 
1 
 
                                +                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 10-05976 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 1, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for his employment with a defense contractor. (Item 
6) On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H 
(Drug Involvement) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) (Item 1). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR was sent to Applicant and he responded on April 21, 2011, admitting all 
allegations under both guidelines. (Item 4) The response was returned to Applicant 
because he did not indicate if he requested a hearing or a decision on the record. (Item 
3) Applicant requested a decision on the record on October 5, 2011. (Item 5) 
Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on October 18, 2011. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on November 1, 2011, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
 
2 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He did not provide additional information. 
The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2012. Based on a review of the case file, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the three factual allegations under Guideline H and the factual 
allegation under Guideline J. I carefully reviewed the case file and the pleadings, and 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a single 23-year-old pipe fitter in an apprentice program in a Navy 
shipyard. He never married and has no children. He is a high school graduate with 
some college credits. His mother died when he was young, and he was raised by his 
grandparents. (Item 6) Applicant noted in response to questions concerning drug use on 
his e-QIP that he used marijuana from August 2003 until February 2009. He was 
arrested for possession of marijuana in July 2007. His driver’s license was restricted 
and he was required to perform 24 hours of community service. He further noted he was 
arrested for possession of marijuana in February 2008. The charge was dismissed. He 
listed an arrest in January 2008 for felonious larceny which was dismissed. (Item 6 at 
36-38)  
 
Applicant was requested by security investigators to clarify his statements on the 
security clearance application concerning drug use and criminal conduct. He admitted 
using marijuana from age 15. He would smoke with friends two or three times a week 
after school or at parties. He got the marijuana from the friends or his father. He 
admitted that he was stopped for speeding in July 2007 when he was 19 years old. The 
police found a small amount of marijuana in his car. He pled guilty and was sentenced 
to community service which he completed. In January 2008, when he was a 20-year-old 
college student and a member of the baseball team, his roommate took a campus 
police golf cart and he and Applicant went for a joy ride on campus. His roommate 
drove the golf cart, into a nearby river. Applicant spent one night in jail and was ordered 
by the college to perform community service. He was released from the baseball team 
and paid for the golf cart. He also admitted that he and his roommate received a 
marijuana cigarette from his father in February 2008 when they were on the way to a 
party. He was stopped by police just before he smoked the cigarette. The charge was 
dismissed. (Items 7 and 8) 
 
Applicant never sold, manufactured or distributed marijuana to others. He 
stopped using marijuana in February 2009 when he was 21 years old. He applied for 
the shipyard apprentice program after realizing he wanted a good job and more from 
life. He never tested positive for marijuana on a urinalysis test, was never treated for 
drug abuse, or diagnosed as drug dependent. He has no intention to use marijuana 
again. He wants a career in the shipyard. He plays on the shipyard baseball team and 
does not want to jeopardize his position or career. (Item 7)  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
 
4 
 
substances, and include those listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. 
Marijuana is listed in the act as an illegal drug. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or 
the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 
24).  
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana in high school and college from age 15 to 21. 
He received the marijuana from friends or his father. Applicant’s marijuana use raises 
Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug use); and AG ¶ 25(c) 
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution).  
 
 I considered Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; (1) dissociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation). These mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Appellant admits using marijuana about two or three times a week from age 15 to 
age 21. There were no unusual circumstances leading to the drug use. He was a young 
person who admits he used the illegal drugs based on peer pressure and opportunity. 
However, Applicant wanted a better life and career and applied for and was accepted 
into an apprentice program with an employer that prohibits drug use. While there is no 
"bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or sufficient time has passed 
since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct affects an individual's present 
reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of time has passed without 
evidence of drug involvement, there must be an evaluation whether that period of time 
demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs for almost three years since February 2009. 
He entered an apprentice program where drug use is prohibited. There is no evidence 
that he associates with drug users. He indicated clearly his intent not to use drugs 
again. His coming of age and maturing, the abstinence from drug use since February 
2009, the entry into the apprentice program, and his intent not to use drugs in the future 
is sufficient information of a change of circumstance, showing he has reformed and will 
no longer use illegal drugs. Applicant presented sufficient information to overcome the 
security concern for his use of illegal drugs. Guideline H is decided for Applicant 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Appellant was arrested and 
 
5 
 
charged with larceny for being a passenger in a campus police golf cart his roommate 
took for a joy ride on campus. The roommate drove the cart into a river. Applicant’s 
actions raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses), and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted). 
 
 Applicant raised in his response to security investigators Criminal Conduct 
Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment). The offense happened over four years ago when Applicant was a young, 
immature college student. The golf cart was taken and driven by his roommate. But 
Applicant went along for the ride. The incident took place long ago under unusual 
circumstances. It was a minor criminal offense and not likely to happen again. As a 
minor offense, it does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. I find for Applicant under criminal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge evaluates the 
applicant’s conduct and all of the circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
 Applicant has established that he is trustworthy, reliable, and exercises good 
judgment. He used marijuana as an immature teenager and his last use was over three 
years ago before realizing he wanted more out of life. He applied for and was accepted 
into an apprentice program that prohibits drug use. He is now older and more mature. 
He no longer associates with those that use drugs, and he stated his intent not to use 
drugs in the future. He established changed circumstances to show he has reformed 
and been rehabilitated. His criminal conduct was the result of an immature prank over 
four years ago and does not now reflect on his reliability and trustworthiness. He 
provided sufficient evidence to establish that he should be trusted with access to 
classified information. The record evidence leaves me with no questions about 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
Applicant has mitigated drug involvement and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
