1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-06842 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Hoda Berry, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 8, 2008, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 13, 2011. He answered the 
SOR in writing with an undated Answer, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on or about June 17, 2011. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 29, 2011.  DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on October 27, 2011, setting the hearing date for November 16, 2011.  I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on November 16, 2011.  
2 
 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, and documents for administrative 
notice, which were received without objection. Applicant testified.  He submitted Exhibits 
A through N, without objection. I kept the record open until December 1, 2011, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents pertaining to an alleged termination in January 
2006. Applicant’s attorney requested an additional two weeks within which she could 
submit such documentation. On December 8, 2011, Applicant submitted a document 
from his previous employer which I marked as Exhibit O. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on November 29, 2011.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. (Tr. at 15-17.) The request and the attached documents 
were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 4 and were included in the record as 
Administrative Notice Documents I through V. Applicant had no objection to these 
documents. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations.  He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 44 years old, divorced from his first wife with whom he has four 
children, and now married since 2007 to his second wife. His present wife is seeking to 
become a naturalized U.S. citizen. She is a citizen of Iraq at the present time. (Tr. 30, 
31, 47-51, 70, 78-81; Exhibits 2, A, B, O) 
 
 Applicant served in the Iraqi Army from 1989 to 1990 as required by Iraqi law. In 
1991 Applicant fled Iraq, followed by his wife and two children. Applicant went to a 
refugee camp with his family for three years before being admitted to the United States.  
Applicant came to the United States in June 1994 with his family. Applicant became a 
U.S. citizen in April 2002.  (Tr. 32, 49, 59, 64 66; Exhibits 1, 2) 
 
 Applicant’s mother died in 1998. His father was an Iraqi policeman who died in 
1973. Applicant has a brother living in Sweden. Applicant’s sister lives in Iraq with her 
husband and five children. Applicant does not tell them anything about his work except 
that he is a contractor doing construction work in Iraq. Applicant’s present wife has a 
mother and three sisters living in Iraq. (Tr. 33, 60, 71, 84; Exhibits 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant contacted his relatives once a month while he was working in Iraq from 
2003 to 2006. His present wife calls her mother and sisters in Iraq twice a year from the 
United States. (Tr. 71)  
3 
 
 Applicant worked for defense contractors in Iraq doing translation work from 2003 
until June 2006. His first employer was purchased by another one in 2005. In January 
2006 he was told the contract under which he was hired had ended and he was sent 
home. In March 2006 he applied to work with another contractor. He had a counter-
intelligence interview in March 2006 after completing the SF-86 and the company 
application. Applicant told the investigator that if Al-Qaida operatives captured him he 
would give them anything they wanted. Applicant admitted at the hearing he knew that if 
captured he would be killed because he worked with the American Army and would be 
regarded as a traitor to Iraq. This interview also recorded Applicant as stating he was 
fired in Iraq after being absent for 19 days following his May 9, 2005, hernia operation. 
Applicant denied he was ever fired from a translation job. Applicant’s termination 
occurred because he was considered a counter-intelligence risk after his comment 
about Al-Qaida made to two Army investigators.  Applicant claims now he was confused 
by the nature of his cessation of work in January 2006 and did not make the statement 
as reported. Applicant claims he was reemployed by the original contractor in March 
2006 until June 2006 when he was laid off again. He was then unemployed until April 
2007. Applicant’s security clearance from 2005 ended in January 2006. He worked for 
his employer until June 2006 without a security clearance. Applicant’s exhibit from the 
contractor who employed him states it does not have historical information on 
Applicant’s termination reasons. The wording of the exhibit shows me that Applicant 
was terminated, but the specific reasons are no longer shown in the company’s records. 
(Tr. 33, 51-58, 82-117; Exhibits 5, 6, P) 
 
 Applicant majored in English in a college that he attended in Iraq before he fled 
the country. Applicant testified he could comprehend different Arabic language dialects, 
thus enhancing his translation abilities and value. He declared his “language fluency is 
very advanced.” (Tr. 43, 62) 
 
 Applicant submitted 14 documents consisting of two letters of recommendation 
and 12 standard printed certificates of appreciation from his superiors in the U.S. 
military for whom he provided translation services from 2003 to 2011. The letters date 
from 2003 to 2011. (Tr. 38; Exhibits A to N)  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove the dictator Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. That effort was 
successful, and a new constitution was written by the Iraqi people.  After free elections, 
Iraq’s new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq 
remains plagued by violence though safer and quieter this past year than previously due 
to the American troop increases since 2007.  Violent acts are perpetrated by Al Qaeda 
terrorists and other insurgents. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have target the U.S. 
Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis.  Although the new 
government has taken aggressive action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq 
remains high, as do human rights abuses. Terrorist groups conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (Exhibit 4, Administrative Notice 
Documents) 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to 
AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual’s access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security. 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and three sisters-in-laws are citizens of Iraq, 
Applicant’s former wife and their children live in the United States and are naturalized 
U.S. citizens. His present wife is an Iraqi citizen residing in the United States as a 
resident alien seeking U.S. citizenship. Her mother and three sisters live in Iraq. While 
                                                          
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter 
of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country 
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
6 
 
Iraq struggles with the creation of a democracy, it continues to be routinely victimized by 
terrorist attacks. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest for 
Applicant.  AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
 Applicant was interviewed in 2006 by two U.S. Army investigators who explained 
their questions carefully to Applicant. Applicant stated he was fired by one contractor 
and that if Al-Qaida captured him he would give them whatever they wanted. Applicant 
admitted at the hearing he knew he would be killed by Al-Qaida operatives if he were 
ever captured because as an Iraqi-born person helping the United States he was 
regarded as a traitor. The investigation concluded Applicant was a counter-intelligence 
risk because of his answer and because he was fired by the contractor who employed 
him. AG ¶ 7 (c) applies.   
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Two conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
Applicant did not establish the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Applicant only became a 
U.S. citizen in 2002. In 2003 he went to Iraq to translate for the U.S. military while 
employed by a government contractor. While there he communicated monthly with his 
family members. He met and married his second wife in Iraq in 2007. He has not had 
sufficient time to separate himself from his ancestral connections to Iraq. Based on his 
family relationships and the lack of time to develop a depth of loyalty to the U.S., he 
cannot be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
Especially troubling is the serious and substantial discrepancy contained in the 
exhibits evidencing his interview in 2006 with two U.S. Army investigators. Applicant 
studied English in the Iraqi university he attended, and presents himself as having great 
linguistic skills. He cannot now state with any persuasiveness that he did not 
understand what he was asked in that interview. He told the investigators if he were 
captured by Al-Qaida operatives he would give them whatever they wanted, ostensibly 
to save his life. There is also a major conflict between his testimony now that he was not 
fired from a contractor’s translating position and his statement in 2006 that he was fired. 
7 
 
I believe the earlier statements because they were closer to the actual events and more 
reliable.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) has no application to Applicant’s relationship with his spouse, because 
she has a “green” card and lives in the United States with him. There is no likelihood 
that his marital relationship will create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  It has 
some application to his contact with his wife’s family members in Iraq, because she 
does have contact with them and could influence her husband to protect them if they 
were threatened.  There is a possibility that terrorists could attempt to coerce or 
threaten Applicant through his mother-in-law or his wife’s siblings living in Iraq because 
of his translating work and his flight from Iraq in 1991.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Several circumstances weigh 
against Applicant in the whole-person analysis.   
 
First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Iraq. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists hostile to the United States actively seek 
classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could attempt to use 
his mother-in-law and her daughters, who live in Iraq, to obtain such information.  
 
8 
 
Second, he had connections to Iraq before he left there in 1991. He was born in 
Iraq and spent his formative years there. He served in the Iraqi Army from 1989 to 1990. 
 
Third, he was fired from his contractor translating job because he was absent 
without leave for 19 days after his 2005 hernia operation. Applicant never offered an 
explanation as to his whereabouts for that time. 
 
Fourth, Applicant’s statement to the investigators that he would give Al-Qaida 
operatives whatever they wanted if they captured him, even though he testified at the 
hearing that he knew if he were captured he would be executed by them. Al-Qaida 
regarded Iraqis who worked for the United States as traitors. Applicant did not have a 
credible and persuasive explanation concerning these serious discrepancies.  
 
Some mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. Applicant is a mature person. He came to the United States as a refugee in 
1994 and became a naturalized citizen in 2002.  He has worked in the United States 
since his arrival and currently resides with his second wife.  He owns two houses in the 
United States consisting of the house where his first wife and children live, and the 
house in which he lives with his second wife. I do not give much weight to the two letters 
of recommendation because they were written in 2003 and 2005, before the critical 
interview with the Army investigators. The certificates of appreciation are standard-issue 
printed documents given to employees in government agencies. I give them only 
minimal weight and do not find them persuasive on the issue of foreign influence. 
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during his tenure in Iraq without any 
indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While that fact is not 
normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s 
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations 
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 
5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the national security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to 
an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, 
and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
9 
 
 However, Applicant’s past record while working in Iraq is counter-balanced by the 
termination discrepancy and the statements he made to the Army investigators. These 
two events are very serious and cause serious doubt about Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. AG ¶ 2 (b) states in part, “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” The facts present serious doubt. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  I 
conclude the “whole person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
