 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07937 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 1, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Security concerns are raised under the guidelines for Personal Conduct and 
Foreign Influence. The allegations pertain to Applicant’s Columbian citizenship; her 
associations with her siblings who are citizens of Columbia; and Applicant’s falsification 
and poor judgment with respect to her sister who resides in the United States illegally. 
Foreign Preference concerns were not established. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
E, Personal Conduct; B, Foreign Influence; and C, Foreign Preference. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) in writing on August 6, 2011, and elected 
to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Due to an 
administrative error, the case was assigned to the undersigned on October 5, 2011, and 
was scheduled for hearing on November 2, 2011. Applicant reiterated her request for a 
decision on the record in an October 25, 2011 email, and the hearing was canceled. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 7, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on 
November 11, 2011. It consisted of a 12-page letter setting out the Government’s 
position; 10 Government exhibits (GE) marked GE 1 through GE 10; and 5 documents 
for administrative notice, marked GE I through GE V. Applicant was afforded a 30-day 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. As of December 29, 2011, she had not responded. The case was 
assigned to me on January 13, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the SOR, she admitted the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.d, 2.a, and 2.b. She denied ¶ 3.a. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and through review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was born in 
Columbia. She immigrated to the United States in 1995, and became a citizen of the 
United States on September 15, 2000. On her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (eQIP), she indicated she was a dual citizen of both the United 
States and Columbia. She surrendered her Columbian passport, which was issued on 
June 25, 1999, and expired on June 24, 2009, to her facility security officer for 
destruction on January 5, 2011. (GE 3; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant is entitled to retirement pay for work she did while still in Columbia. She 
estimated that she was only entitled to “about $100 to $200 a month.” She indicated in 
her affidavit that she does not plan to collect the retirement pay and does not need it to 
live. She estimated her net worth in the United States totals $450,000. (GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant has one brother and one sister. A second sister is deceased. 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Columbia, where he lives with his wife 
and adult son. Applicant’s brother calls Applicant on a monthly basis to visit with their 
mother, who resides legally with Applicant. Applicant applied eight years ago to sponsor 
her brother and his family to immigrate to the United States. Her brother has been 
approved for a visa, but is “awaiting final approval” before he moves to the United 
States. (GE 3; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a Columbian citizen residing illegally in the United States. On 
January 25, 2010, Applicant completed an eQIP. On the eQIP, in her answer to “Section 
18: Relatives” she indicated that her sister resided in Columbia and listed an address in 
Columbia. Applicant knew at that time that her sister was actually residing in the United 
States. Further, in her March 26, 2010 statement to an agent of the Department of 
 
3 
 
Defense, Applicant indicated her sister was a resident of Columbia employed in a small 
store that makes baby clothes. She further indicated that the last contact she had with 
her sister was in 1996. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 6.) 
 
 In 1998, Applicant’s sister, a citizen of Columbia, entered the United States on a 
five year visa, with “the standard permission to stay for six months.” Applicant wrote in 
her Answer that “before that permission expired I bought her a return ticket and sent her 
back to Columbia.” Applicant’s Answer indicated that in 2000, Applicant’s sister 
reentered the United States and resided in New York until 2008, when she relocated to 
another state to live with her daughter. Applicant’s August 2010 Affidavit further 
disclosed: 
 
I was not truthful with the other investigator who interviewed me for my 
security clearance in Mar[ch] [20]10. My sister [Applicant’s sister] lives in 
the United States illegally. I was nervous and did not inform the 
Investigator that [Applicant’s sister] does not live in Columbia as I listed on 
my security paperwork. She came to visit me in the U.S. legally in 1998 
but when it was time for her to leave, she did not want to go back to 
Columbia. My husband and I told her that she had to leave and bought her 
a plane ticket back to Columbia. My husband and I are lawful citizens and 
did not want [Applicant’s sister] living with us illegally. Some time later I 
discovered that she was living in New York. She is a Columbian citizen 
and does not have a visa to be in the U.S. [Applicant’s sister] came to 
[Applicant’s state] about one and a half to two years ago. Since that time 
[Applicant’s sister] has been living with me off and on. When she is not 
living with me she stays with my niece in [another city in the same state]. 
When [Applicant’s sister] comes to stay with me she stays for one week 
every month. My husband and I are not happy about [Applicant’s sister] 
staying with us but she is in poor health, unable to find work because of 
her status and she is my sister. I am not able to let her live on the streets. I 
am very sorry I did not tell the truth about [Applicant’s sister] to the other 
investigator. (GE 6.) 
 
Columbia1 
 
Any person born in Colombia is considered a Colombian citizen. Columbian 
citizens are required to present a Columbian passport to enter and exit Columbia. 
 
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to 
Colombia. Violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some rural areas and 
cities. The potential for violence by terrorists and other criminal elements exists in all 
parts of the country. Three terrorist groups also pose a threat in Columbia. Terrorist 
organizations and other criminal organizations continue to kidnap and hold persons of 
all nationalities and occupations for use as bargaining chips. U.S. Government officials 
and their families have strict limitations on travel to and within Colombia due to these 
                                                          
1 GE I through GE V. 
 
4 
 
dangers. Approximately 282 kidnappings committed by terrorist groups and for-profit 
kidnap gangs were reported to authorities in 2010. Robbery and other violent crimes are 
common in major cities while small towns and rural areas can be extremely dangerous 
due to the presence of narco-terrorists.  
 
The Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) – as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations. These groups have carried out bombings and other attacks in and 
around major urban areas, including against civilian targets. The FARC has targeted 
civilians, government representatives and politicians, soldiers, and the civilian 
infrastructure. FARC held three U.S. government contractors -- all U.S. citizens -- 
hostage for five years, until they were rescued on July 2, 2008 by the Colombian 
military.  
 
 Although the government’s respect for human rights continued to improve, 
serious problems remain. Unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, 
insubordinate military collaboration with criminal groups, torture and mistreatment of 
detainees, overcrowded and insecure prisons, and other serious human rights abuses 
were reported during 2010.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. (AG.) In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
6 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 Applicant’s sister resides illegally in the United States. Applicant has supported 
her sister by providing her a place to live, for one week out of each month since 2008. 
Thus, not only is Applicant associated with a person who is involved in criminal activity, 
but she is potentially committing a crime herself by violating 8 U.S.C. § 1324, the 
criminal statute which addresses “Harboring Certain Aliens.” Moreover, she falsified 
facts concerning her sister’s residence on both her eQIP and in her March 2010 
interview with an investigator. Applicant has demonstrated questionable judgment, a 
lack of candor with the Government, dishonesty, and an unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations of the United States. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16 (b), 16 (c), 16(e) and 16(g) 
are applicable as disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
7 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant intentionally omitted significant details regarding her sister on the eQIP.  
She continued her questionable judgment by further lying to an investigator in her 
March 2010 security clearance interview.  She did disclose her sister’s immigration 
status to an investigator in August 2010, but Applicant failed to present proof that her 
disclosure was a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the falsification. Further, she 
continues to associate with and provide housing for her sister. No mitigating conditions 
are applicable to Applicant’s deliberate falsifications and questionable conduct. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Columbia. Her sister is a 
citizen of Columbia, residing illegally in the United States. Applicant’s sister 
resides with her for a week out of each month. Her close connections to her 
Columbian siblings, coupled with the security risks present in Columbia including 
the activities of narco-terrorist organizations, terrorist cells, and human rights 
violations of the Columbian government itself, give rise to security concerns. If 
 
8 
 
Applicant has access to classified information, she could be subject to foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply to Applicant’s failure to report her sister’s illegal status.  
Applicant failed to report her sister because she was focused solely on her sister’s 
interests. She made the repeated decision to falsify her eQIP and her March 2010 
interview, instead of complying with her duty and obligation to report her sister’s location 
to the U.S. Government. In doing so, she chose the interests of her sister over the 
interests of the U.S. Government. Given that Applicant’s sister is still illegally in the U.S., 
I cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of her sister in the future, based upon her past choices.   
Additionally, it cannot be said that Applicant could be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. because she has offered little evidence to 
demonstrate her compliance with legal obligations concerning her sister.  Applicant has 
a strong sense of loyalty and obligation to her sister. Applicant’s contacts with her 
foreign family members are not minimal, and she has provided little concrete evidence 
showing her relationships in the U.S. Therefore, it cannot be found that AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  One week out of each month, Applicant lives with her 
sister, who is still a Columbian citizen despite her illegal residency in the U.S.  She also 
 
9 
 
communicates with her brother in Columbia on a monthly basis. Thus, it cannot be said 
that her contacts with her siblings are casual and infrequent. 
 
 Further, mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(e) does not apply. Applicant’s disclosure of 
her sister’s residency was not prompt. It occurred over eight months after the initial 
falsification. In addition, Applicant had opportunities after completing her initial eQIP to 
correct her omission, but she failed to do so until she was questioned in August 2010. 
Judging the record in its totality, the Foreign Influence guideline is resolved against 
Applicant. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in AG ¶ 
9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case:2   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefit from a foreign country. 
 
 In 2000, Applicant became a citizen of the United States. She had obtained a 
Columbian passport prior to her naturalization as a U.S. citizen. That passport has been 
destroyed. She indicated that she is entitled to between $100 to $200 a month in 
retirement pay in Columbia. There is no evidence that she is collecting any retirement 
pay. She has indicated that she has no intent to seek such benefits from Columbia. The 
Government failed to produce evidence that Applicant acts in such was as to indicate a 
preference for Columbia over the United States. None of the disqualifying conditions set 
out in AG ¶ 10 apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
2 Department Counsel’s argument under Guideline C pertains to another foreign nation and appears to 
involve facts dissimilar from the case at hand.  
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, B, and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant offered no letters in support of her application. Her misconduct and 
criminal association indicate Applicant cannot be trusted to be honest with the 
Government and indicate she exercises poor judgment. She has offered no evidence to 
suggest that she takes the responsibilities of holding a security clearance seriously. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct and Foreign Influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
