 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-07119
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant was discharged of his debts in 2002 after he and his wife divorced. He
more recently accrued unpaid debts in excess of $21,000. He recently paid some of
those debts, but did not present sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns
about his financial problems. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
On November 18, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On September
1, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered3
in support of the Government’s case.
 SOR 1.u alleges that Applicant’s bankruptcy was filed in October 2001, and that it was discharged in January4
2001. Neither party addressed this in their submissions, so I am left to assume that the bankruptcy was
discharged in January 2002.
2
raise security concerns addressed at Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the
adjudicative guidelines (AG).2
On October 12, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision
without a hearing. On November 3, 2011, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the Government’s preliminary decision. Applicant3
received the FORM on November 14, 2011, and was given 30 days to file a response to
the FORM. Applicant timely responded to the FORM by submitting a four-page
memorandum and eight enclosed exhibits. Department Counsel waived objection to
Applicant’s response to the FORM and it has been included in the record. The case was
assigned to me on January 23, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant filed for Chapter 7
bankruptcy protection in October 2001 and that his debts were later  discharged through4
that petition (SOR 1.u). It was also alleged that Applicant owes to 20 different creditors
approximately $21,971 in delinquent debt. (SOR 1.a - 1.t). In response to the SOR
(FORM, Item 2), he denied SOR 1.k and admitted the remaining allegations. His
response to the SOR did not include any explanatory information. In addition to the facts
established through his admissions, I have made the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 49 years old and works for a defense contractor as a field service
technician, a position that requires a security clearance. He has worked for his current
employer since November 2009. From about August 2005 until he was hired for his
current position, Applicant worked mostly as an electrician for several different
employers. In August 2006, he was laid off due to lack of work, and he was unemployed
until he found work as a laborer six months later. (FORM, Item 5)
Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from September 1984 until March 2004. He
retired as a first class petty officer (E-6). There is no indication that he has held a
security clearance before. (Id.)
Applicant and his wife have been married since June 1998. He was also married
from May 1984 until May 1998, when he and his first wife were divorced. They had been
separated since July 1997. Applicant has two adult children and three adult
stepchildren. (Id.) The debt alleged at SOR 1.k was for $1,730 in unpaid child support.
 Directive. 6.3.5
3
Applicant averred that he has never been past-due in his support obligations, and that
the amount alleged was actually a refund for overpayment. He also presented
information that showed the account is closed and is being deleted from his credit
history. (Response to FORM) 
When Applicant submitted his eQIP, he disclosed several delinquent accounts,
including collection accounts, charged-off accounts, and two car repossessions totaling
approximately $17,719. (FORM, Item 5) Credit reports obtained during his background
investigation attributed to Applicant the debts alleged in the SOR. (FORM, Items 6 and
7) In response to the FORM, Applicant established that he had paid or otherwise
resolved the debts at SOR 1.b, 1.d - 1.f, 1.l,, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.q, 1.s, and 1.t. Those debts
totaled $2,416. Applicant repaid the debt at SOR 1.o in July 2010. The others were
resolved after September 2011. (Response to FORM)
As to his remaining debts, Applicant averred that he has made arrangements to
make payments on the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.p, 1.r, and 1.t, starting
between January 2012 and March 2012. As to SOR 1.I, Applicant averred that he
started repaying that debt in December 2011 through $75 monthly payments. He further
stated that SOR 1.I arose after Applicant voluntarily had his car repossessed due to
chronic mechanical problems, which the car dealer failed to resolve. The SOR 1.I debt
accrued in July 2009. (Response to FORM; FORM, Item 6) Applicant did not provide
any corroborating information regarding the terms of any arrangements he has made
with his creditors, nor did he document any current payments under those
arrangements.
Applicant filed his bankruptcy petition in response to a bankruptcy petition filed by
his ex-wife after they divorced. The record does not show how much debt was
discharged. As to Applicant’s more recent debts, he averred that the debts at SOR 1.d,
1.e, and 1.s arose after he was injured in an auto accident in November 2009. He had
to wait until subsequent legal proceedings were complete before he paid those debts.
Applicant attributed the debts at SOR 1.f - 1.h, 1.j, 1.p, and 1.r, which total $10,669 to a
job lay-off that occurred in 2006. (Response to FORM; FORM, Item 5)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government presented information that showed Applicant owes at least
$17,000 in delinquent debt consisting of 20 accounts that have either been referred for
collection or charged off as business losses. Applicant’s financial problems arose even
after he had previous debts discharged in bankruptcy about 10 years ago. This
information raises a security concern about Applicant’s finances addressed, in relevant
part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG
¶ 19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
Of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20, the following pertain to these facts
and circumstances:
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control); 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s information does not fully support any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating
conditions. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. His financial problems are numerous and recent,
in that he still owes more than nine debts that have been delinquent for several years.
Also, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply, because Applicant did not show how his six month
period of unemployment more than five years ago, or his car accident in 2009, kept him
from taking action to resolve his debts until after he answered the SOR. Further, he did
not support his claims of scheduled repayment arrangements with his creditors. For
these same reasons, his actions in 2011 to start paying his debts do not constitute a
systematic, good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Thus, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
Applicant admitted all but one of the SOR allegations. Thus, he was burdened
with producing information sufficient to mitigate or extenuate the security concerns
about his finances. For AG ¶ 20(c) to apply, the record must at least contain information
about the current state of his finances. He did not submit any information, in response to
6
either the SOR or the FORM, about his income, expenses, budget, professional
financial advice he has received, or other matters that might show his financial problems
will not recur.
Applicant is entitled to some benefit under AG ¶ 20(e), because he established
that the child support debt at SOR 1.k was not properly attributable to him. I also
conclude in Applicant’s favor the debts at SOR 1.b, 1.d - 1.f, 1.l,, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.q, 1.s,
and 1.t. However, with SOR 1.k, they comprise only about 18% of the total debt
attributable to him. Without additional persuasive information, which Applicant did not
provide, and in view of his failure to more timely address his debts, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s information about
his finances.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 49 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He served for 20 years in the U.S. Navy
and, generally, has been gainfully employed since his retirement in 2004. However, the
record does not contain sufficient information to support application of the AG ¶ 2(a)
factors in a way that would overcome the doubts, established by this record, about
Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the
national interest is paramount in these determinations, those doubts must be resolved
for the Government.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d - 1.f, 1.k - 1.o, For Applicant 
1.q, 1.s
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.g - 1.j, 1.p, 1.r Against Applicant
1.t, 1.u
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
