 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09099 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 9, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has not filed 
Federal or State income taxes since 2003. In addition, he has failed to address any of 
his delinquent debts. Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge and 
 
2 
 
then reassigned to me on November 7, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
November 8, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 15, 
2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open until December 20, 2011, for Applicant to submit 
exhibits. As of that date, Applicant had not submitted any documentation and the record 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 30, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is single and has 
no children. He has worked as a defense contractor for the past 17 years and has held 
a security clearance since 1995 without incident. From 2002 to 2009, Applicant also ran 
a business in addition to his contracting work. Applicant testified that he received a 
number of on-spot awards and commendations from his commanding officer in relation 
to his contracting position. (GE 1; Tr. 22, 31-32.) 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts as identified by Applicant on his electronic 
questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP) dated March 22, 2010 (alleged in 
allegations 1.c. and 1.d, and 1.f. through 1.m.), and one additional lien (allegation 1.e.) 
that is listed in a report of credit dated March 30, 2010. (GE 1; GE 3.) Applicant 
attributed his financial problems to a back injury he received in approximately 2004. He 
was unable to manage his business after his injury and his debts piled up during that 
time. (Tr. 22-24, 28, 33-35.) Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement indicated he had 
approximately $232 left over after he satisfied his bills each month. (GE 2.) His debts 
are as follows: 
 
 Allegation 1.a. alleged that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns 
for tax years 2004 through 2009 in violation of 26 U.S.C § 7203. Applicant admitted this 
allegation. At hearing he testified that he had his Federal income tax filings prepared for 
2004 through 2010, but that he has still not filed them. He was unable to articulate a 
reason why he had not yet filed them. (GE 1; Tr. 24-25, 27, 36-40, 47.) 
 
 Allegation 1.b. alleged that Applicant failed to file his state tax returns for tax 
years 2004 through 2009. Applicant admitted this allegation. At hearing he testified that 
he had his state income tax filings prepared for 2004 through 2010, but that he has still 
not filed them. He was unable to articulate a reason why he had not yet filed them. (GE 
1; Tr. 24-25, 27, 36-40, 47.) 
 
 Allegation 1.c. alleged that Applicant was indebted to the Internal Revenue 
Service for a tax lien filed against him in July1991 in the amount of $1,863. Applicant 
admitted he was indebted to the IRS for this amount, but claimed to have satisfied this 
debt. He failed to produce documentation that this debt has been satisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 
26.) 
 
 Allegation 1.d. alleged that Applicant was indebted to his state for a tax lien filed 
against him in June 1996 in the approximate amount of $106.  Applicant admitted this 
debt.  He failed to produce documentation that this debt was satisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 25.) 
 
3 
 
 Allegation 1.e. alleged that Applicant was indebted to his state for a tax lien filed 
against him in April 1993 in the approximate amount of $2,409. Applicant claimed he 
was never notified of this debt. He failed to produce documentation that this debt was 
satisfied or otherwise addressed. (GE 3; Tr. 26.) 
 
 Allegation 1.f. alleged that Applicant was indebted to his state for delinquent 
excise taxes in the approximate amount of $4,000. Applicant admitted this debt, but 
claimed it has since been satisfied. He failed to produce documentation to support his 
claim. (GE 1; Tr. 26.) 
 
 Allegation 1.g. alleged that Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the 
approximate amount of $1,431. Applicant testified that he believed this debt was for a 
secured credit card. He testified that he deposited $500 when he initially received the 
credit card and made charges against his deposit. At the time of the hearing, he had not 
contacted this creditor to dispute the debt or make payment arrangements. At the close 
of the record, this debt remained unsatisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 Allegation 1.h. alleged that Applicant was indebted to a collection agent for a 
bank in the approximate amount of $1,045. Applicant admitted this debt. He testified 
that he had not contacted this creditor to arrange payment. At the close of the record, 
this debt remained unsatisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 26-27.) 
 
 Allegation 1.i. alleged Applicant was indebted on a delinquent 
telecommunications bill in the approximate amount of $1,158. Applicant admitted this 
debt. Applicant failed to present documentation showing he contacted this creditor or 
satisfied this debt. At the close of the record, this debt remained unsatisfied. (GE 1; 
Answer.) 
 
 Allegation 1.j. alleged Applicant was indebted on another delinquent 
telecommunications company bill in the approximate amount of $150. Applicant 
admitted this debt. Applicant failed to present documentation showing he contacted this 
creditor or satisfied this debt. At the close of the record, this debt remained unsatisfied. 
(GE 1; Answer.) 
 
 Allegation 1.k. alleged that Applicant was indebted on a past due medical 
account in the approximate amount of $651. Applicant admitted this debt. He testified 
that he had not contacted this creditor to arrange payment. At the close of the record, 
this debt remained unsatisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 46.) 
 
 Allegation 1.l. alleged that Applicant is indebted on a past due medical account in 
the approximate amount of $128. Applicant admitted this debt. He testified that he had 
not contacted this creditor to arrange payment. At the close of the record, this debt 
remained unsatisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 46.) 
 
 Allegation 1.m. alleged that Applicant is indebted on a past due medical account 
in the approximate amount of $290. Applicant admitted this debt. He testified that he 
 
4 
 
had not contacted this creditor to arrange payment. At the close of the record, this debt 
remained unsatisfied. (GE 1; Tr. 46.)  
 
 Applicant submitted no character references or evidence tending to establish 
good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. Appellant provided no documentation 
concerning the quality of his professional performance or the level of responsibility his 
duties entail. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and is unable or unwilling to pay his 
obligations. His delinquencies have been on-going since 1993, without resolution. 
Additionally, Applicant has failed to file both his Federal and state income tax returns 
since 2004. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not acted responsibly, or in a timely manner, to attempt to resolve 
his failures to file his income tax returns or his outstanding delinquent accounts. 
Applicant’s failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns and satisfy his debts 
demonstrate a continuing course of conduct that does not warrant application of AG ¶ 
20(a).  
 
 Applicant claims his failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns and 
pay his debts was due to his back injury in 2004 and related subsequent business 
problems. However, Applicant has known since at least May 2011 that his failure to file 
his Federal and state income tax returns and pay his other debts were of concern to the 
Government, and he failed to take any actions on them. There is no evidence that he 
has received counseling for his financial problems, made a good faith effort to repay his 
debts, or that he has contested any of his debts. He has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c) and 20(d) are not mitigating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has been a contractor for 17 years and has held a security clearance 
since 1995 without incident. However, his choices, with respect to his debts and unfiled 
taxes, do not demonstrate the maturity, judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness needed 
to hold a security clearance. There are significant unresolved concerns about 
Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.~ 1.m.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
