1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-04835
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                          
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On September 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) noting security concerns arising under Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
(DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
In an undated response received on September 22, 2011, Applicant admitted all
allegations and requested an administrative determination in lieu of a hearing. On
December 2, 2011, Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM),
which included six attached items. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM.
The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2012. Based on a review of the case file,
I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the security concerns raised.
Security clearance is denied.
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was ordered to complete 40 hours of community service. In his response      1
to the SOR, Applicant volunteered that he was ordered to fulfill 80 hours.
 Compare FORM, Item 5, to Response to the SOR.       2
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 25-year-old aircraft mechanic who has worked for the same
defense contractor since December 2008. He is single and has no children. Applicant
completed a post-secondary course of academic study. He admits all facts raised in the
SOR allegations. He is contrite over his past misdeeds.  
In April 2002, at the age of 15, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony
commercial burglary and misdemeanor criminal mischief after being caught entering a
building without permission. He was sent to juvenile detention for two days before he
was released to his parents. At trial, the charges were dropped when the building
owner’s wife testified that she had forgotten to lock the door to the building. 
In about January 2003, Applicant began using marijuana. Around that same
time, he was stopped by police at a road check. The officer found a pipe used for
smoking marijuana that contained traces of the substance. Applicant was charged with
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. He was fined $480. 
Applicant continued using marijuana daily until about January 2005, at which
time he reduced his marijuana consumption to about twice a week. As of January 2006,
he had reduced his drug use to about twice a month. He decided to quit using
marijuana in May 2007 because he did not want to jeopardize his future professional
aspirations. However, in September 2007, he again used marijuana. The following day,
he was subjected to a random drug test, failed the test, and consequently was fired
from his job.  Throughout this period, Applicant bought the drug on occasion. 
In July 2008, Applicant and some friends entered a school that was under
construction. He was arrested and charged with felony commercial burglary and
convicted of misdemeanor attempted breaking and entering. He was sentenced to one
year suspended confinement, fined approximately $1,000, banned from the local public
schools, and ordered to perform 80 hours of community service.  To date, he has only1
served between 12 to 30 hours of that requirement.  2
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. The AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under
AG ¶ 2 (c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, § 3.1(b)  and EO 10865 § 7.      5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
3
the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2 (b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. It is an applicant’s responsibility to
present  “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is3
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security clearance denial does not7
necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
established for issuing a clearance.
 AG ¶ 30.      8
 AG  ¶ 24.      9
 Id. at ¶ 24(a)(1-2).      10
 Id. at  ¶ 24(b).      11
4
Analysis
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
The concern under this guideline is that “criminal activity creates doubt about a
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”  In8
this case, Applicant admitted he was arrested and charged with commercial burglary
and fined for possession of marajuana and drug paraphernalia when he was a teen. He
also admitted that he was found guilty of attempted breaking and entering in 2008, and
ordered to complete 80 hours of community service. He has yet to complete his
community service requirement. Such facts are sufficient to raise both Criminal Conduct
Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses)
and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). Consequently, it is
Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security concerns raised.
Applicant admitted the allegations raised under this guideline. In relying on an
administrative determination, there are scant available facts tending to show successful
rehabilitation or otherwise mitigate the security concerns at issue. While the 2002 and
2003 incidents could be amenable to mitigation as being dated incidents from his
teenage years, the 2008 breaking and entering incident and his failure to complete his
required community service hours sustain security concerns. Consequently, none of the
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32(a)-(e) apply. 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.  “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior-altering substances9
and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and other
substances.  “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a10
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.11
Applicant admitted he used and occasionally purchased marijuana between
2003 and 2007. He was fired from a job in September 2007 after it was discovered
 AG ¶ 15.      12
 Id.      13
5
through a drug test that he had been using marijuana. Such facts are sufficient to raise
Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG ¶ 25(c)
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale,
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). With disqualifying conditions
raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate related security concerns.
Although his last admitted use of marijuana was in late 2007, Applicant did not
avail himself of the opportunity to provide any evidence tending to demonstrate his
intent not to use marijuana again in the future, such as those noted at AG ¶ 27(b)-(d).
At best, AG ¶ 27(a)  (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies to a
limited extent.
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because “conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.“  In addition, “any failure to12
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process” is of special interest.  13
Applicant was charged with three offenses between 2002 and 2008. He has yet
to complete the required community service hours to complete his sentence for the
2008 attempted breaking and entering incident. Moreover, he was terminated from a
job for using marijuana in 2007. Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG
¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwilligness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information) applies. With a PC DC raised, the burden
shifts to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns.
As was the case in the analysis under Guideline J, the significance of the more
remote incidents from 2002 and 2003 was renewed because of the 2008 attempted
breaking and entering charge in 2008. Related security concerns are sustained by his
failure to complete his sentence and fulfill his community service requirements to date.
Although security concerns regarding his 2007 dismissal from employment could be
mitigated due to the passage of time, the security concerns renewed by the 2008
charge and the incomplete community service requirement obviate application of the
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
In choosing a decision without a hearing, however, there are scant facts of record. It is
noted that Applicant is an educated 25-year-old who regrets his past misdeeds. As a
teen, he was twice arrested. As an adult in July 2008, he was found guilty of breaking
and entering. To date, however, he has yet to complete his court-ordered 80 hours of
community service. Consequently, he has yet to complete his sentence for that
conviction. Moreover, while he has apparently ceased using marijuana, there is scant
evidence demonstrating any intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
While completion of his community service requirement could do much toward
mitigating related security concerns, security concerns remain unmitigated. As
previously noted, the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information. Given the scant facts of record, I
conclude that Applicant failed to meet his burden. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
