 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case:  10-08113 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On April 12, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under the guideline for alcohol consumption. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 22, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 14, 2011, he 
 
2 
 
 
confirmed that decision in an email to a Department Counsel. On September 22, 2011, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing ten 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on September 27, 2011. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 6, 2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file 
objections and submit additional information. Applicant did not submit additional 
information or object to anything in the FORM. On January 28, 2012, DOHA assigned 
the case to me.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations contained in 
Paragraphs 1.a through 1.c. He admitted the remaining two allegations. Those 
admissions, along with the admissions contained in the Interrogatories (Items 6,7, 8.) 
are incorporated into the findings below.   
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is married and has four adult children. In April 2010 
he began working part time as an electrical engineer for a defense contractor. He was 
unemployed from May 2007 until April 2010 because he resigned from a position to take 
care of his aging parents. (Item 5 at 14.) During that time, he gave trumpet lessons and 
played in a band. (Item 6 at 3.) From January 1997 until April 2007, he worked as an 
electrical engineer for a defense contractor and held a security clearance. (Items 5 at 
15, 6.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse that began in college. (Item 10 at 19, 
23.) On November 10, 2009, Applicant saw his primary care physician for a physical. He 
admitted long-term alcohol abuse and sought a referral for alcohol abuse treatment. He 
told his doctor that he consumed four alcoholic beverages a day. He reported that he 
suffered from anxiety and depression. (Item 10 at 23-24.) In his answer to the SOR, he 
admitted that he consumed alcohol at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, 
from 1975 to February 2010. The record indicated that he admitted consuming alcohol 
to February 2011. ( Item 8 at 3.) 
 
 On January 18, 2010, Applicant entered an alcohol treatment program and was 
initially diagnosed with Depressive Disorder, Panic Disorder, and Alcohol Dependence. 
The evaluating physician recommended individual therapy, medication evaluation, and 
an intensive outpatient program (IOP). (Item 9 at 4.) During the intake assessment, 
Applicant disclosed that he was experiencing sleep disturbances, anxiety, gaps in 
memory, and blackouts. He consumed six drinks per day, and consumed alcohol the 
previous day. (Id. at 10.) One of the treatment goals was to “establish a state of total 
abstinence.” (Id.) On March 9, 2010, Applicant received a Certificate of Achievement for 
completing the Intensive Outpatient Addictions Program. He was discharged with a 
diagnosis of Depressive Disorder, Not otherwise Specified, Panic Disorder, and Alcohol 
Dependence. At the time of the discharge, he was maintaining abstinence. (Id. at 3)  
 
 On May 13, 2010, Applicant saw his primary care physician. He admitted that he 
had remained abstinent until April 2010, when he relapsed because of family social 
 
3 
 
 
problems. He related that he had seen a psychiatrist and was prescribed psychotropic 
medications. (Item 10 at 14.) The primary care physician recommended that he abstain 
from alcohol and stay in touch with his Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) sponsor. (Id. at 16.)   
 
 In June 2010 a government investigator interviewed Applicant about his alcohol 
consumption. Applicant stated that he had a short relapse in March 2010, but had not 
relapsed since then.1 Although he attended a couple AA meetings, he was not 
participating in them because they were time consuming. (Item 6 at 4.) 
 
  On September 14, 2010, Applicant met with his primary care physician for a 
follow-up visit and stated that he was “’back to drinking.’” (Id. at 10.) Applicant reported 
that members of his family had recently been diagnosed with cancer. (Id.) The physician 
recommended that Applicant follow-up with AA. (Id.) On December 7, 2010, Applicant 
saw his primary care physician for another follow-up visit. He told him that he consumed 
three to four alcoholic drinks on the weekends and one to two drinks per day during the 
week. He was not participating in AA. He complained of increased anxiety and 
depression. (Id. at 5.) His physician recommended that he participate in AA and gave 
him a referral to another psychiatrist. (Id. at 8.)     
 
  On February 8, 2011, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories. He indicated 
that he currently consumed alcoholic beverages, beer or wine. He drank two glasses of 
wine or two beers on work nights, two or three times a week. He consumed up to four 
glasses of wine or beer on the weekends. (Item 8 at 2.) He last consumed alcohol on 
February 5, 2011. He was using alcohol to relax and manage stress. He noted that he 
was treated by a psychiatrist from January to March 2010, as part of the IOP. (Id. at 3.)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
                                                          
1 For purposes of clarification, Applicant related to his physician that he relapsed in April, not March.  
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to Alcohol Consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
5 
 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 Applicant habitually consumed alcohol to the point of excess and intoxication 
from 1975 to February 2010. In early 2010 he entered an alcohol treatment program 
and was diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent. His health care providers in that program 
recommended that he abstain from alcohol. In April 2010 he relapsed. By September 
2010 he was regularly consuming alcohol. He admitted that he was consuming alcohol 
in February 2011 when he completed the government’s Interrogatories. There is no 
evidence that he has ceased consuming alcohol since then. The evidence raised the 
three disqualifications.  
After the government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has a 35-year history of 
abusing alcohol, spanning from 1975 to February 2011. Given the frequency and long 
history of alcohol abuse, his behavior casts doubt on his current trustworthiness and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant 
recognizes his alcoholism or that he established a pattern of sustained rehabilitation 
and sobriety, which are necessary to apply AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant was treated in early 
 
6 
 
 
2010 and relapsed within a month of leaving treatment. He is not participating in 
counseling or an aftercare program. AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. He did not provide 
evidence to demonstrate a sufficient pattern of abstinence or a favorable prognosis from 
his physician or psychiatrist. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 53-year-old man, who has 
worked for defense contractors for over thirty years and held a security clearance during 
those years. He has abused alcohol most of his adult life, starting in 1975 while in 
college. On January 18, 2010, he entered an alcohol treatment program. On March 9, 
2010, he was discharged from the program with a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence 
and was told to remain abstinent. In April 2010 he completed a security clearance 
application. In either March or April 2010, he relapsed. By September 2010 he was 
regularly consuming alcohol. As of February 2011 he continues to drink alcohol in spite 
of recommendations from his treatment program, and primary care physician who 
suggested he stop drinking alcohol during three office visits. Other than enrollment in 
the three-month intensive addictions program in 2010 (immediately preceding his 
application for a security clearance), he has not participated in aftercare programs, such 
as AA. He presented no persuasive evidence that he acknowledged his alcohol problem 
or is committed to remaining abstinent. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary. Overall, 
the record leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
