 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-00953 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant and her spouse owe a foreclosure judgment of $128,952.69 after they 
defaulted on the primary mortgage for their previous residence in 2008. Applicant also 
defaulted on a second mortgage balance of $26,518. They recently proposed settlement 
offers through their attorney, which have not been accepted by their creditors as of January 
2012. Applicant also violated the terms of a credit card provided by a previous employer, 
and she made no effort to repay a $1,565 delinquent balance. Clearance denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On July 13, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, which provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny 
her a security clearance. DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
 
 2 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on August 17, 2011, and she requested a 
decision without a hearing. On September 16, 2011, the Government submitted a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) consisting of nine exhibits (Items 1-9). DOHA forwarded a copy 
of the FORM to Applicant and instructed her to respond within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
responded on October 26, 2011, submitting a personal statement (AE A) and a letter from 
her attorney (AE B), which were entered as Applicant exhibits (AE) without objection. On 
November 7, 2011, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
On January 5, 2012, I reopened the record to give Applicant an additional 
opportunity to document her efforts to address the debts alleged in the SOR. On January 
27, 2012, Applicant timely submitted a letter in which she made representations about 
settlement negotiations. The document was incorporated into the record as AE C without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline F that Applicant has two mortgage loans in 
foreclosure after she fell behind around $6,000 on a $26,000 balance (SOR 1.a) and 
$28,000 on a $106,000 balance (SOR 1.b), and that she also owes a $1,565 collection 
balance (SOR 1.c). (Item 1.) In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent 
mortgages, but she indicated that a hearing was scheduled for September 9, 2011, to 
vacate the final judgment of foreclosure so that she could sell the house mortgaged by the 
loans in SOR 1.a and 1.b. She denied the collection debt alleged in SOR 1.c on the basis 
that there was no record of the debt, and it had been removed from her credit record by 
two of the three credit reporting agencies. (Item 4.) 
 
After considering the Government’s FORM and Applicant’s exhibits A-C, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old electrical engineer with a master’s degree in electrical 
engineering. She has been employed full-time by a defense contractor since May 2007, 
after working as a network planning engineer for the company under the employ of a 
subcontractor from August 2006 until May 2007. (Item 5.) She holds a secret-level security 
clearance, which was granted around June 2008. (Items 4, 5.)  Applicant has been married 
since December 1998, and she and her spouse have two children ages 6 and 11. (Item 5.) 
 
In May 2003, Applicant was awarded her graduate degree. In June 2003, she and 
her spouse moved back to their home state after living and working in an adjacent state for 
four years. They owed delinquent real estate taxes of $1,300.31 on their previous 
residence due to Applicant’s previously low wages and periods of unemployment. They 
moved in with her in-laws at no rent, and they were eventually able to settle the tax debt in 
early December 2004. (Items 5, 6.) 
 
 3 
In September 2003, Applicant began working as a middle school science teacher for 
the local school district. From August 2004 to December 2005, she taught electronics at 
night at a community college. She gave birth to her second child in July 2005 and found it 
difficult to fulfill her time commitments to the college with a new baby. In December 2005, 
her contract was not renewed. Applicant returned to the school district to teach science to 
gifted students. (Items 5, 6.) 
 
In November 2005, Applicant and her spouse bought a house. They took out a 
primary 30-year conventional mortgage of $111,200, to be repaid at $916 per month (SOR 
1.b).
1
 Applicant also took out a 15-year second mortgage of $27,800, to be repaid at $203 
per month. (Item 6.) Around August 2006, the second mortgage was transferred to its 
current holder. (SOR 1.a). (Items 5-9.)   
 
 Applicant did not work during the summer of 2006, but she was paid by the school 
district because she had chosen to receive less pay during the previous semester. In 
August 2006, Applicant resigned from the school district on good terms, to work as a 
subcontractor for her present employer. In May 2007, she took advantage of an opportunity 
to work on a different program as a direct hire for the company. (Items 5, 6.) 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant and her spouse bought a new home closer to her job. They 
took out a 30-year mortgage of $210,535, with monthly repayments of $1,656. They moved 
in with her mother-in-law for one month until their new home was ready, and they rented 
out their previous residence to help cover the mortgages on that house. (Items 5, 6.) 
Shortly thereafter, their tenant stopped paying the rent. Applicant and her spouse had their 
tenant evicted, but they could not find another renter. They could not afford to pay the 
mortgages for their previous residence and also pay the new mortgage for their present 
residence. In September 2008, Applicant made a last payment on the second mortgage for 
the vacant property. The loan balance was $26,518 (SOR 1.a). In October 2008, Applicant 
and her spouse made a last payment on the house’s primary mortgage, which had a 
principal balance of $106,216 (SOR 1.b). Their primary lender initiated foreclosure 
proceedings around July 2009. (Items 6-9.) 
 
On September 15, 2009, Applicant executed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for her employer. In response to the financial 
delinquency inquiries, she listed the $1,300.31 real estate tax debt settled in December 
2004; a $1,565 charged-off balance on a credit card account that had been provided for 
her business use by a previous employer in June 1998 (SOR 1.c);
2
 and the two delinquent 
mortgages on her previous residence (SOR 1.a and 1.b). Applicant disclosed that the 
primary mortgage was in foreclosure, and that she and her spouse had given their primary 
lender “immediate possession” in a voluntary foreclosure as soon as they were unable to 
                                                 
1
The bank that originally held the debt is different from the current mortgage holder. The original lender may 
have been acquired by the financial institution that foreclosed on the property in September 2010. There is no 
evidence showing a transfer of the loan from the original lender to the current holder. 
 
2
The $1,565 credit card delinquency had been charged off in June 2001 and was in collection. (Item 9.) The 
account was opened in June 1998 and closed in June 2008. High balance on the account was reportedly 
$5,937. (Item 6.)
  
 
 4 
make their monthly loan payment. As for the second mortgage, Applicant indicated that 
arrangements were being made to satisfy the debt. (Item 5.) 
 
A check of Applicant’s credit on September 24, 2009, confirmed that Applicant’s 
delinquencies were limited to those debts listed on her e-QIP. Applicant and her spouse 
were making timely payments on a $24,240 auto loan taken out in October 2008, and on 
the $206,928 mortgage balance for their current residence. (Item 9.) 
 
On October 27, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about her employment history and the past-
due debt balances on her credit record (SOR 1.a-1.c). Applicant indicated that she and her 
husband had tried to work out a payment plan on the primary mortgage for their previous 
residence by adding the delinquent balance to the end of their loan, but they fell further 
behind until they stopped paying altogether around September 2008. Applicant expressed 
her belief that the foreclosure proceedings were final, but she did not know whether the 
house had been sold. Applicant also did not dispute the delinquency on the second 
mortgage, although she questioned the credit agencies’ reporting that the debt was hers 
alone and not jointly incurred by her and her spouse. Concerning the credit card debt, 
Applicant explained that it was a corporate card for expenses when she traveled to Europe 
for her then employer about 12 years ago. She admitted that she had used the account for 
both personal and business travel, and that she did not repay the personal charges. 
Applicant indicated that the $1,565 was a negotiated balance that was less than the 
original debt. There were times when she had the funds to pay the debt but chose not to. 
She expressed her intent not to pay the debt. (Item 6.) 
 
As of January 2010, Applicant was $3,059 past-due on the second mortgage (SOR 
1.a). Applicant’s and her spouse’s primary mortgage was in foreclosure proceedings with 
$13,735 past-due (SOR 1.b). They were making timely payments of $417 per month 
toward their auto loan balance of $20,378, and of $1,779 per month on the $205,000 
principal balance of their mortgage for their current residence. The delinquent credit card 
debt (SOR 1.c) had been dropped from her credit record by Equifax (Item 8), although 
Trans Union continued to report a $1,565 past-due balance. (Item 6.) 
 
On September 28, 2010, the holder of the primary mortgage on their vacant house 
was awarded a final judgment of foreclosure in the amount of $128,952.69. A foreclosure 
sale was scheduled for December 23, 2010. On November 23, 2010, the court cancelled 
the foreclosure sale on the creditor’s motion. On December 23, 2010, Applicant and her 
spouse retained legal counsel, at a $1,500 retainer fee, to defend the summary judgment 
of foreclosure, and to negotiate settlement of the foreclosure action. (Items 4, 6.) 
 
Applicant informed DOHA on December 23, 2010, that she was planning to have the 
foreclosure judgment vacated so that she and her spouse could pursue a short sale of the 
house to resolve the delinquent mortgages on the property. She had filed a dispute with 
Trans Union over listing the old business credit card debt because it was beyond the 
seven-year reporting date. Applicant furnished a credit report confirming she had no new 
past-due accounts. (Item 6.) 
 
 5 
 
On July 13, 2011, DOHA issued an SOR to Applicant because of the outstanding 
mortgage delinquencies and the long-overdue credit card debt. (Item 1.) Around August 16, 
2011, Applicant contacted the credit card lender. Her account had been closed, and the 
lender was in the process of removing the debt from her credit profile. On August 17, 2011, 
Applicant informed DOHA that the lender had no record of the debt and would not accept 
any payments. As for the mortgage delinquencies, a hearing was scheduled for September 
9, 2011, on her and her spouse’s motion to vacate the judgment of foreclosure so that they 
could sell their vacant property and settle the mortgages. (Item 4.) 
 
As of October 26, 2011, Applicant was negotiating settlements of her delinquent 
mortgages. She had proposed settlement terms, which her attorney characterized as 
“uncommonly generous and exceptionally favorable to the mortgage companies.” Her 
attorney expected the lenders to accept her offers, pending final assessment of the payoff 
balances. (AE B.) Applicant asked DOHA for more time to resolve the debts before 
revoking the security clearance that she needs for her job. (AE A.)  
 
 On January 5, 2012, I gave Applicant until January 27, 2012, to document her 
efforts, on her own or through her attorney, to address the mortgage debts, including 
through selling the property, settling with her lenders, or paying on the debts. In a timely 
response, Applicant indicated that the holder of the first mortgage had the authority to sell 
the house through foreclosure and had not responded to her offers to settle the debt (SOR 
1.b). She planned to continue to pursue an amicable settlement, notwithstanding the 
creditor’s unwillingness to negotiate. Concerning the second mortgage (SOR 1.a), a 
collection agency (reporting representing the primary lender) offered to settle for 20% of 
the balance, but the assignee wanted to deal with her directly. Before she could accept the 
offer, she was contacted by another assignee, who offered to settle for $7,955.43, if paid 
by January 31, 2012. She countered with $3,000, which is what she could borrow from a 
family member, but the lender rejected her offer. As of January 27, 2012, Applicant and her 
spouse were reassessing their finances and asking relatives for assistance in resolving the 
debts. Applicant expressed her intent to resolve the debts. (AE C.) 
 
 As of early December 2010, Applicant’s hourly wage was $45.48 for her work with 
the defense contractor. Her federal taxable gross wages totaled around $100,000. Her 
spouse earned considerably less from his job at a hospital, where he was paid $18.30 an 
hour. His gross income for 2010 was about $40,000. They had about $1,453.46 in net 
income each month after paying educational costs for Applicant to pursue her MBA. (Item 
6.) 
 
From September 2008 to December 2009, Applicant was enrolled in a part-time 
engineering management master’s degree program offered by the state university at a 
local community college one weekend a month. After graduating from the engineering 
management program, she began attending an affiliated one-year MBA program in 
January 2010. Program costs total $26,190 for four terms of study, and she is responsible 
for $306.77 per month of the tuition costs. Unlike the engineering program, the MBA 
 
 6 
courses are held on the campus of the state university, so she incurs additional 
transportation, lodging ($210 per month), and food ($40 per month) costs. (Item 6.) 
 
Applicant and her spouse have not been late in their car payments or in the home 
loan for their present residence. As of May 2011, their mortgage had a principal balance of 
$200,000, while they owed $15,000 on their car loan. (Item 7.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
 
 7 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Guideline F notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” are established. As of the close of the record in this case, Applicant 
owes a $128,952.69 foreclosure judgment (SOR 1.b) and about $26,518 for a defaulted 
second mortgage (SOR 1.a) on her previous residence. Furthermore, around 1998, 
Applicant used a business credit card account for personal expenses, and she did not 
repay the personal charges. At her October 2009 interview with an OPM investigator, she 
admitted she did not intend to repay the $1,565 collection balance (SOR 1.c). Although the 
lender is no longer pursuing the debt because her account has been closed, her misuse of 
the business credit card account implicates AG ¶ 19(b), “indebtedness caused by frivolous 
or irresponsible spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay 
the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt.” 
 
 Concerning potentially mitigating conditions, AG ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” cannot reasonably apply when there has been no resolution of the debts in the 
SOR. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” applies in the absence of any evidence to 
indicate that their tenant’s default on the rent was reasonably foreseeable. However, AG ¶ 
20(b) does not mitigate Applicant’s years of knowing disregard of the credit card debt, or 
eliminate the financial burden of about $155,470 in delinquent mortgage debt, for which 
she and her spouse were still liable as of January 2012.  
 
 As to whether Applicant acted reasonably to address the mortgage debts, she 
submits that she and her spouse arranged with their primary mortgage lender to add the 
delinquency to the end of their loan, and then gave the lender “immediate possession” of 
the house in a voluntary foreclosure as soon as they could no longer afford the mortgage. 
 
 8 
Available information does not substantiate her claim of due diligence, however. Applicant 
told an OPM investigator in October 2009 that she believed the foreclosure proceedings 
were final, but she did not know whether the property had been sold. A summary judgment 
of foreclosure was not issued until September 2010, so it appears that Applicant made no 
effort to keep herself apprised of the foreclosure proceedings. She did not retain legal 
counsel until December 23, 2010, some three months after the court assessed her and her 
spouse’s liability at $128,952.69 on the primary mortgage, and they then moved to vacate 
the judgment so that they could sell the house. A hearing was reportedly scheduled for 
September 9, 2011, on their motion. Presumably, they were not successful in having the 
judgment vacated. As of January 2012, she was attempting to negotiate settlements of 
both mortgage debts. 
 
 The attorney handling the settlement negotiations asserts Applicant has been “very 
proactive” in her efforts to resolve the mortgage debts. He characterized her repayment 
proposals as “uncommonly generous.” In January 2012, I gave Applicant an opportunity to 
provide details of the negotiations and perhaps establish AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” About 
the first mortgage, Applicant indicates only that she is continuing her efforts to reach the 
creditor, who has not been responsive to her attempts to settle. Without further detail about 
the dates and amounts of any settlement offers, I cannot conclude that she has acted 
diligently. Concerning the second mortgage, Applicant was apparently offered a settlement 
of 20% by an assignee representing the primary mortgagee. Sometime later, she received 
an offer from a different assignee offering to settle the $26,518 balance for $7,955.43. 
Despite a household income in excess of $100,000, Applicant asserts that she is unable to 
meet the settlement. She counteroffered with $3,000, which she would have to borrow from 
a family member. Her evidence falls short of establishing AG ¶ 20(d). Furthermore, it would 
be premature to apply AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for 
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control,” given the status of the settlement negotiations. Little progress has been 
made toward resolving any of the debts in the SOR in the year since the foreclosure and 
the two years since her interview with the OPM investigator, when she knew or should have 
known that the delinquencies were of concern to the DOD. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).
3
 
                                                 
3 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 9 
 
In her favor, Applicant has a record of timely payments on her car loan and on her 
mortgage for her current residence. There is no evidence of new delinquencies, so it could 
be said that the debts in the SOR are not characteristic of the manner in which handles her 
finances generally. Yet, Applicant indicates she cannot afford the latest settlement offer on 
the second mortgage when her income would suggest otherwise. As of December 2010, 
she was spending at least $556.67 per month to obtain an MBA degree. Even with those 
educational expenses, Applicant and her spouse had a reported $1,453.46 in net 
remainder each month. It is unclear what has changed about her financial situation to 
where she is nonetheless in a position of having to borrow from family members to settle 
the delinquent mortgages. Based on the record before me, I cannot conclude that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
