 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09016 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 In an undated answer to the SOR, Applicant elected to have his case decided on 
the written record. On December 27, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
it was received on January 9, 2012. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
provided additional information to which Department Counsel had no objection. The 
case was assigned to me on February 14, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all allegations except ¶ 2.b. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old. He is not married and has no children. He worked for a 
federal contractor as an intern during the summers of 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2008. He 
began working for the same federal contractor full time in January 2010. He was 
granted a confidential security clearance in September 2002 and a secret security 
clearance in April 2006.  
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 2004. He attended two community 
colleges and attended a university from August 2004 to December 2008. He attended 
another university beginning in August 2009 to at least May 18, 2010, the date he 
submitted his security clearance application. He has not received a degree.  
 
Applicant admitted that he used marijuana 20 to 30 times between 2003 and 
2006. He admitted he used the prescription drug Adderall that was not prescribed to 
him, approximately 15 times between 2004 and 2008. He admitted he used the 
prescription drug Valium that was not prescribed to him about 15 times from 2006 to 
2008. Both drugs are controlled substances. He used these drugs subsequent to being 
granted a confidential security clearance in September 2002 and a secret security 
clearance in April 2006.  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on June 7, 2010, and 
again on July 23, 2010. He stated that he used the prescription drugs because of peer 
and school pressures. The drugs helped him to stay alert when studying and taking 
tests. He used marijuana because it helped him relax. He told the investigator that his 
drug use was an isolated time period in his life, and he has not used drugs since 2008 
and does not intend to use drugs in the future.1
 
  
During Applicant’s July 23, 2010 interview with a government investigator he said 
that he was unaware that his security clearance was still in effect after he served his 
summer internships and during the periods he returned to school. He stated that had he 
known that he had a security clearance during that entire time he would never have 
                                                          
1 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
used the drugs while attending school. He admitted that he used drugs illegally to help 
him get him through school. He was sorry for his actions.  
 
 Applicant told the government investigator that he never purchased drugs. He 
stated that he has never had a positive drug test. It is unknown whether Applicant is 
regularly tested for drugs through his employer. He stated his parents are aware of his 
past drug use. He used the drugs with college friends at social gatherings. It is unknown 
if he still associates with these friends.2
 
  
 On August 25, 2005, at 2: 39 a.m., Applicant was approached in his vehicle by a 
campus police officer. The police officer noted that Applicant was unconscious in his 
vehicle with the engine running. The police officer knocked on the door and window of 
Applicant’s vehicle for two to three minutes before Applicant awoke. The police officer 
detected alcohol immediately and noted Applicant’s eyes were watery and his speech 
was slurred. He asked Applicant how many alcoholic beverages he had consumed. 
Applicant stated probably 8 or 9 beers. The police officer issued a citation for minor 
under 21 with liquor and filed a report with the above information. After Applicant 
successfully completed a diversion program, the court dismissed the charge.3
 
  
In Applicant’s June 7, 2010 interview with a government investigator he provided 
information about the August 2005 incident. He stated that he was driving at 
approximately 7:00 p.m. and he was stopped by the campus police. He told the 
government investigator that he was advised by the police officer that he was speeding. 
Applicant’s version is that the police officer asked him if he had been drinking alcohol 
and he admitted he had been drinking and that he had left a party where he consumed 
two drinks. Applicant stated he agreed to take a breathalyzer that showed he had 
consumed alcohol. The breathalyzer result is unknown. He stated he was given a 
citation for underage drinking and was released.4
 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted to being pulled over by the police 
and cited for being a minor in possession of alcohol, but again denied he was passed 
out in his vehicle while the engine was running.5
 
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he admitted the facts as stated in the 
police report. He stated: 
 
During my investigation and completion of my security paperwork, I had 
not recalled this situation at all. It was not until I was provided with the 
police report of the incident, where finally I recalled what happened. 
                                                          
2 Item 6. 
 
3 Item 8. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Reviewing the police report, I can say that it is 100% accurate and I admit 
in this letter that it did happen. If I was able to re-submit my SOR, I would 
admit to section 2.b.6
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
6 Response to FORM.  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana approximately 20 to 30 times from 
2003 to 2006, while holding a security clearance. He used two different prescription 
drugs that were not prescribed to him approximately 15 times each from 2004 to 2008. 
He held a security clearance during that time. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following 
three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana to relax. He used it socially with his college friends. He 
stated he does not intend to use marijuana in the future. I have insufficient evidence to 
determine whether Applicant continues to associate with his friends who use marijuana 
and whether they continue to use it. Although he stated he no longer uses marijuana, 
other than his written statement, I have no other evidence to substantiate his claim. 
Applicant indicated that he used prescription drugs that were not prescribed to him to 
help him with stress associated with school and to cope. Applicant listed on his security 
clearance application that he is still attending college. It is unclear if he will succumb to 
using non-prescribed drugs to help him again cope with school. I have insufficient 
evidence to show what he does now to handle stressful situations.  
 
Applicant was granted a confidential and later a secret security clearance while 
working as an intern. He explained that he was not aware that the security clearance 
was still in effect when he returned to school. He stated that had he known that his 
security clearance was still in effect he would not have used the drugs. His explanation 
may be plausible. However, this statement does not reflect an appreciation that his 
actions were illegal regardless of the fact that he held a security clearance. Some of his 
misconduct may be attributed to his youth, but based on the information provided I 
cannot conclude that he has matured and gained a clear understanding of his 
responsibilities as an adult. I find his actions did not happen under unique 
circumstances, such that they are unlikely to recur. His actions cast doubt on his 
trustworthiness and good judgment. I do not have sufficient information to conclude he 
has disassociated himself from drug-using associates or has changed his environment 
where drugs are used. There is no evidence the prescription drugs were prescribed to 
him. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), and 26(c) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
7 
 
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and conclude the following have been raised: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant deliberately provided false and misleading information to a government 
investigator about his citation for a minor under 21 with liquor. He continued to deny the 
information on his answer to the SOR. He later admitted the information after he 
reviewed the police report. Applicant’s use of illegal drugs and misuse of prescription 
drugs creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, as it is the type of 
information, if known, could affect his personal and professional standing. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s use of illegal drugs and misuse of prescription drugs has been 
addressed under the drug involvement guideline. He failed to provide sufficient 
mitigating information as explained above about his conduct. I find AG ¶17(c) does not 
apply because his offenses were ongoing and not minor. Based on the record evidence, 
I am also unable to conclude that his conduct is unlikely to recur. His actions continue to 
casts doubts on his judgment and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 17(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant explained in his response to the FORM that he did not recall the 
incident where he was passed out in his vehicle and that is why he did not disclose it to 
the government investigator. His statement is not credible. He was made aware of the 
specific facts when he received the SOR, yet he again denied that he was unconscious 
in the vehicle when the police found him. He failed to explain why he again denied his 
actions in his answer to the SOR when he was on notice regarding the specific incident. 
He later admitted he was passed out in his vehicle after consuming 8 or 9 beers. He did 
not make a prompt or good-faith effort to correct his falsification. Rather, he repeated it 
in his answer. His conduct is not minor and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness 
and judgment. It was not until he was confronted with the police report that he finally 
admitted his actions. Applicant did not meet his burden of persuasion to conclude his 
actions were not intentional. I find AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
illegally used marijuana and prescription drugs while holding a confidential and secret 
security clearance. He failed to provide sufficient information to substantiate his 
 
9 
 
 
assertion that he has abstained from illegal drug use since 2008 and will not use drugs 
in the future. Applicant’s past drug use may be the result of youthful indiscretion, but it is 
unclear if he understands that regardless of his security clearance status, his actions 
were illegal. Applicant more recently provided false information surrounding a citation he 
received for being a minor in possession of alcohol. It was not until he reviewed the 
police report that he admitted his actions. His explanation for his falsification was not 
credible. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
