 
1 
 
                                                                           
                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 10-03114 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Scott Ashelman, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaires for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on 
December 9, 2009. On March 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 18, 2011.  He answered 
the SOR in writing on March 23, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on April 19, 2011. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 31, 2011. The case was assigned to another 
 
 
2 
 
administrative judge who scheduled the hearing for July 27, 2011, after a Notice of 
Hearing dated June 28, 2011, was issued. Applicant retained an attorney before the 
hearing, who requested a continuance, which was granted. The case was transferred to 
me on October 24, 2011,. DOHA issued the second Notice of Hearing on October 27, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 17, 2011. The 
government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were received without objection.  
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through K. The Government objected to 
Exhibits J and K, but I overruled the objection and admitted those exhibits into the 
record (Tr. 113). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 30, 
2011. I granted Applicant s request to keep the record open until December 1, 2011, to 
submit additional matters.  On that date, he submitted Exhibits L to O, without objection. 
The record closed on December 1, 2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR, 
with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request for 
eligibility for a public trust position.   
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, married, and has a step-son. He has a college degree 
in physics and works for a defense contractor. Applicant worked for his first defense 
contractor employer from October 2000 to March 2006, earning $56,000 annually, until 
he was laid-off work. He started his second job in April 2006 and worked for that 
defense contractor until October 2009 earning $64,000 annually. He was again laid-off 
work until January 2010 when he started his present job and now earns $75,000 
annually. (Tr. 19, 36, 47-52; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant purchased a home in 2005 for $135,000. He underestimated the cost 
of owning a home, especially after a storm caused a tree to topple into his house, his 
water heater and flooring near the storm damage had to be replaced, and then he paid 
$9,000 for a new geothermal heat pump. He used credit cards to pay for these 
purchases and repairs. His monthly mortgage payment is $1,235.82. Applicant is the 
sole wage earner in his family. (Tr. 26, 27, 36, 38; Exhibits 2-6, A, B, I) 
 
 Applicant owns two cars. His car is a 2000 model which has had several 
expensive repairs made to it in the past four years. His wife drives another car on which 
they owe $4,465. His wife’s car cost $23,000 when new. (Tr. 39, 101) 
 
 Applicant has two delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The first debt is owed to a 
bank on a credit card in the amount of $34,621. The second debt is owed to a 
department store in his credit card in the amount of $9,082. The total debt listed is 
$43,703.  
 
 The first debt occurred after Applicant opened that account in 2006, charged 
$14,000 on it, opened another bank’s credit card with a lower interest rate, and then 
 
3 
 
transferred the balance from the first card to the second card. He then tried to pay the 
second card’s balance from his income. Meanwhile, he charged another $14,000 on the 
first card. Applicant opened a third credit card account from the bank that issued him the 
second credit card. He transferred the new balance from the first card to the third card. 
He attempted to pay his monthly payments on all three cards. Applicant continued to 
use the first card and incurred another $34,000 in debt on it because he used it to 
purchase food, clothing, and other items while he tried to pay the second and third 
credit card balances. Meanwhile he used the department store credit card for the heat 
pump that cost $9,000. Applicant made payments on that account as regularly as he 
could. The second and third accounts he attempted to negotiate to a settlement with the 
bank issuer. He succeeded in arriving at a settlement of 15% of the balance. He used 
all the $14,000 from his Section 401(k) retirement account to pay the two credit cards 
and closed them in August 2009. Applicant also attempted to settle the first credit card 
account. However, the bank wanted 50% of the balance, and would have taken 30% but 
Applicant did not have that amount of money available after paying the other two credit 
cards. (Tr. 21-88, 96; Exhibits 2-6, A-O) 
 
 Applicant pays the collector for the first credit card $100 monthly until he can 
save a significant amount of money with which to negotiate a settlement. He has paid 
this amount since August 2011. The balance owed is now $33,921. (Tr. 21-26, 30-32; 
Exhibits 2-6, C-F, M) 
 
 Applicant submitted copies of the department store account bills showing that 
since November 2009 he has made payments on that debt. The current debt owed is 
$7,485.52 as of November 2011. (Tr. 33-36, 76-78, 99; Exhibits G, H, O) 
 
 Applicant paid his state and federal income taxes, including property taxes. 
(Exhibits J-L, N) 
 
 Applicant consulted with a financial counselor before he made his settlement 
offers to his creditors. He thinks he has control of his finances at the present time. 
Applicant also considers that he will keep his finances in order if he remains vigilant 
about them. He does not have a savings account at the present time. He does not have 
any other credit cards, using a checking account debit card or cash for his current 
purchases. (Tr. 40, 84, 85, 106) 
 
 Applicant was sincere about his efforts to control his finances and expenditures. 
He was contrite about his past financial mistakes. Applicant was credible in his 
documented efforts to pay his delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions.   
(See Regulation  C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person 
 
4 
 
to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.  (See 
Regulation  C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation  C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG 
(AG ¶ 2 (a)). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG  
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept.  The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG  2(b) 
requires that [a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.  In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive  E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive  E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .  The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
 
5 
 
of the applicant concerned.  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated $43,703 of delinquent debt as 
listed in the SOR and was unable to pay in total these two obligations since 2007. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a 
closer examination. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
conditions might apply: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has not received any current financial counseling, but did when he 
started his plan to resolve the second and third credit card debts. He was successful in 
getting a significant reduction in his debt on those two credit cards and being able to 
resolve them totally. His income was then directed toward the remaining original credit 
card debt and his department store account. His financial problems are being resolved 
and are under control through Applicant’s regular monthly payments. Applicant earns a 
substantial income with which to afford these payments. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant 
 
6 
 
resolved two earlier significant delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement, which 
consumed his only savings. He makes regular payments on the remaining bank credit 
card which is currently delinquent. He has reduced the department store credit card 
account by more than $2,000 through regular payments. I conclude this mitigating 
condition applies. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG  2(a): (1) the nature, 
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; 
(4) the individual s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  Under AG  2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.   
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial difficulties 
started in 2006 when he purchased his house and had to made significant 
improvements and repairs to it. His fiscal management suffered from a flaw, which was 
attempting to transfer balances from one credit card to another to reduce his interest 
costs and enable him to resolve those amounts of debt. However, Applicant became 
caught in a cycle of debt. He has now stopped that problem through the negotiated 
settlements on his accounts. Applicant learned his lesson and made changes in his 
financial practices. He used all his retirement savings to accomplish part of his financial 
reform plan. The potential for duress, coercion, exploitation, or pressure is slight based 
on his efforts to date. There is insignificant likelihood Applicant will engage in such 
dangerous behavior in the future because his experiences have educated him as to the 
proper course of financial conduct.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
  
 
8 
 
 
 
