1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-07393
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Julian Roberts, Esq., Daniela Jansen, Esq. 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows that Applicant
bought a second home as a future retirement home located near her elderly father. In
the meantime, she used it as rental property. As a landlord, she had problematic
tenants and the rental property never produced a positive cash flow. Her attempts to
modify or refinance the mortgage loans on the rental property were unsuccessful, and
the property foreclosed in mid-2011. Any deficiency balance is likely not collectable
under the state’s antideficiency statute since both loans were used to purchase the
rental property. She incurred additional delinquent debt, but those three debts, for
relatively small amounts, are now resolved or in repayment. There are now clear
indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control, and she
has initiated a good-faith effort to repay her creditors. For the reasons discussed below,
this case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 All three credit reports describe this loan as a second mortgage. Exhibits 2, 3, and 6. According, it is found2
to be a second mortgage loan as opposed to a home-equity loan.  
 Exhibits L and M. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on or about July1
12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to another judge on September 15, 2011, before it was assigned to me on
October 14, 2011. The hearing took place November 1, 2011. The hearing transcript
(Tr.) was received November 10, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged five delinquent debts consisting of a (1) a $55 medical
collection account, (2) $1,408 a charged-off consumer account, (3) a $3,824 past-due
consumer account, (4) a charged-off home-equity loan for $51,084,  and (5) a mortgage2
loan of $209,458 in foreclosure. In her Answer, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations
with explanations. Her admissions are accepted and adopted and incorporated herein
as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial
evidence. 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She works as a
senior analyst in the fields of configuration management and data management. She
has been employed by the same large company engaged in defense contracting since
1980. She has a good employment record, as verified by written performance
assessments from 2006–2009 and performance awards from 2009–2010.  Her current3
annual salary is about $84,000. She is seeking to retain a security clearance at the
secret level, which she has held for many years.  
Applicant is not married and has no children, but she has a longtime boyfriend
with whom she cohabits. Under joint tenancy or tenancy in common, she and her
 Exhibit 2.  4
 Exhibit 2. 5
 Tr. 58. 6
 Exhibit 3. 7
 Exhibit 6. 8
 Exhibit K. 9
 I took administrative notice of this well-known fact. 10
 I took administrative notice of this fact.  11
3
longtime boyfriend bought a home in 2003, and they divide the mortgage loan payment
and the household bills equally. 
In about 2007, Applicant, in her individual capacity, bought a small two-bedroom,
one-bathroom house in a community about 55 miles from her residence in the same
state. She bought the house as a future retirement home because it was located near
her elderly father. Until she retired, she planned to use the house as rental property.
She made no down payment and financed the purchase with a mortgage loan of
$205,176 and a second mortgage loan of $51,294.  Both loans were with the same4
mortgage lender. The house required a considerable amount of work and repairs. In
addition, as a landlord, she had problematic tenants and the rental property never
produced a positive cash flow. She had no tenants at times, requiring her to cover both
mortgage loans. 
By May 2010, both loans were late more than 120 days and she had past-due
balances.  She attempted to work with the mortgage lender to modify or refinance the5
loans, a process she described as “a nightmare.”  Having no success with the mortgage6
lender, she hired a lawyer to assist her, but that was unsuccessful as well. In 2010, the
mortgage lender placed her on a trial period with increased monthly payments, she
made payments for a few months, but by about July 2010 she was no longer able to
make the payments. By March 2011, the second mortgage loan was still past due and
the first mortgage loan was in foreclosure.  And by June 2011, the month before the7
SOR was issued, the second mortgage loan was described as a charged-off account
and the first mortgage loan was in foreclosure.  The foreclosure was completed, and the8
house was sold in May 2011 for $66,298,  which was substantially less than the9
purchase price of more than $250,000. The steep drop in market value is generally
consistent with the fact that the rental property is located in one of the states hardest hit
by the bursting of the real estate bubble.10
Applicant has not received any type of notice or paperwork from the mortgage
lender stating that she owes a deficiency balance on either mortgage loan. She resides
in a nonrecourse state that has an antideficiency statute.  This means that the11
 Exhibit A. 12
 Exhibit G. 13
 Exhibit B and H. 14
 Exhibits I and J. 15
 Exhibit E. 16
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to17
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.18
4
mortgage lender is not permitted to come after a borrower’s other assets and income if
the borrower defaults on original loans used to purchase the property. 
Applicant presented documentary information for each of the three other
delinquent debts. She paid the $55 medical collection account.  She settled the $1,40812
charged-off consumer account for $880.  And the $3,824 past-due consumer account13
is  enrolled in a repayment plan with the creditor and is in good standing.14
Applicant’s current financial situation appears to be stable. She has two other
credit card accounts, both of which are in good standing.  Her tax preparer since 200415
examined the history of returns prepared for Applicant, and there was no indication of
extraordinary financial problems or income.  Of note, Applicant files as head of16
household claiming her father as a qualifying person under the law that allows a
taxpayer to claim that status when the taxpayer provides a home for a parent who does
not live with her. In addition to assisting her elderly father, Applicant also provides
financial assistance to a disabled adult nephew who is living in an assisted-care facility.
Her nephew is the son of her brother, who passed away suddenly within the last few
years. His death placed an additional financial strain on Applicant as she was the family
member who paid the funeral expenses. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As17
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt18
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.
  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 25
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).26
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.27
5
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An19
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  20
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting21
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An22
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate23
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme24
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.25
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.26
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it27
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 28
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant29
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  30
 AG ¶ 19(a).  31
 AG ¶ 19(c). 32
6
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant28
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline29
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  30
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The evidence also raises security concerns because it indicates
an inability to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within31 32
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions.  
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a33
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
7
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;33
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I considered all the mitigating conditions, and the most pertinent here are AG ¶¶ 20(c)
and (d). Taken together, along with the other favorable evidence, they are sufficient to
overcome and mitigate the security concerns.  
The evidence shows Applicant bought a second house as a future retirement
home and then used it as rental property pending retirement. Her experience as a
landlord was difficult, and she eventually defaulted on both the first and second
mortgage loans, which resulted in foreclosure. It is most probable that she owes nothing
more on the loans under the state’s antideficiency statute. Her three other delinquent
accounts, which were delinquent due to inability to pay, are now resolved, with one
account paid, another settled, and the third in a repayment plan. Given these
circumstances, there are now clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are
being resolved or are under control, and she has initiated a good-faith effort to repay her
creditors. Her overall financial situation appears to be stable, thus making a repeat of
her past financial problems unlikely. 
 
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I have no doubts or
concerns about Applicant’s fitness or suitability for a security clearance. In reaching this
conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence
outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).34
8
whole-person concept.  Having done so, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate34
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
