                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 10-08098
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding her alcohol consumption.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On November 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 2, 2011, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2012. The case was scheduled for hearing
2
on January 26, 2012. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of six  exhibits (GEs 1 through 6); Applicant relied on one
witness (herself) and five exhibits (AE A through E). The transcript (Tr.) was received on
February 2, 2012. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline G, Applicant allegedly (a) consumed alcohol, at times to excess,
from approximately1998 to at least June 2011; (b) was arrested in about May 1998 for
fraudulent use of a birth certificate/driver’s license, and driving under the influence (DUI)
alcohol 0.08 or more, to which she pleaded guilty and was fined; (c) was arrested in
March 2004 for DUI and DUI alcohol 0.08 or more, to which she pleaded guilty to DUI
and was sentenced to perform two days of community service, attend a three-day DUI
program, fined $1,700, had her driver’s license suspended/restricted for three months,
and was placed on probation for five years; (d) was arrested in March 2009 and charged
with DUI and DUI 0.08 or more with a prior, to which she pleaded guilty to DUI 0.08 or
more and was sentenced to complete a multiple conviction alcohol program for 18
months, fined $2,418, ordered to complete four days of community service, had her
driver’s license suspended for one year, and was placed on probation for one year; (e)
was detained by police in July 2009 after she was found outside a bar drunk in public,
and was taken to a police station and held in a drunk tank before being released with no
charges filed against her; and (f) continued to consume alcohol to at least June 2011
despite her alcohol-related incidents and court-ordered enrollment in an 18-month
alcohol program.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with
explanations. She claimed she understood the results of her mistakes which she has
worked hard to correct and change. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old management assistant for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
 Applicant enlisted in the Navy in December 1998 after completing one year of
college.  She served four years of active duty and was honorably discharged in August
2002. (GE 1; Tr. 52) While in the Navy, she held a secret security clearance. (GE 4)
Following her Navy discharge, Applicant returned to college. She married in
March 2003 and accompanied her husband to another part of the state where he was
stationed. While relocated with her husband, she attended local colleges. She has no
3
children from her marriage and divorced her husband in June 2005. (GE 1) Following her
divorce, she relocated to her present place of residence and enrolled in an accredited
local university. (Tr. 44-45) She earned a bachelors degree from this university in May
2008. (GE 1; Tr. 45) 
Applicant joined her current employer in 1998 and currently serves as an assistant
to the vice president of her development group. (GE 1; Tr. 26) She has since  taken legal
steps to restore her maiden name. (AE E) 
Before enlisting in the Navy, Applicant consumed alcohol on a regular basis,
sometimes to the point of intoxication. (Tr. 49-50) While in the Navy (between 1998 and
2002), Applicant consumed alcohol on the weekends. (GE 2) She became intoxicated if
she had two or three glasses of wine or three or four beers. Following her discharge from
the Navy in 2002, Appellant enrolled in college, married, purchased a home, achieved
debt-free status, and generally avoided heavy drinking and alcohol-related arrests.
Applicant’s arrest history
Public records document multiple Applicant arrests (three in all) and a detention
for alcohol-related incidents between May 1998 and July 2009. In May 1998 (before her
Navy enlistment), Applicant was arrested and charged with fraudulent use of a birth
certificate/driver’s license and DUI. (GEs 2, 3, and 6) She was attending college at the
time and used a fake driver’s license to obtain drinks in the bar she was attending with
college friends. (Tr. 50-51) She pleaded guilty to a charge of reckless driving, and was
fined. (GEs 2, 3, and 6) This incident was alcohol-related despite Applicant’s plea to a
lesser charge.  
Police and court records document Applicant’s being arrested in March 2004 and
charged with DUI and DUI alcohol 0.08 or more, to which she pleaded guilty to DUI and
was sentenced to perform two days of community service, attend a three-day DUI
program, fined $1,700, had her driver’s license suspended/restricted for three months,
and was placed on probation for five years. (GEs 2, 3, 4, and 6; Tr. 52-53) Applicant is
credited with completing the court’s imposed probation conditions.
Prior to her March 2004 DUI arrest, Applicant had been out with friends one
evening and volunteered to drive for one of her friends who was more intoxicated than
she was. (Tr. 54-55) While driving, she made an illegal U-turn and was pulled over by
police. (Tr. 56) After being administered a series of sobriety tests, she was arrested and
her car was impounded. She was then transported to a local police station where she
was administered a breathalyser test. On this test she recorded a .17 % blood alcohol
content (BAC). (Tr. 56-57) Applicant completed her court-ordered requirements and paid
her assessed fine.
In March 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and DUI 0.08 or
more with a prior conviction, to which she pleaded guilty to DUI 0.08 or more and was
sentenced to complete a multiple conviction alcohol program for 18 months, fined
4
$2,418, and ordered to complete four days of community service. (GEs 2, 3, 4, and 6; Tr.
66) The sentencing court also suspended her driver’s license for one year and placed
her on probation for 10 years (not the five years alleged in the SOR). 
Before Applicant’s March 2009 alcohol-related incident, she had gathered with
friends in a bar and offered to drive her friends home, believing she had paced herself
appropriately and was below the legal limit for driving. She acknowledged recording a
.17 % BAC in her administered breathalyser test and making a mistake of judgment in
not staying with her friends or taking a cab, and she regrets her actions. (Tr. 61)
Applicant documents her attendance of required weekly Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) meetings, spread over a 25-month period spanning November 10, 2009 and
January 23, 2012. (AE 5; Tr. 31-33) Due to surgical procedures and work-related
conflicts, Applicant missed several months in 2009, over seven months between June
2010 and March 2011, and several months between July 2011 and October 2011. (AE
D; Tr. 31-33) 
Because of her missed meetings, Applicant still has additional AA meetings to
complete before she is eligible to receive a certificate of completion of her court-ordered
alcohol program. (id.; Tr. 34) She is credited with completing her community service
requirements.
In July 2009, Applicant was confronted outside a bar by police who suspected
she was intoxicated in public.  Police escorted her to a local police station and detained
her in at the station for several hours before releasing her without filing any charges
against her. Although Applicant characterized her detention as a safety precaution (Tr.
63-64), her detention in a drunk tank at the police station is more consistent with holding
her for sobriety assurance reasons. Despite the lack of an arrest or charges, her
detention still qualifies as an alcohol-related incident based on the reported details and
surrounding circumstances.
Between 2004 and 2009, Applicant experienced a family loss and divorce and
consumed alcohol more heavily than she was accustomed to doing. (Tr. 59). She admits
to driving while intoxicated on other occasions without being stopped or arrested. (Tr. 58)
And she admits to some dependence tendencies in her past without manifest alcohol
dependence. (Tr. 63-64) 
Applicant continued to drink occasionally in social situations following her March
2009 arrest, but for the past year has maintained her abstinence. (Tr. 70) However, she
has never obtained an alcohol diagnosis and prognosis from a licensed medical
professional or substance abuse counselor. 
Afforded an opportunity to obtain a post-hearing diagnosis and prognosis,
Applicant never augmented the record. At this time there are too many unknowns about
Applicant’s drinking history to draw any reasonable inferences on her condition and
ability to safely consume alcohol, even at light to moderate levels.
5
Endorsements 
Applicant is well regarded by her supervisor and colleagues. (AE A; Tr. 27-29)
They consider her a superior performer with an outstanding reputation for attitude,
organization, efficiency, and reliability. Her supervisor and co-workers praise her for her
demonstrated professionalism trustworthiness, and reliability. (id.) Her coworkers who
have known her and worked with her characterize her as a dependable, reliable, and
hardworking professional who plays a critical role in her company’s important missions.
(id.) 
During her four years of Naval service, Applicant earned numerous citations
honoring her achievements and superior performance. (GE 5 and AE C) Her
performance evaluations for 2009 through 2011 consistently characterize her overall
performance as exceeding requirements. (id.) In her most recent evaluation, her
supervisor credited her with being an invaluable asset. (AE B) Cited comments include
exceptional attention to detail, ability to remain calm and focused under pressure,
organizational skills, and a positive attitude that together produce exceptional results
every day. (id.)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors: 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6)
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
concerns are pertinent herein:
Alcohol Consumption
    The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21.
    
Burden of Proof
      Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an Applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
          The Government's burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial evidence any
controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven
have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
        Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
7
Analysis
Applicant is a conscientious and highly dependable management assistant for her
defense contractor who presents with a considerable history of alcohol-related incidents
over an 11-year period. Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s
history of alcohol-related offenses, and the recency of her last alcohol-related conviction
in 2009 without the benefit of a diagnosis and completion of the court’s probation
conditions. 
        Applicant’s recurrent problems with abusive drinking and alcohol-related arrests
over an 11-year period raise major concerns over her risk of recurrent alcohol abuse. On
the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs for
alcohol consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse
abuse, disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” and DC ¶ 22(c),
“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
      While Applicant has never been diagnosed with any known alcohol abuse or
dependence, she has attended numerous AA meetings over a two-year period in
accordance with the probation requirements imposed on her in connection with her
March 2009 DUI conviction. She still has additional AA meetings to complete before she
is eligible for certification of completion of the program.
Applicant’s AA program offered no identified diagnostic procedures or
rehabilitative guidance, and cannot be properly assessed without some documentation of
the program’s diagnosis assessments (if any) and discrete steps to address them, or an
independent diagnosis and prognosis from a licensed medical professional or substance
abuse counselor. Applicant has provided neither for consideration.  While she  denies
any alcohol problem, she admits to drinking to intoxication levels sufficient to produce
three DUI convictions and police detention in connection with a fourth-alcohol-related
incident in July 2009. And she provides no diagnostic insights into her disposition for
alcohol at this time.  
Because of the absence of any known diagnosis or reliable prognosis  to
evaluate Applicant’s capacity to safely consume alcohol at any level, application of DC ¶
22(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence,” may not be
employed in Applicant’s circumstances. Her court-approved AA sessions are not
explained or qualified by any records of counseling and treatment by a duly qualified
medical professional.
By contrast, were Applicant to be diagnosed with either alcohol abuse or
dependence, some recommended abstinence or curtailing of her alcohol consumption
could be reasonably expected. Depending on the diagnosis, Applicant’s continued
8
abstinence or drinking at light to abusive levels could be an important consideration in
determining what weight to assign to her reformed drinking claims. See ISCR Case 02-
03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case 01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004).
Quite possibly, Applicant could resume her occasional social drinking when her AA
conditions are concluded later in 2012. Without any counseling records to evaluate,
though, there is no verifiable way to know whether she can safely drink at any level in the
future. 
Considering Applicant’s recurrent arrest history (with four prior alcohol-related
offenses) and the limited elapse of time since her last alcohol-related incident DUI in July
2009, limited application of MC ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or the behavior was
so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” is available to her. Partially applicable to Applicant’s circumstances are
MC ¶ 23(d), “the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling
or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or a
similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
alcohol treatment program.” Still too little is known about her court-approved AA program
in 2009, her ability to tolerate alcohol at any level without a diagnosis and prognosis, and
how long she is likely to remain on unsupervised probation to warrant safe conclusions
that she is not at risk for a recurrent incident.     
Faced with similar evidence of limited rehabilitation and a seasoned track record,
the Appeal Board has expressed doubts about the ability to make safe, predictive
judgments about an applicant’s ability to avoid abusive incidents in the future without
jeopardizing the national interest. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 (App. Bd. Jan. 14,
2008); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007); ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007). 
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse and incidents away
from work and corresponding lack of solid probative evidence of a seasoned track record
of abstinence without probation conditions, the applicable guidelines, and a whole-
person assessment of her limited consumption of alcohol since her last alcohol-related
incident in July 2009, it is still too soon to draw firm conclusions about her commitment to
avert recurrent alcohol abuse after she has completed her AA conditions.   
Applicant’s overall showing that her abusive drinking in the past was situational
and that she can be trusted to drink responsibly and avert any recurrent problems with
judgment lapses related to alcohol in the future is not sufficient to enable her to meet her
mitigation burden. While Applicant’s AA participation and limited alcohol consumption
over the past two years are encouraging, a whole-person assessment does not support
approval of a security clearance at this time. 
9
At this time, Applicant has additional AA meetings to attend to fulfill her probation
requirements and faces continued unsupervised court probation. Without a certificate of
successful completion of her court-imposed AA meetings, or documentation of a
favorable diagnosis and prognosis, it is premature to make safe predictive judgments
about her ability to withstand recurrent risks to resume drinking. More time is needed for
her to demonstrate  that she can avert alcohol-related incidents in the future. While her
contributions to the Navy and her civilian employer are impressive and commendable,
they are not enough to enable her to surmount recurrent risks of alcohol abuse at this
time.  Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by
the alcohol guideline of the SOR. 
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE G ( ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):      AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f::     Against Applicant 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
