 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01673   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In his undated answer to the SOR, Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on November 15, 2011, scheduling the hearing for December 5, 
2011. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 
 
2 
 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
The record was held open until January 8, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked AE E through G 
and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum forwarding AE E 
through G is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. After reviewing AE E through G, I 
conducted a telephone conference with Department Counsel and Applicant on February 
13, 2012. I extended the deadline for Applicant to submit additional material until 
February 21, 2012. I informed Applicant that he could provide proof of payments toward 
the settlement agreements contained in AE E and F, or any other information that he 
would like to submit. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked AE H 
through J and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum 
forwarding those documents is marked HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on December 13, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old truck driver for a defense contractor. He has worked 
for his current employer since May 2009. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. He is married 
with two children, ages 20 and 12, and two stepchildren, ages 26 and 21.1 
  
 Applicant has had financial issues for a number of years. He had federal tax liens 
filed against him in 2002, 2003, and 2005. Applicant paid his taxes, and the liens were 
released in 2008. He lost his house to foreclosure in about 2004. Applicant has been 
steadily employed for about ten years, but he injured his back while working in 2009. He 
was off work for four to six months. He received workers’ compensation, but it was less 
than his normal income. Applicant’s wife lost her job in about 2009. She is still 
unemployed.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $18,900. 
There are multiple credit reports in evidence. All the debts appear on at least one of the 
credit reports. Several of the debts appear on an early credit report, but do not appear 
on later reports. Applicant denied owing all the debts. He indicated some of the debts 
had been paid; some were not incurred by him; and some he felt should not be his 
responsibility.  
  
 Applicant noted a number of delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86), which was submitted in October 2009. He discussed his 
finances and his delinquent debts when he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in December 2009. Applicant retained a company in about August 2011 to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25, 28-29, 50, 63; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 26-30; GE 1, 2, 6, 7. The tax liens and foreclosed house were not alleged in the SOR. Any debts 
that were not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. They may be 
considered when assessing Applicant’s financial history, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in 
analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
3 
 
assist him in disputing items on his credit report. Applicant submitted a TransUnion 
credit report obtained on October 18, 2011. That report only listed the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.3 Individual debts are discussed further below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $430 delinquent debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
telephone services company. When he responded to DOHA interrogatories in April 
2011, Applicant wrote that he “will take care of [this debt].” He initially testified that he 
felt that “someone had used [his] credit” and “took [his] identity.” He later testified that 
he had an account with the telephone services company, but he paid it. He disputed the 
debt. It is not listed on his October 2011 TransUnion credit report. It is listed on the 
Equifax credit report obtained on December 2, 2011, under a different collection 
company.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $568 delinquent debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
utility company. In his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant wrote that he “will 
take care of [this debt] when [he is] able.” Applicant disputed owing this debt and 
testified that he did not think the debt was his. He testified that he had an account with 
the utility company several years ago, but he paid the account when he stopped using 
the company. The debt is listed on the October 2011 TransUnion credit report. Applicant 
submitted a combined credit report that was obtained on December 1, 2011. The report 
is two pages long, but Applicant only submitted the first page. This debt is not listed on 
the page that Applicant submitted. The debt is listed on the Equifax credit report 
obtained on December 2, 2011.5 
 
 Applicant cosigned a car loan for his wife in about 2007. In 2008, the car 
developed transmission problems. Applicant took the car to various mechanics who all 
stated the car needed a new transmission. Estimates for the repair were between 
$7,000 and $14,000. Applicant left the car at the mechanic’s shop. He called the finance 
company and told them he was leaving the car at the shop, and they could pick it up as 
a voluntary repossession. The finance company lists the amount owed on the loan as 
$7,590. This debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant told the OPM investigator in 
December 2009 that he did not intend to pay the debt. He initially testified that he did 
not believe he was responsible for the debt. He later indicated that he planned to pay 
the debt when he has a reasonable settlement.6 
 
 Applicant and the collection company handling the SOR ¶ 1.c debt entered into a 
settlement agreement on December 12, 2012. The company agreed to accept $5,400 in 
settlement of the $7,589 debt. The agreement called for a $3,000 payment by January 
31, 2012, followed by monthly $200 payments until the $5,400 settlement amount was 
paid. The first payment was due after the record originally closed. The record was 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 15, 52; GE 1, 6; AE B-D. 
 
4 Tr. at 30-33; GE 7, 8; AE D. 
 
5 Tr. at 24-25, 51-52, 57; GE 7, 8; AE D, G. 
 
6 Tr. at 19-24, 52; GE 6. 
 
4 
 
reopened on February 13, 2012, and Applicant was given the opportunity to submit 
proof that he made the $3,000 payment. Applicant submitted an e-mail from the 
collection company dated February 13, 2012, which appears to be a “thank you” from 
the collection company for Applicant’s $3,000 payment.7  
 
 Applicant’s truck was stolen in 2009. His insurance did not pay enough on the 
claim to satisfy the loan on the truck. The credit reports list the amount owed on the loan 
as $5,869. This debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant told the OPM investigator in 
December 2009 that he did not intend to pay the debt. He testified that he did not 
believe he was responsible for the debt because the insurance company should have 
paid the loan off. He later indicated that he planned to pay the debt when he has a 
reasonable settlement.8 
 
 Applicant and the creditor holding the note for Applicant’s stolen truck entered 
into a settlement agreement on December 12, 2012. The company agreed to accept 
$4,174 in settlement, payable in 18 payments of $231. The settlement agreement was 
memorialized in an e-mail on December 13, 2011. The e-mail did not state when the 
first payment was due. The record was reopened on February 13, 2012, and Applicant 
was given the opportunity to submit proof that he made any of the $231 payments. 
Applicant submitted an e-mail from the collection company that appears to be dated 
February 14, 2012, which appears to be a confirmation of a settlement agreement. He 
did not submit proof of any payments toward the settlement agreement.9 
 
 Applicant cosigned a lease for a friend’s apartment in about 2003. The friend 
moved out of the apartment before the end of the lease. The landlord obtained a $400 
judgment against Applicant in 2003. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges the $400 judgment. SOR ¶ 1.h 
alleges a $1,728 debt to a collection company on behalf of the apartment landlord. 
Applicant listed the debts on his SF 86. Applicant acknowledged responsibility for the 
$400 judgment during his background interview. He stated that he planned on 
contacting the creditor within the next 6 to 12 months and set up a payment plan. 
Applicant denied owing this debt in his response to the SOR. He testified that the 
judgment is not listed on his current credit report and, as far as he knows, he does not 
have a judgment against him. He stated that he told the friend about the judgment, and 
he assumes the friend paid the judgment.10 
 
 Applicant denied owing the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($263), 1.i 
($257), and 1.l ($248). He also denied $206 debt to an insurance company, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.k. None of the debts appear on the most recent credit reports.11 
 
                                                          
7 AE E, I. 
 
8 Tr. at 15-19, 52; GE 6. 
 
9 AE F, J. 
 
10 Tr. at 34-38, 53; GE 1, 6. 
 
11 Tr. at 37-39, 42-44; GE 8; AE D. 
 
5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a $71 delinquent debt to an automobile club. Applicant listed 
this debt on his SF 86. He wrote that he was “not able to make payments now.” During 
his background interview, he stated that he planned to contact the creditor and pay the 
account within the next six months. He testified that he paid the debt. The debt is not 
listed on the most recent credit reports.12  
 
 Applicant listed a $1,358 delinquent debt to a telephone services company on his 
SF 86. He wrote that he was “not able to make payments.” This debt, as collected by a 
collection company, is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. Applicant told the background investigator 
that the debt resulted from his wife and daughter going over their allotted minutes. He 
stated that he planned on contacting the creditor within the next 6 to 12 months and set 
up a payment plan. He testified that he settled the debt by paying a little every month. 
The debt is listed on the December 2011 Equifax credit report, under a different 
collection company and with a balance of $1,429.13 
 
 Applicant stated that his finances are currently in better shape. He moved to a 
different shift that permits him to work more overtime. The company that is helping him 
correct his credit also provided him financial counseling. He stated that he is able to pay 
his current debts without incurring additional delinquent debts.14 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified that Applicant is one of the better workers in the 
company. He described Applicant as reliable and dependable.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 37-38, 53; GE 1, 6, 8; AE D. 
 
13 Tr. at 39-42, 57-58; GE 6. 
 
14 Tr. at 45-51; GE 7. 
 
15 Tr. at 60-63. 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant injured his back in 2009 and was off work for four to six months. His 
wife lost her job in about 2009, and she is still unemployed. Those events qualify as 
conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant had financial issues before his family’s employment problems. He had 
federal tax liens filed against him in 2002, 2003, and 2005, and he lost his house to 
foreclosure in about 2004. Applicant is credited with paying his federal taxes. He is also 
credited with making a $3,000 payment as part of the settlement of the deficiency owed 
on his car loan after he returned the car to the finance company. Applicant submitted a 
copy of the settlement agreement in his post-hearing submission. The agreement called 
for the $3,000 payment by January 31, 2012. The record was reopened on February 13, 
2012, and Applicant was given the opportunity to submit proof that he made the $3,000 
payment. Applicant did not establish that he made the $3,000 payment until after the 
record was reopened. He also did not establish that he started the monthly payments on 
his other payment agreement. I am not convinced that Applicant will maintain either 
payment once he is no longer under the threat of the denial of his security clearance.  
 
8 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling, establishing the first section of AG ¶ 
20(c). However, I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances and made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His finances are not yet 
under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable. The second section of AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable.  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l have been deleted 
from Applicant’s credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts. It is not 
applicable to any of the other debts. I find that financial concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, Applicant has 
not convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security 
clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
