 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06552 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Heidi Rogers, Personal Representative 
 
 
February 9, 2012  
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to 
have a history of indebtedness including ten debts in the approximate amount of 
$190,205, raising security concerns under Financial Considerations. Applicant mitigated 
the Financial Considerations security concerns because the debts were caused by 
unforeseen circumstances beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly with 
respect to his debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 13, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge then 
reassigned to me on November 7, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
7, 2011, scheduling the hearing for December 14, 2011. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 27, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for the past 16 years and recently received a promotion. He also 
works two additional part-time jobs to make ends meet. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 35-42, 25.) 
 
Applicant was married from July 1994 through August 2009. He has two children 
with his ex-wife, ages 19 and 14. He shares joint custody of their minor child with his ex-
wife. (GE 1; Tr. 42-44.) 
 
DOHA alleged under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, that Applicant is 
indebted to ten creditors in the approximate amount of $190,205. Applicant denied 
these allegations in his Answer, as each of the debts were discharged through Chapter 
7 bankruptcy. (SOR; Answer.) 
 
Applicant testified that each of the delinquent debts were a direct result of the 
demise of his marital relationship. In 2005, Applicant and his wife purchased a 
restaurant franchise to supplement his income. Applicant’s wife ran the franchise and 
was solely responsible for its operation and management. In approximately 2008, 
Applicant’s wife injured her back and began taking pain medication. She became 
addicted to pain killers. As a result, she began misappropriating funds designated for 
their bills and the upkeep of the franchise for her own personal use. Applicant had 
trusted his wife to manage their funds in the past and had no knowledge of her 
mismanagement of the business and of the funds until his wife became involved in 
another relationship and moved away. Applicant was left with their two children, a failing 
franchise, and a significant amount of unpaid bills. After his divorce in 2009, Applicant 
sold the franchise for a fraction of its fair-market value due to a number of required 
upgrades and compliance issues that had to be resolved by the new owner. Due to the 
loss of income from the franchise, he was unable to pay the mortgage on his house. In 
August of 2010, it was foreclosed upon and the bank took possession of the home. 
(Answer; Tr. 23-34, 40-66.) 
 
Applicant attempted to contact his creditors and work out payments, but he 
quickly found himself overwhelmed with the amount of debt. As a result, Applicant filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy on or about March 10, 2011. He disclosed approximately 
$115,016 in unsecured debts (incorporating SOR allegations 1.a-1.f, 1.i-1.j), and 
$607,307 in secured claims (incorporating SOR allegations 1.g and 1.h) including the 
first and second mortgage on Applicant’s foreclosed residence. Applicant had little 
 
3 
 
independent knowledge relating to the debts listed on the SOR, as his wife managed 
their finances. His debts were discharged on June 17, 2011. (GE 2; GE 5; GE 6; AE A; 
Tr. 23-34, 40-66.)  
 
As part of Applicant’s bankruptcy, he completed an instructional course on 
personal financial management. It included a computer-based financial planning 
session, a booklet of financial information that he read, and two telephonic counseling 
sessions. Applicant estimated that all of the counseling sessions took approximately five 
hours for him to complete. During the course, he created a budget that he is able to 
utilize. (GE 4; Tr. 30-31.) 
 
Applicant’s most recent credit report shows no other delinquent accounts. He 
testified he is current on all of his credit cards. He has savings of approximately $3,000 
in liquid funds and approximately $35,360 in retirement accounts. His former landlord 
wrote a letter of support on his behalf verifying that Applicant was an excellent tenant 
and paid his rent on time. Applicant now manages all of his finances himself and will not 
rely on anyone else to manage his money in the future. (GE 3; GE 7; AE C; Tr. 64-65.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by his co-workers, friends, and two assistant fire 
chiefs. A friend and co-worker for over 16 years wrote of Applicant, “he is the hardest 
working, most conscientious honest trustworthy person I know.” All spoke of his good 
moral character and trustworthiness. An assistant chief also spoke of the many hours of 
community service Applicant has devoted to his community. (AE C.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2 (a)). The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 As listed on the SOR, Applicant was indebted to ten creditors in the approximate 
amount of $190,205. These debts became delinquent in approximately 2008 and 
remained delinquent for a number of years. Since 2008, he was unable to satisfy the 
first and second mortgage on his property and his home was foreclosed upon. He filed 
 
5 
 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy and the debts alleged on the SOR were discharged in June 2011. 
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant meets significant mitigating factors for financial considerations. While 
his financial difficulties are recent, the circumstances under which they occurred are 
unlikely to recur. He trusted his ex-wife to manage their finances. He could not have 
predicted her misappropriation of the funds, after 14 years of marriage, which was 
caused by her addiction to painkillers and her extra-marital affair. Her actions led to the 
financial demise of both their franchise and the default of their mortgage. Applicant 
acted responsibly by seeking discharge of the debts through bankruptcy and the debts 
are now resolved. The Applicant’s financial problems are directly attributable to 
unforeseen circumstances. He continues to remain current on his other financial 
obligations. It does not appear that Applicant was living beyond his means in any 
regard. He can be trusted to monitor his finances closely and resolve his debts in the 
future. He received financial counseling, created a budget, and is current on all of his 
bills. He has a small savings account for use in emergencies. Clearly, Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by those that know him and work with him. He performs well at his job 
and works three jobs to support himself and his children. His dedication, community 
service, and integrity, as attested to by those that know him best, indicate he is 
trustworthy. His financial problems were unexpected. They were created by factors 
beyond his control and Applicant behaved maturely in how he handled his debts. He 
can be expected to remain debt free in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
   
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
