 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09240 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, 
and B. The actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 2, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge on November 22, 2011, and was reassigned to me on December 7, 
2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 15, 2011. I convened the hearing 
 
2 
 
 
as scheduled on January 24, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objections. The Government requested 
administrative notice of Hearing Exhibit I (HE). There was no objection, and I have 
taken administrative notice of HE I. Applicant did not offer any exhibits. The record was 
held open until February 7, 2012, to allow Applicant to submit documents. He submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence without objection, and the 
record was closed.1
 
 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 1, 2012.  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.f. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He married in 1980 and divorced in 1987. He has two 
grown sons. He served in the Army and was honorably discharged. He worked for a 
defense contractor from 1988 to 2005.2
 
 
 In 2005, Applicant left his job of 17 years with a defense contractor and moved to 
another state so he could take care of his parents, whose health was failing. At the 
same time, he agreed to go into business with his brother. Applicant invested about 
$45,000 of his own money in the business. The business struggled, and when a 
government contract was canceled, it ran out of operating money. Applicant used credit 
cards for two to three years to subsidize his living expenses after this period. Sometime 
in 2009, he contracted with a debt consolidation company to help him organize, settle 
and pay his delinquent debts. He arranged to pay $1,600 a month. He has consistently 
made payments, except for a three-month period when he used the money to pay 
taxes. Applicant paid the owed taxes. Applicant provided documented proof of his 
payments. In 2009, he was able to go back and work for the government contractor he 
had previously worked for. He worked there for 14 months until he obtained a better job 
offer from a different government contractor. He was given $5,000 for moving 
expenses.3
 
 
 The $22,822 debt in SOR ¶ 2.f was settled by Applicant outside of the debt 
consolidation agreement. He used the $5,000 he received for moving expenses 
provided by his employer,  to resolve the debt. He has settled and paid the other alleged 
debts in the SOR, except two. SOR ¶1.a ($4,306), a judgment that the creditor would 
not settle is being paid through garnishment. Applicant stated the payment of that debt 
                                                          
1 AE A is a fax cover sheet. AE B is a 42-page document from Nationwide Asset Services, Inc. and bank 
statements. AE C is a court order. AE D is two months of earning statements. HE II is the Department 
Counsel’s response to the documents and he had no objections to their admission into evidence.  
 
2 Tr. 22, 49, 66. 
 
3 Tr. 22-23, 26-27, 30-40, 46-49; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 
will be completed by March 2012.4  Applicant is making $400 monthly payments on the 
remaining debt, SOR ¶ 1.d ($19,416), through the debt consolidation plan. After he 
completes the garnishment payments, he intends to increase the monthly payments on 
this debt to expedite its settlement. He anticipates the debt being paid by November 
2012.5
 
 
 In 2005, Applicant’s friend enrolled him in several internet dating services. He 
received some emails from the services. In September 2005, he contacted a woman on 
a Russian website. They corresponded through email and telephone calls. She invited 
him to visit her in Russia. He visited her for two weeks. They continued their relationship 
online until he asked her to marry him in October 2006. He obtained a fiancé visa for 
her, and they were married in May 2007. She has a daughter who is now 21 years old. 
His stepdaughter stayed in Russia with her grandmother until June 2007, when she 
moved to the United States to be with her mother. Applicant’s wife and her daughter do 
not have any contact with her ex-husband. Applicant does not know what his occupation 
is or when his wife last had contact with him. Applicant’s wife worked in the 
telecommunications industry in Russia. She has a job in the United States as a systems 
analyst.6
 
 
 Applicant’s wife and stepdaughter are both citizens of Russia and permanent 
residents of the United States. His stepdaughter lived with them and now attends 
college and lives off-campus. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of 
Russia. She never married her daughter’s father. Applicant’s wife does not know her 
father.7
 
  
Applicant’s mother-in-law sold her house in Russia and gave her granddaughter 
money to pay for college tuition. She moved into an apartment that formerly belonged to 
Applicant’s wife, who signed it over to her in 2010. The value of the house was 
approximately $25,000 to $30,000. She is retired and receives a pension from the 
government. Applicant’s wife has weekly contact with her mother in Russia. His 
stepdaughter talks to her grandmother in Russia once every one to two months. His 
wife provides financial support for her daughter. The daughter also has a part-time job. 
His wife has not applied for U.S. citizenship because it is expensive, and Applicant is 
trying to pay his delinquent debts. His wife has not returned to Russia since moving to 
the United States in 2007. His mother-in-law has not visited his wife in the United 
States. Applicant stated that if his wife’s mother became ill or something happened, he 
would send his wife back to Russia to see her.8
 
  
                                                          
4 Tr. 27, 40-42; AE C, D. 
 
5 Tr. 27, 34-35, 42-46, 50-54; GE 3; AD B. 
 
6 Tr. 23, 47-48, 54-60, 65-69, 71-75. 
 
7 Tr. 59-61. 
 
8 Tr. 50-52, 61-63, 66-68. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s stepdaughter does not maintain contact with her biological father. 
She has returned to Russia for a three-month period to visit her grandmother. A 
Russian relative purchased the plane ticket for her to visit. Applicant’s stepdaughter has 
not applied for U.S. citizenship. She intends on remaining in the United States.9
 
  
The Russian Federation10
 
 
The Russian Federation is composed of 21 republics. The government consists 
of a strong president, a prime minister, a bicameral legislature and a weak judiciary. It is 
a vast and diverse country with a population of 142 million people. It achieved 
independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 1991. It is a 
nuclear superpower that continues to develop politically, socially, and economically. 
 
The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests. Of 
mutual interest to the United States and Russia are counterterrorism and the reduction 
of strategic arsenals. Russia and the United States share a common interest in 
controlling the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver 
them. The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CRT) program was launched in 1992 to 
provide for the dismantlement of weapons of mass destruction in the former Soviet 
Union. The CRT program was renewed in 2006 for seven years, until 2013. 
 
The Russian Federation’s intelligence capability is significant and focuses on 
collection of information from the United States. Russia has targeted U.S. technologies, 
particularly cyberspace, and has sought to obtain protected information from them 
through industrial espionage. Russian espionage specializes in military technology and 
gas and oil industry expertise. As of 2005, Russia and China were the two most 
aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and accounted for the 
majority of such targeting.  
 
Russia is a leading arms exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and 
military-related technology to China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. Two trends that may 
increase Russia’s threat over the next several years is that many Russian immigrants 
with advanced technical skills who work for leading U.S. companies may be increasingly 
targeted for recruitment by the Russian intelligence services. In addition, a great 
number of Russian companies affiliated with the intelligence service will be doing 
business in the United States.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence testified before Congress in February 2010 
stating, “Russia continues to strengthen its intelligence capabilities and directs them 
against U.S. interests worldwide. Moscow’s intelligence efforts include espionage, 
technology acquisition, and covert actions to alter events abroad without showing its 
hand.”  
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 63-65. 
 
10 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
In June 2010, the U.S. Department of Justice announced the arrest of ten alleged 
secret agents for carrying out long-term, deep-covered assignments on behalf of 
Russia. The defendants plead guilty and were immediately expelled from the United 
States. In January 2011, a convicted spy and former CIA employee was sentenced to 
an additional prison term because of money laundering and conspiracy to act as an 
agent of the Russian government for passing information to the Russian government 
between 2006 and 2008. 
 
The threat of terrorism in Russia continues to be significant. Travel in the vicinity 
of Chechnya may be dangerous, despite Russian efforts to suppress the terrorists. Acts 
of terrorism include taking hostages and bombings.  
 
Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international human rights standards, 
but human rights abuses continue. Both Russian federal forces and Chechen rebel 
forces act with impunity while engaging in torture, summary executions, 
disappearances, and arbitrary detentions. Additional problems include corruption, media 
suppression, life-threatening prison conditions, and corruption in law enforcement.  
 
The U.S. Department of State reports allegations that Russian government 
officials and others conduct warrantless searches of residences and other premises, 
and electronic surveillance without judicial permission. This surveillance includes 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office monitoring of internet and e-mail 
traffic.  Additionally, Russian law enforcement agencies have legal access to the 
personal information of users of telephone and cell phone services.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
6 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts after he moved to help his aging parents 
and started a new business with his brother that later failed. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and the following are potentially applicable; 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant had numerous delinquent debts that he has settled and paid through a 
payment plan. However, there are still two remaining debts that he is paying. Therefore, 
at this time, I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant moved so he could help his aging parents. He then started a business 
with his brother and invested $45,000 of his own money. The business was viable for a 
period, but eventually failed when a government contract was canceled. Applicant 
accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt from using credit cards to 
subsidize his business and living expenses. I find these conditions were beyond 
Applicant’s control. For AG ¶ 20(b) to be fully applicable, Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant contracted with a debt consolidation 
company in 2009 and has consistently addressed all of the delinquent debts since then. 
He has two remaining debts that he continues to make payments to resolve. He 
anticipates that all of his debts would be paid by November 2012. I find Applicant acted 
responsibly, and AG ¶ 20(b) fully applies. In addition, I find Applicant made good-faith 
efforts to repay his overdue creditors, and there are clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved and under control. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
apply.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding Foreign Influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or person, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” necessary to raise AG ¶ 7(a) is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s 
family ties to a foreign country, as well as each individual family tie, must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States. 
 
Most nations with substantial military establishments seek classified and sensitive 
information from the United States because it has the largest military industrial complex 
 
9 
 
 
and most advanced military establishment in the world. Russian officials actively seek 
sensitive and classified information from U.S. citizens with access to this material.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. Russia’s intelligence services conduct a 
full range of activities to collect economic information and technology from U.S. targets. 
Russia targets U.S. visitors overseas to potentially access sensitive information. It is 
one of the two most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. technology 
particularly cyberspace.  
 
Russia human rights record is uneven and poor. Two trends that may increase 
Russia’s threat over the next several years is that many Russian immigrants with 
advanced technical skills, who work for leading U.S. companies, may be increasingly 
targeted for recruitment by Russian intelligence services and a greater number of 
Russian companies affiliated with the intelligence services will be doing business in the 
United States. These factors create a heavy burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his relationship with his wife, stepdaughter, and mother-in-law do not 
pose a security risk, and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to 
the United States and them. With Russia’s poor human rights record, its aggressive 
collection efforts, its focus on obtaining U.S. intelligence, and its extensive covert 
operations in the United States, it is conceivable that it would target its own citizens or a 
former citizen living in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information 
from the United States. Applicant’s contact and relationship with his wife, stepdaughter, 
and mother-in-law, all citizens of Russia, are sufficiently close to raise a possible 
security concern.  
 
Applicant’s wife and stepdaughter are citizens of Russia and residents of the 
United States. His wife resides with him in the United States. His stepdaughter attends 
college in the United States and visits them. She returns to Russia to visit her 
grandmother, who is a citizen and resident of Russia. Applicant’s wife worked as a 
systems analyst in Russia and now works for an American company in the same 
capacity. Her daughter intends on remaining in the United States. Applicant’s mother-in-
law provided financial help for her granddaughter, and another relative paid for a plane 
ticket so she could visit her grandmother in Russia. His stepdaughter has returned to 
Russia and spent three months with her grandmother. Applicant will assist his wife 
financially if she needs to return to Russia to help her mother. His wife and his 
stepdaughter have not applied for U.S. citizenship. These facts potentially create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, 
and also create a potential conflict of interest. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
 
10 
 
 
I have also analyzed the facts and considered all mitigating conditions for this 
security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following three are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s wife, stepdaughter, and mother-in-law are Russian citizens. His wife 
and stepdaughter live in the United States, and they maintain close contact with her 
mother, who resides in Russia. His stepdaughter spent three months with her 
grandmother on a return visit to Russia. Applicant’s relationship with his wife and 
stepdaughter cannot be characterized as casual and infrequent. His wife and 
stepdaughter’s relationship with her mother cannot be described as casual and 
infrequent. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant’s relationships are likely to create a risk 
for foreign influence of exploitation. I find AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.   
 
Applicant’s wife and stepdaughter are Russian citizens and their relationship to 
him is close. His mother-in-law resides in Russia. Due to Russia’s aggressive 
espionage tactics against the United States, their covert operations within the United 
States and their willingness to exploit Russian immigrants in the United States there is 
considerable cause for concern. Applicant’s wife worked as a systems analyst in Russia 
and does similar work in the United States. Under the circumstances, I find that it is 
likely that Applicant, his wife, or his stepdaughter could be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of the United States and that of the Russian 
government or their family in Russia. I find Applicant has a deep and longstanding 
commitment to the United States. However, I find there is a conflict of interest because 
his sense of loyalty to his wife and her family is not minimal. Therefore, I cannot apply 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) or 8(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall, commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant had 
delinquent debts due to moving to help his parents and a failed business. He started a 
repayment plan in 2009, and he has systematically reduced his debt. He has two debts 
remaining that he is making payments on. He expects all delinquent debts to be paid by 
November 2012.  
 
Applicant’s wife and stepdaughter are citizens of Russia. His mother-in-law is a 
citizen and resident of Russia. Although Applicant is a loyal American, who has served 
his country, his relationship with his wife and stepdaughter creates a heightened risk 
that is not mitigated. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations, but failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
