 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-11158 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robert G. Cohen, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2011, and initially requested an 
administrative determination without a hearing before an administrative judge. She then 
retained counsel who requested a hearing on September 19, 2011. The case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on October 4, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 31, 
2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 15, 2011. Applicant 
waived the 15-day requirement between notice and hearing based upon discussions 
between Applicant’s counsel and Department Counsel.1 The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified, offered one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) A through E at the hearing, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. A demonstrative exhibit was used 
and marked as HE II. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted AE F through I, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum was marked HE III. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 28, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation. That admission is incorporated as a 
finding of fact. After a review of the pleadings, testimony, and admitted exhibits, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since September 2004. She is an engineer. She has a bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering. She is married, with two children. Her husband works 
and his annual salary is over $175,000. Her annual salary is over $100,000. She has no 
military service and has never held a security clearance.2  
 
 The SOR alleges one delinquent debt. The debt is a charged off home equity 
debt (the credit reports refer to the debt as a home equity loan, while the testimony 
refers to the debt as a second mortgage) in the amount of over $58,700. The charged 
off debt was listed on credit reports obtained on September 25, 2010, and February 22, 
2011.3  
 
 Applicant’s husband handled the finances for the family. Although Applicant is 
involved with the financial decisions, her husband deals with the regular financial issues 
that arise. In 1989, Applicant and her husband purchased a home. By 2008, they were 
able to pay off the mortgage on that home and own it unencumbered. They believe the 
home’s current market value is $250,000. In 2006, they bought a second home about 
35 miles from their first home. They paid about $600,000 for the second home, of which 
$480,000 was financed by a first mortgage, $60,000 was financed through a second 
mortgage, and a down payment of $60,000 was made. They bought the second home 
because they believed this was a good location for the two of them as their children 
grew older and went off to college. They retained their first home primarily for the sake 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 8. 
 
2 Tr. at 93, 111; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 3-4. 
 
 
3 
 
of the children. They did not want to uproot them from their schools, friends, and 
extracurricular activities by moving them to the second home’s location. They split their 
time between the two homes. Their daughter has gone off to college, but their son 
remains in high school.4  
 
 Applicant lives in an area hard hit by the mortgage crisis and recent property 
devaluations. In 2008, Applicant’s husband discovered that the market value of their 
second home decreased significantly. He believed the value dropped to between 
$200,000 and $360,000. He based these numbers on the foreclosures and short sale 
prices of neighbors’ homes in the area. These homes were very similar to Applicant’s 
home. Up to that point of time, Applicant and her husband had not missed a monthly 
payment on their second home (the first home remained debt free). Because of the 
financial upheaval the area was experiencing, they decided to approach their mortgage 
holder about loan modifications for their two mortgages. At that time, they did not know 
that there were two mortgages on the property, because they paid the same mortgage 
holder for both loans through one payment. It was when they sought a loan modification 
that they discovered there were two mortgages on the property and that they would 
need to seek modifications to both mortgages. Applicant’s husband claimed that he 
completed and filed the loan modification paperwork several times with the lender, but 
that it was lost. A duplicate modification application was completed in December 2008. 
Through the modification application, they asked the bank to reduce their interest rates 
(from 6.25% on the first mortgage and 7.25% on the second mortgage to 5% overall), 
combine both mortgages into one, and reduce the principle to $240,000.5 
 
 Applicant’s husband periodically inquired with the bank about the status of the 
modifications, but nothing seemed to be happening. He claimed he was told by a bank 
representative to stop making payments on his mortgages in order to speed-up the 
process. He independently researched, through the internet, whether stopping his 
payments was a constructive idea. He determined it was and stopped making monthly 
payments on both mortgages. In June 2009, the bank agreed to a modification of the 
first mortgage by lowering the interest rate and by tacking the delinquent payments on 
to the end of the mortgage. Applicant’s husband continued to correspond with the bank 
about the second mortgage, but no definitive answer was forthcoming. Then in 
September 2009, while shopping for a car for their daughter, Applicant and her husband 
were informed during a credit check that the second mortgage showed as a “charge off” 
on their credit report (this is the debt alleged in SOR¶ 1.a).6   
 
 Applicant’s husband did not immediately respond to the charged off account 
because it did not seem to affect their credit standing at the time. The family was still 
extended credit without any apparent repercussions. It was only when Applicant applied 
for a security clearance that the ramifications of the charged-off account became 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 36-38, 67-68, 111-112. 
 
5 Tr. at 39, 40, 42; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-45, 53, 55-57; AE B-C. 
 
 
4 
 
apparent. After she received the SOR in April 2011, her husband began negotiating with 
the bank to resolve the charged off second mortgage account. He initially offered 
$5,000, but the bank wanted about 65% of the loan value. He then offered $15,000, and 
the bank representative countered with $20,000. Any settlement amount had to be 
approved by the bank’s approval board. On November 18, 2011, Applicant’s husband 
formally put the $15,000 settlement offer into writing and sent it to the bank. 
Additionally, Applicant provided documentation showing a bank account that contained 
enough money to pay the settlement offer. Also, in her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated she and her husband had $150,000 worth of liquid assets. There is no evidence 
in the record indicating the bank accepted Applicant’s offer. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is 
still unresolved. There is no evidence Applicant received any financial counseling.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 59-63; AE F-I. 
 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
 Applicant intentionally stopped making payments on two mortgages in an 
attempt to seek modifications to those mortgages. She was successful in 
receiving a modification to her first mortgage, but not to her second mortgage, 
which was charged off by the lender. This debt remains outstanding despite 
Applicant having the resources to pay the debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the disqualifying condition that Applicant is unwilling to satisfy her debt.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s charged-off second mortgage is an on-going debt and is recent. Her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment are called into question because she has 
the ability to pay the debt, but has chosen not to do so. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant and her husband made conscious decisions to stop payments on their 
mortgages in order to secure loan modifications. They were not forced into this position 
by their financial status at the time. Neither of them lost jobs, nor did they experience 
significant medical obligations, or any other type of family emergency. Nothing caused 
their house payments to become untenable. They simply chose to pursue this tactic to 
secure lower housing costs for themselves. While there is nothing wrong with using this 
tactic, it cannot be deemed beyond their control when it does not work out the way they 
intended. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 There was no evidence of financial counseling. Applicant’s recent efforts to settle 
this debt, after it became apparent how the debt was impacting her ability to receive a 
security clearance, do not amount to a good-faith effort to repay her debt.8 AG ¶ 20(c) 
and ¶ 20(d) do not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s years of service to her employer. However, I also 
considered that she and her husband purposefully pursued loan modifications of their 
mortgages by stopping payments and causing their second mortgage to become 
delinquent and ultimately charged off. They only became interested in attempting to 
resolve this debt when they realized the impact it had on Applicant’s chances to receive 
a security clearance. Even then, the debt remained unresolved, despite Applicant’s 
apparent ability to pay the debt. Her unwillingness to resolve this debt puts into question 
her reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a    Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
