 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------1 )  ISCR Case No. 10-11199 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 30, 2010, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On June 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 23, 2011. She answered the 
SOR in writing on July 6, 2011, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
DOHA received the request on July 12, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on August 25, 2011, and I received the case assignment on August 31, 2011. 
                                                          
1
 Applicant married after the SOR was issued. Her name used in the SOR is in parenthesis.  
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 27, 2011, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 17, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through G, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 1, 
2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by striking ¶ 1.c, alleging 
Applicant voluntarily returned a vehicle to the loan provider as repossession. The 
Government explained that the documents showed Applicant had an auto lease and 
returned the vehicle at the lease expiration. It was not repossession. I granted the 
motion. (Tr. 20-22; Exhibit D)  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b, of the SOR, with explanations. She also provided additional information to 
support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, married, and works for a defense contractor as a data 
specialist. She also has other office duties to perform. She divorced her first husband in 
2009 and has recently remarried. After the divorce she moved from another state to the 
one in which she and her new husband presently live. Her first husband handled the 
family finances. (Tr. 36, 37; Exhibit 1, E) 
 
She has two delinquent debts that she is resolving. They total $28,125 as alleged 
in the SOR. The first debt is to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for self-employment 
taxes resulting from her work in her brother’s real estate business. She earned $40,000 
in that position. Applicant owes $8,087.00 on that debt and is paying $250 monthly 
pursuant to an installment payment agreement. She has made payments since August 
2011. Applicant sought assistance from the IRS in March 2011 to arrange an installment 
payment agreement. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 30-32, 42-45; Exhibits 2-5, A, G) 
 
Applicant owes $19,700 on a student loan to a government agency. Applicant 
graduated in 2001 with an associate’s degree in culinary arts. She paid $150 monthly 
several years ago, but when she got divorced she stopped paying. She now has 
resumed making payments of $200 monthly beginning August 2011. This debt is being 
resolved on the installment payment plan. (Tr. 33, 34, 47; Exhibits 2-5, F) 
 
Applicant’s income dropped from $40,000 to $28,000 when she changed jobs 
after her 2009 divorce and moved to another city. Her current job pays her $36,000 and 
she is better able to make her debt payments. If her husband’s house sells she will be 
 
3 
 
 
able to repay her loans faster. They currently live in a home Applicant rents from her 
father for $350 monthly. (Tr. 32, 33, 34, 38, 40, 41) 
 
Applicant submitted two character letters from her supervisors. Both describe her 
as competent, conscientious, hard-working, and dedicated. (Exhibits B and C) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $28,125 in delinquent debt from 2001 to the present time 
that remains unpaid.  Applicant has two delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
5 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant is currently paying her debts in an orderly manner. She makes regular 
payments on each of the two delinquent debts. Therefore, there are clear indications 
from the evidence she presented that the financial problems are under control and 
being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) applies.  
 
Applicant has a regular debt repayment program in operation on the IRS debt 
and the student loan debt. She should be able to repay both debts in less than eight 
years. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay her 
delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant explained credibly her 
past efforts to pay these two debts and the reasons they were incurred. She admitted 
frankly why they were not paid before now. Her changing income, usually downward, 
 
6 
 
 
adversely affected her ability to make the payments. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She has tried in the past to repay them and continues that effort. 
There is no likelihood of recurrence. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress is very slight because of the regular repayment plan she is using, and the 
character letters from her supervisors’ show her situation is known within her employer’s 
managerial ranks.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
