 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 10-10601  
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
After reviewing the results of Applicant's background investigation, adjudicators 
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a 
preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. On October 20, 2011, DOHA issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which specified the basis for its decision: 
 
 
 
2 
security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1
 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 15, 2011, Applicant admitted the six 
SOR allegations. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 16, 2011, and I received 
the case on December 21, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 9, 2012. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 25, 2012. 
 
During the hearing, the Government offered three exhibits, which I admitted as 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified, and offered four exhibits, 
which I admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through D. I held the record open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documentation, which he timely submitted. I admitted one 
document as AE E.2
 
 The transcript was received on February 1, 2012. 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 63 years old and holds a two-year technical degree in field service 
computer technology. He served in the Navy from 1967 to 1969, and served in Vietnam. 
In the 1980s, he held a security clearance when he served as a federal police officer. 
He then worked for a national oil company. From 1999 to 2008, he worked for a large 
telecommunications company doing LAN desktop support. He divorced in 1993. He has 
five adult children ranging from 27 to 43 years of age. He raised his youngest son and 
daughter on his own for approximately 10 years, since about 1993. His youngest child 
has not lived with him since she moved out of state to attend college in 2003. (GE 1; AE 
A; Tr. 19-23) 
 
In his most recent job for the telecommunications company, he worked from 
home, using his own laptop to assist customers in the United States and Canada with 
obtaining storage on servers. However, eventually, his outdated computer could not 
handle the requirements of his job, and in September 2008, he was terminated. In the 
first three quarters of 2008, he earned $43,364. (AE B; Tr. 23-26) 
 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of this case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. The AG apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which 
an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 AE E consists of the first two pages of Applicant's federal tax returns for 2009 and 2010. 
 
 
3 
Applicant was unemployed for approximately a year and a half. His credit report 
shows that his debts became delinquent at about that time. In 2009, Applicant's income 
consisted of unemployment compensation and distributions from an IRA, totaling 
$44,366. In 2010, he obtained temporary employment for about four months, and a few 
other temporary positions, working a total of about six months. His income from these 
positions, along with unemployment compensation and IRA distributions, totaled 
$25,723. In 2011, he continued to work for temporary staffing agencies doing short-term 
computer jobs. His February 2011 personal financial statement (PFS) shows income of 
$1,360 per month in unemployment compensation, monthly expenses of $765, and debt 
payments of $450, leaving a monthly net remainder of $145. At the hearing, he 
estimated he earned about $10,000 in 2011. His current job offer is awaiting 
confirmation of his security clearance. (GE 2, 3; AE C, D, E; Tr. 27-30) 
 
Applicant kept up with his debts as well as he could after losing his job. In 2009 
and 2010, he used his savings to pay debts. His credit report shows only the SOR 
debts, with numerous other accounts showing as “closed or paid, “ and numerous 
accounts that have been closed at the Applicant's request. As his income decreased 
over time, several debts became delinquent. (GE 2, 3; AE C, D, E; Tr. 27-30, 41) 
 
 Applicant admits the SOR debts, which total approximately $57,000. The 
following debts appear in his credit bureau report of October 2011. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 35-37, 
40-41)  
 
MORTGAGE: 1.a - $41,000 - Applicant admits owing this mortgage debt. He 
made no mortgage payments in 2011. He applied for loan modification, and was 
offered one if he could keep up payments during a trial period. He paid a 
reduced amount of $900 per month, or approximately half his normal payment. 
He paid about three months at this rate. However, when he was no longer 
employed, he could not continue the payments. He had a meeting scheduled on 
January 28, 2012, a few days after the hearing. He did not forward any 
documentation about the modification before the record closed. He testified that 
he does not expect to qualify for a modification without full-time employment. 
The lender has not threatened foreclosure. (Tr. 32-35)  
 
 CREDIT CARD accounts: 1.b (totaling $9,201) and 1.c ($3,936)   
 
HOME REPAIR loan: 1.d ($4,603)  
 
 TELEPHONE: 1.e ($288)  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
 
 
4 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3
 
 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
                                                 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
over-extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The 
delinquent debts Applicant has accrued are sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s past-due mortgage accounts for the bulk of his SOR debt, along with 
four other delinquencies. They are recent because they remain unpaid. He did not 
become indebted due to deliberately ignoring his responsibilities, or other deliberate 
actions such as negligence, gambling, alcohol abuse, or frivolous spending. Given that 
Applicant did not accrue delinquencies while he was working, and has paid his debts 
from savings as much as he could while he was unemployed, I conclude that 
delinquencies are unlikely to recur, once he regains full-time employment. His 
trustworthiness and good judgment are not at issue. AG ¶20 (a) applies only in part. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) mitigates financial problems that stem from unexpected events 
beyond an applicant's control. Here, Applicant was gainfully employed by the same 
employer for nine years. Eventually, his outdated computer could not keep up with the 
demands of his job, and he was terminated in 2008. Since then, he has not been 
employed in a permanent position in more than three years. He has tried to find 
employment, but the financial downturn and soft job market have made it difficult for 
him to find anything other than short-term temporary jobs. Because of his low income 
over the past three years, he has fallen behind in his mortgage, and without steady 
employment, he is unable to qualify for a modification. He acted reasonably under the 
circumstances by using savings to pay some creditors over the past three years, so 
that the SOR alleges, other than his mortgage, only four delinquent debts, despite his 
steadily decreasing income. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant was financially solvent while he held a permanent job. His current 
delinquencies arose only after he was terminated from his employment in 2008. He has 
persistently tried to find permanent employment. Since 2008, he has supported himself 
on unemployment compensation, short-term temporary jobs, and IRA distributions. In 
2009 and 2010, he used savings to pay as many of his debts as possible. However, 
some became delinquent. He testified candidly about his delinquencies, and his 
credibility is not in question. He has made efforts to obtain a modification of his 
mortgage loan by working with the lender, but cannot obtain a modification without 
steady employment.  
 
 The Appeal Board has held that an applicant is not required to be debt-free, or 
to have developed a plan to pay all debts simultaneously or immediately.7
 
 Here, 
Applicant acted responsibly by using savings to pay his debts as much as possible. 
Given his limited resources, the difficult job market, and his decreasing income over 
the past three years, there are not many other steps Applicant could have taken to deal 
with his debt. Especially in light of Applicant's financial responsibility when he was fully 
employed, I conclude that he will work to resolve his remaining debts once he regains 
permanent employment. 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security clearance. 
                                                 
7 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567.a1 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009) 
 
 
7 
For these reasons, I conclude he has mitigated the security concerns arising from the 
cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.e  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
