 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10121 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs from 1985 until December 2009. He used drugs 
after he was employed by a government contractor in December 2006, and after he was 
granted a security clearance. Moreover, he deliberately falsified his security clearance 
application (SCA) when he failed to disclose his illegal marijuana use during the seven 
years preceding his SCA. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 21, 2007, 
and he was granted a security clearance. He used marijuana around December 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing investigation, adjudicators for the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative 
finding1
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 
On September 6, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant answered the SOR 
on October 4, 2011, and he elected to have his case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. A copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 27, 
2011, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated October 27, 2011. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 11, 2011. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. He did 
not respond to the FORM, and he provided no additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on January 23, 2012.  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the three factual SOR allegations under Guideline H. He 
denied the single Guideline E allegation. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, including his answer 
to the SOR and his statement to a government investigator, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended high 
school from 1983 until 1987, when he received his diploma. Applicant married his wife 
in May 1994, and they were divorced in February 2004. He has a son, age 13, and a 
daughter, age 10, of this marriage. Applicant started working for his current employer, a 
government contractor, in December 2006. He submitted his first SCA in June 2007, 
and was granted a security clearance at the secret level shortly thereafter.  
 
Section 24 of his June 2007 SCA asked Applicant whether in the last seven 
years he had used any controlled substance, including marijuana. Applicant answered 
“Yes,” and disclosed that he illegally used marijuana seven times during 2003. He 
explained that at the time “[he] was having a really hard time with [his] divorce and 
made a stupid decision.” (Item 5, SCA) 
 
In December 2009, Applicant tested positive for marijuana on a random drug test 
ordered by his employer. In March 2010, he was interviewed by a government 
investigator about his use of marijuana. Applicant told the investigator he started using 
marijuana at age 16, because his family and friends were also using marijuana. He 
continued to use marijuana as an adult because it helped him to deal with stress and his 
panic attacks. Since age 16, he used marijuana approximately three times a month. He 
purchased marijuana from his cousin to meet his needs. Until he participated in the 
December 2009 random drug test, Applicant never made any attempts to stop using 
marijuana.   
                                            
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
After Applicant tested positive for marijuana, his employer reaffirmed its policy 
against the use of illegal drugs. Applicant was given the option to either resign or stop 
using illegal drugs. Applicant indicated that his job was very important to him and vowed 
to stop using drugs. In January 2010, Applicant’s employer referred him to three weeks 
of substance abuse counseling. At the end of the counseling, Applicant tested negative 
for the use of illegal drugs.  
 
Applicant stated that he participated in aftercare treatment with Narcotics 
Anonymous (NA), once every one to two weeks. Additionally, his family doctor issued 
him a prescription to curtail his anxiety. Applicant provided no up-to-date evidence as to 
whether he was required to attend further aftercare treatment, the period he participated 
(or has been participating) in aftercare treatment, whether he has been diagnosed with 
substance abuse or dependence, or whether he has remained abstinent since his 
March 2010 interview. 
 
Applicant told the investigator that his substance abuse counseling was helping 
him. He claimed he stopped using marijuana, and that he never used any other illegal 
drugs. He promised never to use any illegal drugs in the future. Applicant averred he 
had stopped associating with family members and friends who use illegal drugs.  
 
Policies 
 
The Secretary of Defense may grant eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
4 
 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally purchased, possessed, and used marijuana from 1983 until 
December 2009 (age 40). He used marijuana while working for a government 
contractor, and after he was granted a security clearance. Applicant knew the use of 
marijuana was illegal and that his employer had a policy against the use of marijuana. 
 
AG ¶ 25 provides three drug involvement disqualifying conditions that raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) any drug abuse;3
 
  
(c) illegal drug possession; and  
 
(d) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s illegal marijuana 
use spanned a period of approximately 26 years, and his use was not infrequent. He 
started using marijuana in 1983, at age 14, and his use extended until December 2009, 
when he was 40 years old. He illegally used marijuana socially, and not under 
extraordinary circumstances. He knew that his possession and use of marijuana was 
                                            
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
illegal and that it would adversely affect his ability to hold his job and a security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant claimed he last used marijuana in December 2009. He told the 
investigator in March 2010 that he was abstinent, and he promised not to abuse drugs in 
the future. He participated in substance abuse counseling provided by his employer and 
attended NA for an unknown period. He also claimed that he had disassociated from his 
marijuana-using family members and friends. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant illegally used marijuana after he started working for a 
government contractor, and after he was granted a security clearance. I do not find his 
questionable behavior is mitigated by the passage of time because of the lengthy period 
during which he used marijuana, his age at his most recent use, and his use of 
marijuana while working for a government contractor and while possessing a security 
clearance.  
 
Moreover, he falsified his June 2007 SCA when he deliberately failed to disclose 
the extent of his marijuana use and provided misleading information. The SCA made 
him aware of the Government’s serious concerns about federal or government 
contractor personnel using illegal drugs. Notwithstanding, he used marijuana after he 
was granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant presented no current documentary evidence about any counseling or 
aftercare treatment program. He presented no evidence of a recent diagnosis or 
prognosis concerning his illegal drug use. In light of Applicant’s age, experience, the 
period he used drugs, his possession of a security clearance, and his recent history of 
illegal marijuana use, his promise not to use drugs without corroboration (e.g., clear 
evidence of lifestyle changes, statements from those who know him about his 
disassociation from his drug-using friends, or a competent medical diagnosis and 
prognosis) is not sufficient to show his use of drugs is unlikely to recur. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past questionable 
behavior still casts doubt on his reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to 
comply with the law. His favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
7 
 
 
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified his 2007 SCA when he failed to disclose he 
illegally used marijuana from 1985 until at least June 2007. He failed to disclose the 
period and extent of his drug use. His falsification triggers the applicability of the 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
 AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find that, for the same 
reasons discussed under Guideline H (incorporated herein), none of them apply to the 
facts of this case. Furthermore, Applicant made no effort to correct his falsification until 
he was confronted by a government investigator after he tested positive for marijuana. 
He falsified his SCA to hide from his employer and the Government his long-term illegal 
marijuana use. His falsification is a serious offense. His questionable behavior is likely 
to recur and it casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant claimed he stopped using marijuana in December 2009, 
because he wants to continue with his career. Apparently, he has done well working for 
his employer.  
 
Considering Applicant’s age, his 26 years of illegal marijuana use, the recency of 
his last drug use, and his falsification of his SCA, his promise to not use illegal drugs in 
the future without corroboration is not sufficient to show his questionable behavior is 
unlikely to recur. At this time, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and of his ability to comply with the law.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
