 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00181 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 31, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge on November 22, 2011 and was reassigned to me on December 7, 
2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 15, 2011. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on January 24, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
 
2 
 
 
and they were admitted into evidence without objections. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) 
A through F, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 1, 2012.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel withdrew the allegation under Guideline E.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except ¶ 1.e. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. She is a high school graduate. She has been married 
for 42 years and has four grown children. She has worked for a federal contractor since 
1999.1
 
 
 On September 7, 2010, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). In the comments section of question 26 she stated: “This question asks about 
filing taxes. I need to file my taxes.” In her answer to the SOR and at her hearing, 
Applicant admitted that she and her husband failed to file and pay their federal income 
tax returns for 2004 through 2009. Applicant’s husband normally took responsibility for 
filing their tax returns. Applicant admitted she was aware that the tax returns were not 
filed.2 They were both aware they needed to do it, but they kept procrastinating, and 
they knew that they would eventually have to file the tax returns. She admitted they did 
not begin to take action to file their tax returns until her security clearance and job were 
in jeopardy.3
 
 
 In 2003, Applicant’s father-in-law had health issues which required her husband 
to travel to his father’s house and take some action on his living conditions. His sister 
also had health problems. Her husband testified that he was not worried about filing 
their taxes returns because they had received tax refunds in the past. In 2007, his father 
came to live with them. His father paid for the remodeling of his house, while Applicant’s 
husband managed the renovations. His father passed away in 2008. Applicant’s 
husband has been involved in administering his father’s estate and there have been 
some family disputes that involved litigation.  Applicant testified that her mother was ill 
during this period of time.4
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 26-28. 
 
2 Applicant’s failure to file her 2005 federal income tax returns and her 2005 through 2009 state income 
tax returns will not be considered for disqualifying purposes. It will be considered when analyzing the 
“whole-person.”  ISCR Case No. 10-00922 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011).  
 
3 Tr. 50-53, 66, 75-78, 80. 
 
4 Tr. 36-52. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s husband withdrew money from his 401K retirement plan which had 
tax consequences. He used the money to help pay bills. He stated he understood when 
he withdrew the retirement funds from his 401K that he would have to pay additional 
taxes, but he was focused on his father. He testified that he did not know how much tax 
he actually owed because he did not file. He knew they would eventually have to pay 
the taxes. Applicant also testified that she knew the taxes would have to be paid and 
they intended to pay them. In 2010, after Applicant disclosed on her security clearance 
application that she needed to file her tax returns, she and her husband contacted and 
paid a person to assist them in doing so. 5
 
 
 Internal Revenue Service (IRS) statements provided by Applicant show that she 
and her husband had an adjusted gross income of $54,000 in 2006, $57,000 in 2007, 
$126,000 in 2008, and $123,000 in 2009. The dramatic increase in their adjusted gross 
income was due to the 401K withdrawal. Applicant’s husband indicated that they used 
the money to pay travel expenses associated with his father. He also indicated that 
during this period he did not earn income because he was managing the renovation of 
his father’s house, and expended some of his funds to fix the house. His father’s house 
was sold in August 2011, and Applicant’s husband received about $25,000. He testified 
that he is expecting to be reimbursed approximately $30,000 for his expenses in 
repairing the house that is being held in escrow. This money has not yet been 
distributed to him. After Applicant and her husband failed to file their federal income 
taxes for one year, it began to cascade and they became overwhelmed with the 
problem.6
 
 
 Applicant and her husband do not have other delinquent debts. On their financial 
statements from March 2011 and January 2012 they list a first and second mortgage for 
approximately $75,000. At the hearing, that amount was corrected and the estimate is 
$60,000. They also have approximately $36,000 in loans and consumer debt that 
Applicant and her husband are making monthly payments toward.7
                                                          
5 Tr. 36-53. 
 Applicant admitted 
she was actively involved in handling their finances. She admitted that they were clearly 
negligent in their failure to file their income tax returns. They did increase their tax 
withholdings when their income increased. They addressed their state taxes and were 
in compliance as of February 2011. Applicant testified that she and her husband have 
filed their delinquent federal income tax returns. She did not provide copies of their filed 
tax returns. Without the tax returns, I am unable to verify the amount of taxes that they 
actually owe.  Applicant provided a document that represented a payoff calculator from 
the IRS. It showed a balance of $23,988 for tax years 2007 through 2010. Applicant and 
her husband paid this amount to the IRS on January 13, 2012. I was unable to confirm 
 
6 Tr. 59-65, 67-68. 
 
7 Applicant’s mortgage, loans, and consumer debt are not delinquent. All of her finances will be 
considered when analyzing the “whole-person.” 
 
4 
 
 
that this payment constituted their entire delinquent tax debt and they are now in 
compliance.8
 
 
 Applicant provided numerous character letters, awards, and performance 
appraisals. She is considered ethical, loyal, conscientious, trustworthy, organized, 
efficient, and competent. She has excellent communication skills. Her work ethic is 
commendable and her integrity is unquestionable. On her performance appraisal she 
received grades of “very good” and “good.” She received awards noting her dedication, 
loyalty and professionalism.9
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
8 Tr. 53-59, 68-75; GE 2, 3; AE A, B, F. 
 
9 AE C, D, E. 
 
5 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant admitted that she failed to file her federal income tax returns from at 
least 2006 through 2009. She admitted that she failed to pay her taxes for these years, 
until her security clearance and job were in jeopardy. I find there is sufficient evidence to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because she repeatedly failed to file her federal tax 
returns for at least a four-year period. She did not file her federal income tax returns 
until after she was notified that her security clearance was in jeopardy. She made a 
lump sum payment to the IRS on January 13, 2012. Although she testified that this 
payment satisfied all of her delinquent tax debt, she did not provide copies of her federal 
income tax returns or a final accounting from the IRS to show she is in complete 
compliance and all of her tax debt is satisfied. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because 
her conduct was frequent and casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s husband usually filed their income tax returns. Applicant admitted she 
was aware that they had repeatedly not filed their income tax returns and repeatedly 
failed to pay them timely. Her explanation was that they procrastinated. They had some 
family issues that were happening during some of this time period, but there was 
nothing that prevented them from filing their income tax returns. Her husband had 
received a lump sum withdrawal from his 401K account, but did not use any of the 
proceeds to pay their taxes. They did not make an installment payment agreement with 
the IRS when their taxes were due. I find there is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 
20(b). Applicant testified they have now filed their delinquent tax returns and they made 
a lump sum payment towards the tax debt. Proof that they filed was not provided. A final 
accounting from the IRS confirming their tax debt is now totally resolved was not 
provided. I find there is some evidence her financial issues are being resolved. I find AG 
¶ 20(c) partially applies, and AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
provided character letters and awards detailing her professionalism and dedication. 
Applicant was aware that she and her husband did not file their federal and state 
income tax returns for at least four years. She also was aware they did not pay their 
federal and state income taxes for the years when they were due. Although her 
husband normally filed their tax returns, Applicant admitted she participated in handling 
their finances and was fully aware that they were not filing their tax returns. After her 
security clearance was in jeopardy, she began to address the issues. I find Applicant 
repeatedly acted irresponsibly by her failure to comply with the federal tax rules. Her 
actions raise questions about her judgment and reliability. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
