1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-03503
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The action is based on foreign
influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s family ties or connections to Iran, his
country of birth, which he left in 1979 at the age of 21 and to which he has not returned.
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security
concerns. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit 3. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on or about June1
16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline B for foreign influence.   
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to another judge September 15, 2011, before it was reassigned to me October
14, 2011. The hearing took place November 2, 2011. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was
received November 17, 2011. 
At the close of the hearing, I kept the record open until November 23, 2011, to
allow Applicant to provide additional documentary information. Applicant made a timely
submission, and that matter is admitted, without objections, as Exhibit B.  
Procedural Matters
I took administrative or official notice of certain facts concerning the country of
Iran per Department Counsel’s written request.  The essential facts about Iran are set2
forth below. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged that Applicant’s mother, two brothers, and two sisters are
citizens of and residents in Iran. He admitted the allegations in his reply to the SOR. His
admissions are accepted and adopted and incorporated herein as findings of fact. In
addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is seeking to
retain a security clearance previously granted to him. A native of Iran, he traveled to the
United States on a tourist visa in 1979, after the fall of the Shah, to visit an older
brother. Once in the United States, the then 21-year-old Applicant decided to seek
political asylum. In time, he was granted resident alien status under the sponsorship of
 Exhibit 1 (Investigations and Clearance Record). 3
 Exhibit 1. 4
 Exhibit 4; Tr. 37–47.5
 Presumably, these circumstances explain why the Iranian passport matter was not alleged in the SOR.6
Because it is not alleged, it does not form any part of the decision in this case, but it is mentioned in the
findings to show that Applicant acted in good faith by disclosing it to the Government. 
3
his brother. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1990. He has not returned to Iran
since his departure in 1979, and he has no intention of traveling to Iran in the future. 
Applicant has worked in the defense industry as an engineer since about 1991.
He obtained a master’s degree in electronics engineering in 1993. He was initially
granted a security clearance in 1991; he was subject to a periodic reinvestigation and
allowed to retain a security clearance in 2002;  and he completed his current security3
clearance application in September 2010.  He has worked for the same company since4
1996. A homeowner, he has lived at the same address since 1999. He currently works
as a senior engineer for a company that provides microwave, radio frequency, power,
and control solutions. He has a good employment record as verified by a highly
favorable letter of recommendation and testimony from his supervisor.  His supervisor5
described him as a dependable, knowledgeable, and trustworthy employee who has the
full support of the company’s executive leadership. 
Applicant married for the first time in 1982 to a native-born U.S. citizen. That
marriage ended in less than two years with a divorce. He married his current wife, a
native of Armenia, in 1989. Of note, Applicant’s family in Iran is ethnically Armenian, as
opposed to Persian or Kurdish. He and his wife have one child, a 17-year-old son, who
attends public schools. His wife immigrated to the United States as a young child, and
she became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1983. She works in the field of purchasing and
procurement management, and she is currently employed by a major technology
company. 
In about 2004, after the passing of his father, Applicant obtained an Iranian
passport as part of a process to decline any right he had to an inheritance of his father’s
estate in Iran. His obtained the passport solely for this inheritance or probate purpose;
he did not use the passport for travel to Iran or any other country. The passport was
valid until it expired in 2009. He disclosed the Iranian passport in his most recent
security clearance application, and he delivered the passport to his company’s facility
security officer, who destroyed it in September 2010.6
Applicant was raised in a large family in Iran consisting of his parents and six
siblings (four brothers and two sisters). Other than his wife, none of Applicant’s family
members know that he holds a security clearance because he closely guards this fact.
His father passed away several years ago. He did not travel to Iran for funeral services.
His mother was a full-time mother and homemaker. He had contact with her by
 Exhibit B. 7
4
telephone on average once every two to three months, and he saw her in person four to
five times during the last 30-plus years when she traveled to the United States. His
mother passed away recently in August 2011.  He did not travel to Iran for funeral7
services. 
Concerning Applicant’s siblings, two brothers immigrated to the United States,
while the others remained in Iran. One of his brothers in the United States passed away
due to cancer. None of his siblings in Iran are employed by, connected to, or affiliated
with the Iranian government or military. None of his siblings in Iran have approached
Applicant with a request or solicitation to provide classified, sensitive, or proprietary
information. He provides no financial support to his siblings in Iran. The table below
summarizes the relevant facts concerning his four siblings who are citizens of and
residents in Iran.
Brother–born 1950. Contact is via telephone on average once
every two to three months. Occupation is
owner of a clothing store.
Brother–born 1966. Contact is via telephone on average once
every six months and in person once
during the last 30-plus years. Occupation
is owner of a telephone connection store.
Sister–born 1942. Contact is via telephone on average once
every six months and in person three
times during last 30-plus years.
Occupation is retired seamstress and
housewife. 
Sister–born 1952. Contact is via telephone on average once
every two to three months and in person
four to five times during the last 30-plus
years. Occupation is housewife. 
  
All of Applicant’s financial interests are in the United States. He earns a six-figure
salary, has a 401(k) retirement account, and owns residential real estate with his wife.
He has no financial interests in Iran or any other foreign country.
Concerning his country of birth, the February 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran, then a
key U.S. ally, opened a long rift in relations between Iran and the United States. On
November 4, 1979, radical students seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, and then held
hostages until shortly after President Regan’s inauguration on January 20, 1981. The
United States severed relations with Iran on April 7, 1980, and the two countries have
had no official dialogue since. In the Untied States, the Iranian Interest Section is
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
5
located in the Embassy of Pakistan. The U.S. protecting power in Iran is Switzerland.
The U.S. Government prohibits most trade with Iran. And the U.S. Government has
special concerns about four particular areas of Iranian behavior: (1) its efforts to acquire
weapons of mass destruction (e.g., its nuclear program); (2) its support of and
involvement with terrorism; (3) its support of violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process; and (4) its dismal record of human rights. Recently, Iran has threatened to
block shipping through the vital oil-trade route of the Strait of Hormuz if Western nations
impose further sanctions over Iran’s nuclear program.   
  
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 19
 AG ¶ 6. 20
6
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access to classified information. 
Discussion
The central issue here is whether Applicant’s family ties to Iran, his country of
birth, disqualify him from eligibility for a security clearance. Under Guideline B for
foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt19
due to an applicant’s foreign connections and interests. The overall concern under the
guideline is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.20
Given the undisputed evidence of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is
clearly hostile to the United States, the Government has established its case under
7
Guideline B. In reaching this conclusion, I considered the following disqualifying
conditions under the guideline: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information.
The guideline also provides that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
foreign influence security concerns. Given the evidence, I have considered the following
mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
Applicant has all the indicators of a mature, stable, responsible, and trustworthy
person. He was articulate, serious, candid, and credible at the hearing. He has the
strong support of his supervisor (and his company’s executive leadership) who vouched
for his trustworthiness. He exercises discretion in not disclosing the existence of a
security clearance to his Iranian family members. During the time he has held a security
clearance, his mother, two brothers, and two sisters lived in Iran, and there is no
indication of attempts to exploit them. Applicant has not returned to Iran since his
departure in 1979, and he does not intend to travel there in the future. 
Nevertheless, Iran’s hostility to the United States, and the heightened risk it
creates, places a heavy burden on Applicant to show his family ties to Iran are
mitigated. On this point, Applicant has the type of contact that is typical with adult family
members who live great distances apart. He provides no financial support to his siblings
in Iran. His siblings are not employed by, connected to, or affiliated with the Iranian
government or military. In addition, him mother, the person he likely felt the strongest
emotional connection to or sense of obligation toward, passed away several months
 AG ¶ 6.21
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).22
8
ago. Given these circumstances, his family ties to Iran are not particularly strong when
compared with his ties to the United States.
Applicant has lived in the United States for more than 30 years, which is nearly
all of his adult life and all of his working life as an engineer. He has been a naturalized
U.S. citizen for more than 20 years. He has worked in the defense industry while
holding a security clearance since 1991. He is married to a woman who became a
naturalized U.S. citizen some years before he did, and their son is a native-born U.S.
citizen. His financial interests are the United States. It is also evident that he sees the
United States as his home, both for his career and for his wife and son. Considering the
evidence as a whole, this is not a case of “divided loyalties”  with an applicant who has21
one foot in the United States and one foot in his native country. On the contrary, the
evidence shows Applicant has both feet firmly rooted in the United States. These facts
and circumstances are unlikely to change, they weigh in his favor, and they lead me to
conclude that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential foreign influence or
pressure by coercive or noncoercive means in favor of the U.S. interest. Looking
forward, it is most probable that Applicant will properly handle and safeguard classified
information, just as he has done for the last 20 years. 
Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I have no doubts or
concerns about Applicant’s fitness or suitability for a security clearance. In reaching this
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Applicant met his22
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
