 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09584    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has $174,856 in 
unresolved delinquent debt, including $143,000 in unpaid federal obligations and 
$18,247 in unpaid state taxes. Furthermore, he willfully failed to file his federal and state 
income tax returns between 2005 and 2009. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 on 
September 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed 
the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F 
(financial considerations).   
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned 
to me on November 18, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on December 15, 
2011. Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. I received the transcript on December 21, 2011. After the 
hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant to submit information about his 
finances. He timely submitted 11 documents, which were admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through L without objection.2  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
SOR Amendments 
 
 On December 8, 2011, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add 
the following allegations: 
 
h. You have failed to file federal income tax returns, as required, for tax 
years 2005 through, at least 2009. 
 
i. You have failed to file state income tax returns, as required, for tax years 
2005 through, at least 2009. 
 
On December 9, 2011, Applicant responded to the allegations, admitting both. At 
hearing, without objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion.3 The 
motion to amend the SOR and Applicant’s answers to the amendments are appended 
to the record as Hearing Exhibit 1. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has been in his 
current position as a senior project manager since June 2010. Twice divorced, he has 
an adult son from his first marriage. Applicant has experienced financial problems since 
2000, which he attributes to three factors: the dissolution of a business partnership in 
2000; the property settlements from his two divorces in 2003 and 2008, respectively; 
and the decline and subsequent failure of his real estate business between 2005 and 
2010. Applicant claims that his income fluctuated significantly during the years he 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
2 I have appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2 the Government’s post-hearing submission 
memorandum.  
 
3 Tr. 10 – 11. 
 
3 
 
operated his real estate business. He testified that as his real estate business declined, 
he had to work part time with a national shipping company to have health insurance. 
When he was laid off from that job after six months, he worked odd jobs to make ends 
meet. Before accepting the position with his current employer, Applicant could not afford 
to live on his own and moved in with his sister. As a result of his financial difficulties, he 
accumulated debt that he could not pay.4  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to six creditors for approximately 
$181,342. The majority of his outstanding debt is for federal and state obligations. He 
owes $123,000 in federal taxes (¶ 1.b.), $20,631 to the Department of Education for a 
student loan (¶1.f.), and $18,247 in unpaid state taxes (¶1.g.). The remaining SOR 
allegations, totaling $19,464, relate to delinquent consumer debt accounts. To date he 
has paid one account, the $314 delinquent credit card debt alleged in ¶ 1.d.5 
 
 Applicant admits that he neither filed nor paid his federal and state income taxes 
between 2005 and 2009. During this period, he was self-employed as a real estate 
agent/broker associated with a nationally recognized real estate firm. He knew that he 
was required to file and pay his taxes quarterly. Between 2005 and 2009, he did not, 
claiming that he did not have the money to pay the taxes owed. However, in 2005, he 
depleted his savings to place a $100,000 down payment on a home, which was deeded 
in his second wife’s name alone. In December 2010, he consulted a law firm to help him 
resolve his tax issues, but did not follow through because he could not afford the fees. 
In April 2011, the state to which Applicant owed income taxes executed a levy against 
his bank account, collecting $2,300 toward his unpaid tax liability.  Applicant claims to 
have made one payment toward his federal tax debt. In January 2012, he claims to 
have paid a $334 federal tax bill for outstanding taxes from 2001. As evidence of his 
claim, Applicant provided a copy of the statement from the IRS, with a handwritten note 
indicating the bill had been paid.6 
 
 He also admits that he is delinquent on a student loan account that he obtained 
to pay for his son’s college education. Applicant has not taken any action to resolve the 
debt. The consumer debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c. represent the same account.7 In 
July 2010, the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant. Twice in 2011, the 
creditor executed levies against Applicant’s bank account and collected $3,100 towards 
the $6,843 judgment. Applicant has not made any payments towards the delinquent 
credit card debt alleged in ¶ 1.e.8  
                                                          
4 Tr. 18-28; GE 1-2. 
 
5 Tr. 41, AE D. 
 
6 Tr. 30-33, 67-70 (Page 67 of the transcript mistakenly attributes Applicant’s testimony to Department 
Counsel.); GE 2; AE C, I-J. 
 
7 When the same conduct is alleged more than once under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). 
 
8 Tr. 34-40, 42-49; GE 3-5; AE G, I. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant earns $93,000 annually. Since starting his position in June 2010, his 
annual salary has increased approximately $23,000. At hearing, Applicant did not 
appear to have a handle on his finances. He discussed delinquent debts not alleged in 
the SOR, but could not provide specifics on those accounts. He claims, for example, to 
have been making $555 payments toward a delinquent debt for several months, but he 
could not identify the creditor or what the debt was for. In his post-hearing submissions, 
he submitted a settlement offer from a creditor, agreeing to accept 12 payments of $555 
to settle a $25,000 debt, but no proof of payment. He also provided documentation 
showing three current credit card accounts. He does not use a budget, nor has he 
obtained any financial counseling.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
9 Tr. 33, 50-57, 66; AE B, E – F, H. 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
 All three disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant experienced financial problems 
during the 2000s that caused him to incur debt that he could not pay, including over 
$161,000 in federal and state government obligations. Furthermore, Applicant willfully 
failed to file his federal or state income taxes between 2005 and 2009.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 2010 apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are not entirely the result of events beyond his control. While his two 
                                                          
10 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
6 
 
divorces and two failed businesses may have caused some financial difficulty, his poor 
financial decisions compounded the problem. His decision to deplete his sizable savings 
to purchase a house proved to be the most damaging. This decision was not 
reasonable or responsible given his circumstances. He spent his $100,000 savings 
without regard for his upcoming tax obligations or his financial security in an industry 
where he was experiencing fluctuating income. Moreover, despite being gainfully 
employed since June 2010 and experiencing a significant increase in income over the 
past one and one-half years, he has voluntarily paid only one debt alleged in the SOR, 
the $314.00 debt alleged in ¶ 1.d. He does not receive credit for the monies collected 
toward the judgment in ¶ 1.a. or the state tax debt alleged in ¶ 1.g. Payments of a debt 
through the involuntary enforcement of a creditor’s levy is not the same as, or similar to, 
a good-faith initiation of repayment by the debtor as contemplated under AG ¶ 20(d).11  
 
  Applicant has not received financial counseling and there is no indication that his 
finances are under control. Evidence of his current credit card accounts does not negate 
or diminish record evidence that Applicant is unable to satisfy his current delinquent 
accounts.12 Applicant’s financial problems are recent, ongoing, and continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 I have reservations or doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have 
considered the whole-person concept described in AG ¶ 2(a). The majority of 
Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. He has not taken any appreciable 
steps towards their resolution. Nor has he explained his inaction since securing a 
steady and stable income in June 2010. Applicant’s willful failure to file or pay his 
income taxes is of concern. An applicant who refuses to comply with federal and state 
laws or otherwise refuses to honor his basic obligations towards the Government does 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
11 See ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (involuntary establishment of a creditor’s garnishment is not 
considered a good- faith effort initiation of repayment under AG ¶ 20(d)) 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 99-0296 (App. Bd. April 18, 2000.) 
 
 
7 
 
not possess the strong character required of individuals granted access to classified 
information.13 As such, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.c. – 1.d.:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.i.:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 98-0810 (App. Bd. June 8, 2000) (It is untenable for an applicant to refuse to 
accept his legal obligation to comply with federal laws and then insist that the government must grant him 
access to classified information.) 
