 
 
1  
 
 
                                                              
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ADP Case No. 11-04656 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant has not mitigated the 
concerns raised under the guidelines for alcohol consumption and financial 
considerations. Eligibility to occupy a position of public trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (Standard Form 
85-P), signed on June 6, 2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
                                                     
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
 
2  
 On August 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns focused 
on Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2
 
 In an undated Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
requested a decision without a hearing.  
In the Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
G, and all but one of the allegations under Guideline F. (Item 4) On November 3, 2011, 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)3
 
 in support of the 
Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM included 14 
supporting documents (Items 1-14). Applicant received the FORM on November 15, 
2011. He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to file a response. 
Applicant timely submitted 14 supporting documents (Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
N). The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2011, for an administrative decision 
based on the written record.  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 42 years old, was engaged as of March 2011. He has a two-year-old 
daughter from that relationship. He also has a teenage daughter from a previous 
relationship. He pays child support of $300 per month. Applicant was employed as a 
die-cutter from 2003 to 2008, when he was laid off. He earned a licensed nursing 
certificate in May 2009. He has been employed since December 2009 as a records 
review specialist. (Items 5, 6; AE B, N) 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol in 1984, when he was about 14. He drank a 
few times per year from 14 to 19 years of age. In college, he drank about six beers or 
mixed drinks, three times per week. Since college, he drinks about six alcoholic 
beverages from one to three times per week. It takes about ten beers for him to become 
intoxicated. (Item 6) 
 
 At his security interview in January 2011, Applicant admitted that drinking alcohol 
causes him to make bad decisions. It also contributed to his financial problems because 
he had to pay court fines for alcohol-related arrests, he missed work when he was 
                                                                                                                                                                           
1 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which were implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The AG supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 
2 to the Directive. 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 14 documents (Items 1 - 14) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
 
3  
“hung over,” and having a police record limits his job opportunities. As of January 2011, 
Applicant had not drunk to intoxication since his 2009 arrest for operating while under 
the influence of alcohol (OWI). As of early 2011, he was drinking about three or four 
beers at a sitting, once or twice per week; he did not drink spirits; and he usually drank 
at home. He intended to continue drinking alcohol, avoid driving after drinking, and 
avoid drinking to intoxication. (Item 6)  
 
 Between 2003 and 2009, Applicant had a series of alcohol-related incidents and 
offenses. (Item 4) In January 2003, he was hired as a die-cutter. For the next several 
months, he called in sick about once every two weeks. He informed his supervisor that 
the absences were related to his alcohol consumption. In August 2003, he was 
terminated because of his excessive absences. He asked his supervisor if he could be 
re-hired if he sought alcohol treatment. He was informed he would be re-evaluated at 
that time. (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
 In August 2003, Applicant was evaluated by a medical doctor. He stated he had 
a history of binge drinking, and was seeking help. He told the doctor he was on “a leave 
of absence” from work pending alcohol counseling. The doctor performed an evaluation, 
which he described as “a brief physical for chemical dependence.” The doctor’s report 
does not clearly state that he diagnosed Applicant with chemical dependence. Instead, 
the doctor listed his impression as “History of some binge drinking which he is currently 
seeking help and will be seen in chemical dependence.” (Items 4, 6, 9) 
 
 From August to September 2003, Applicant attended an outpatient alcohol 
counseling program. He successfully completed the program. He also attended one or 
two Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings per week. After completing the treatment, 
Applicant met with his first- and second-line supervisors. He provided evidence that he 
completed treatment, and was re-hired. He did not disclose his termination on his 
security clearance application. (Items 4, 6) 
 
 About two years later, in August 2005, Applicant and a friend went to several 
bars, where Applicant drank about ten beers. When driving home, he was stopped by 
police. His blood alcohol content (BAC) registered at 0.15. He was arrested, charged 
with Operating a Motor Vehicle while Intoxicated (OWI), and held in jail overnight. He 
pled guilty at the subsequent court appearance. He lost his driver’s license for six 
months, was fined $800, and was required to complete an alcohol assessment. (Items 
4, 5, 6) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant was celebrating his birthday with his fiancée and 
consumed ten mixed rum drinks. He was stopped by police while driving home. His 
breath test registered 0.22 BAC. Applicant was arrested for OWI and spent the night in 
jail. In March 2010, he pled guilty. He was sentenced to two days in jail, fined $1,000, 
required to complete an alcohol assessment, his driver’s license was revoked for one 
year, and he was required to spend 13 days on electronic home monitoring. He was 
subject to random breath tests and urinalyses from April to July 2010. He was also 
 
 
4  
placed on unsupervised probation pending completion of all the conditions of the 
sentence. (Item 6; AE B) 
 
In March 2011, as required by his OWI sentence, Applicant was assessed by a 
licensed clinical social worker. Applicant denied that alcohol is a problem in his personal 
relationships. He reported using alcohol once or twice per week. He admitted that he 
was ticketed for driving after his license was revoked. The counselor determined that 
Applicant’s previous assessment of “Irresponsible Use of Alcohol—Borderline” 
remained accurate. He recommended that Applicant attend the Multiple Offender 
Program. Applicant attended the program on August 20, 2011. (AE B, C, D) 
 
Applicant remained sober during the 2003 alcohol counseling program and for 
about one to two months after. He was sober again from October 2009 to July 2010. He 
stated in his 2011 security interview that he has never been diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol-dependent. He stated he will always be tempted by alcohol, but that it 
no longer affects his life negatively. (Items 4, 6, 9) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 During his security interview in January 2011, Applicant stated that his debts 
stem from his unemployment from November 2008 to December 2009, and because his 
job opportunities are negatively affected by his police record. While unemployed, he 
received unemployment compensation. He also noted that he is able to meet his current 
expenses but, because he lives paycheck to paycheck, he cannot pay his old debts. At 
the time of the interview, he planned to pay off his delinquencies by obtaining a second 
job, living within his means, and setting up a budget. At the time, Applicant's net monthly 
income was $1,900, or approximately $22,800 per year. His monthly expenses, 
including child support of $300, totaled $1,750. His monthly net remainder was $150. 
Since his security interview, Applicant has obtained a second job working part-time as a 
home-care licensed practical nurse, and has worked part-time for more than one year. 
His part-time job pay statement, dated December 2011, shows this job brought in 
approximately $25,000 net pay for the year. His annual net pay from the two jobs is 
approximately $47,800. (Item 6; AE M) 
 
 Applicant’s 13 delinquent SOR debts total $29,800. The debts appear in three 
credit reports dated June and December 2010, and May 2011. In his June 2011 
interrogatory response, he said he made a $6 payment on one $241 debt to the creditor 
at allegation 1.h; and that his pay was being garnished to resolve a state tax debt 
(allegation 1.b). In regard to the remaining debts, he said he intended to “consolidate 
debt or file bankruptcy.” However, he did not provide documentation supporting these 
intentions. (Items 4, 7, 11, 12, 13) 
 
 Applicant's student loans total $18,697. He provided documents showing he has 
applied to have his student loans rehabilitated. It requires nine timely monthly payments 
of $190, starting on January 15, 2012. This date occurred after Applicant submitted his 
FORM response, so there is no evidence of payment. He also submitted documents 
 
 
5  
relating to his auto loan, which was $710 past due in June 2011 (allegation 1.m). He 
recently set up a payment plan, and payments have been automatically deducted from 
his account since December 2011. (Items 7, 11-13; AE E, G, H) 
 
 Applicant also submitted documents regarding six garnishments that were being 
deducted from his pay in 2011. In his FORM response, he states, “My payroll check is 
currently being garnished for a medical bill. In the past year, I have paid of (sic) two 
medical bills and a tax levy thru (sic) my checks being garnished.”  (AE A) He is being 
garnished for the following debts: 
 
o An unpaid judgment for a medical debt of $14,565. It is unclear if 
this is the same medical debt as the one alleged at allegation 1.a 
for $12,105. (AE I) 
 
o A medical debt in the amount of $518. Applicant added a hand-
written note that it is “Paid.” It is unclear if this debt is listed in the 
SOR, which contains five delinquent medical accounts, but none 
with a similar balance. (AE I) 
 
o A lien by a state unemployment insurance agency to recover an 
$880 overpayment of unemployment compensation (allegation 
1.b). Applicant added a hand-written note that it is “Paid.” (AE K) 
 
o A garnishment, identified as “Child” in his pay statement, which 
amounted to $$3,395 as of November 2011. Applicant notes it 
relates to expenses for his two-year-old daughter’s birth. His part-
time wages are also garnished for this debt. It is unclear whether 
this garnishment relates to medical debts in the SOR of $12,105 
and $6,294 (allegations 1.a and 1.c) (AE L, M) 
 
o Two additional garnishments, identified as “Writ,” totaled more 
than $800 as of November 2011. One of the garnishments, for 
$349, is paid. (AE L) 
 
o A dental service garnishment for a debt totaling $349. Applicant 
added a hand-written note that it is “Paid.” (AE J) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant submitted an email dated December 12, 
2011, that appears to be from a financial counseling firm. It indicates Applicant spoke 
with a representative, who provided general advice on how to begin resolving his debts. 
Applicant did not provide further explanation of his relationship with this company, or 
evidence showing he retained it or has set up payment plans. (AE A, F) 
 
Policies 
 
 
 
6  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for 
... assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that ... assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under-Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, the administrative judge must apply the guidelines in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in 
seeking to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
 
 
7  
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the following security concern about alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Guideline G, AG ¶ 22, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse 
or alcohol dependence;  
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol at 14, and has consumed alcohol to the point of 
intoxication on numerous occasions since that time. He was terminated from his 
employment in 2003 because of excessive absences, which he admits were due to 
being “hung over.” He admits he engaged in binge drinking, and that he does not make 
sound decisions when drinking. He drove after becoming intoxicated and subsequently 
 
 
8  
was arrested and convicted of OWI in 2005 and 2009. His BAC of 0.15 in 2003 and 0.22 
in 2009 were both high. He participated in a one-month outpatient alcohol treatment 
program following the first arrest. These facts support application of AG ¶¶ 22 (a), (b), 
and (c). The doctor’s evaluation in 2003 refers to chemical dependence, but the 
ambiguous statements in the evaluation do not clearly show that this doctor himself 
found Applicant to be alcohol dependent. I cannot determine who used the “chemical 
dependence” description that appears in Applicant's medical file. The record shows a 
2010 diagnosis by an LCSW, but it is an assessment of “Irresponsible Use of Alcohol—
Borderline” and not dependence or abuse. AG ¶¶ 22 (d), (e), and (f) do not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following relevant factors that can mitigate security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related behavior was frequent: he consumed several 
alcoholic beverages one to three times per week for many years. He drank alcohol, not 
under unusual circumstances, but in common situations such at bars, with friends, and 
at home with his fiancée. At times, Applicant became intoxicated, and he sometimes 
drove while intoxicated, which demonstrated extremely poor judgment. On two of those 
instances, he was arrested. His one-year driver’s license revocation ended in 2011, 
which is recent. His conduct and convictions raise questions as to his judgment and 
reliability. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant recognizes and admits the problems that alcohol has caused in his life. 
However, he continues to drink three or four beers at a sitting, once or twice per week. 
This mitigating condition concerns rehabilitation, and I find that Applicant is not 
rehabilitated, because he continues to engage in conduct that led to poor decisions and 
alcohol-related arrests in the past. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. 
 
 
9  
Some mitigation applies under AG ¶ 23 (d) as Applicant successfully completed 
one month of court-ordered counseling in an alcohol treatment program in 2003. The 
record does not indicate if his counselor advised that he abstain from drinking, but he 
has abstained for periods in 2003 and in 2009-2010. However, since then, he has not 
modified his drinking, but drinks frequently, consuming several drinks one to three times 
per week. AG ¶ 23 (d) applies in part, but is insufficient to overcome the disqualifying 
conditions that apply.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the following security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The SOR 
alleges more than $29,000 in delinquent debts. They have been accruing for several 
years, indicating that Applicant has been either unable to unwilling to resolve them. AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
10  
 Applicant was on notice that delinquent debts were a concern when he 
completed his application more than two years ago. He was reminded that debts were a 
concern when he met with an investigator in January 2011. Again, when he completed 
DOHA interrogatories seven months ago, he was reminded that delinquent debts were 
an issue. However, the majority of the debts in the SOR remain unpaid, with no plan in 
place to resolve them. With almost $30,000 in bad debt, his delinquencies are both 
frequent and recent. His failure to make consistent efforts to resolve them raises 
questions about his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) mitigates financial problems that stem from unexpected events 
beyond an applicant's control. Applicant experienced a year of unemployment from 
2008 to 2009, and his current annual income is modest. However, to apply this 
mitigating condition, an applicant must also show that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. The record contains scant evidence that Applicant worked with creditors 
over the past two years to pay his debts. He established one payment plan for his 
automobile loan in December 2011. He contacted a consumer credit agency in 
December 2011, after receiving the FORM. Other than an initial email, there is no 
evidence that he retained that firm. AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 (c) and (d) involve good-faith efforts to resolve debts. They do not apply 
because, as discussed, Applicant has made little effort over the past two years to 
resolve his debts. His auto loan payment and contact with a consumer credit agency 
both occurred recently, after he received the DOHA FORM. Most of his delinquent debts 
are being paid, not through his efforts, but through forced garnishment of his wages, 
which does not constitute a good-faith effort. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the appropriate 
 
 
11  
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol consumption. It has caused significant 
hardship in his life, including a job termination, two criminal offenses of OWI, financial 
hardship of paying court costs and fines, and the difficulty in obtaining work because of 
his police record. Despite these effects, he continues to consume alcohol several times 
per week. Applicant abstained from alcohol at two different time periods in the past, but 
returned to alcohol use both times. Applicant's decisions to drink and drive posed a 
danger to himself and others. He admits he will always be tempted by alcohol, and at 
this point in time, I cannot confidently conclude he will not be involved in alcohol-related 
incidents in the future.  
 
 Applicant started to make some effort to resolve his debts, but only recently, and 
in response to this adjudication process. Despite having a net monthly remainder of 
$150 from his full-time job, and additional funds available from his part-time job, most of 
his debts are being handled through enforced garnishment of his wages, rather than 
through his own efforts. His contact with a consumer credit agency is within the past two 
months, after he received the Government’s FORM, and there is no evidence he has 
retained that company or started a payment plan through it. Applicant has not 
established a record of meeting his financial obligations. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability to occupy a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.m  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant 
Applicant access to sensitive information. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of 
public trust is denied. 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
