  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02847 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was terminated from one job in January 2006 and from another in July 
2009. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under use of 
information technology systems and personal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 8, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
1 
  On August 21, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
October 5, 2011, I was assigned the case. On October 7, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on October 24, 2011.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On November 8, 2011, 
additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the 
material, which was admitted into the record as Exs. A through E. On November 2, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
At the close of the evidence, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by 
requesting the same allegations be considered under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
(Tr. 63) The motion was granted. (Tr. 65) The new guideline was not specifically added 
as paragraph 2.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the two factual allegations in the 
SOR, and his admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 67-year-old systems administrator, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2010. In 1983, Applicant began working with a company. (Tr. 20) 
The company ownership changed several times, but he continued to do the same job. 
(Tr. 20) There were periods of time when he worked for other employers, but would 
return to this employer. (Tr. 30, 31) The company employed about 350 people. (Tr. 35) 
 
In July 1995, Applicant reached his ten-year anniversary with his employer. (Exs. 
B, C) The company’s president indicated Applicant, as a software developer, had been 
a major contributor to the company’s growth. In July 2005, he received an award for 
twenty years of service. (Ex. E) The accompanying letter cited Applicant as being a 
major contributor to the company’s achievements, his skills as a software developer as 
being crucial in the development of test tools, and his work performance outstanding. 
(Ex. D) He was called upon daily to isolate and resolve user issues.  
 
 In December 2005, Applicant was trying out a new protocol at his government 
workstation when he accessed a “peer-to-peer” web site. The company prohibited 
employees going to “peer-to-peer” sites. (Tr. 33) In “peer-to-peer” computing or 
networking, one computer will connect or contact two or more computers in order to 
download or upload information. (Tr. 21) It is a distributed application that partitions 
tasks or workloads among peers. All the machines attempt to fill in parts of missing 
information. (Tr. 21) Peers are equally privileged participants in the application. Peers 
make a portion of their resources, such as processing power, disk storage or network 
 
2 
bandwidth, directly available to other network participants, without the need for central 
coordination by servers or stable hosts. The security concern is the other computers 
may be infected. There is no way of knowing about the other computers, the status of 
their antivirus or anti-spam ware programs, how to monitor the other machines, if they 
are secure, or if they are a threat to other computers. (Tr. 22)  
 
 Within a workday, he was told to unplug his computer and stay off the network. 
(Tr. 34) Two work days later, in January 2006, he was terminated from his employment 
as a systems administrator. (Tr. 35) He was not given an opportunity to explain what 
had happened. (Tr. 35) He asserts his action was unintentional. (Tr. 21) There were no 
labels and no warning that the site he was going to was a “peer-to-peer” site. (Tr. 33)  
 
 Applicant admits going to the unauthorized site, regrets that he did, asserts it will 
not happen again, and asserts it was not caused by lax security habits. (Tr. 73) He no 
longer goes to such sites even on this home computer. (Tr. 22)  
 At the time of his termination, he was one of the highest-paid non-management 
employees in the company. (Tr. 51) The income of newly hired employees, those just 
out of school, was less than half of his salary. (Tr. 52) He was 62 years old when 
terminated. While employed for the company, he was aware that other employees had 
gone to inappropriate web sites and were reprimanded, while others had their 
employment terminated. (Tr. 51) He could not say if his age or salary played a role in 
the company’s decision to terminate him. (Tr. 52) His current job pays slightly more than 
the job from which he was terminated. (Tr. 56)  
 
 After his termination, he mowed lawns and repaired cars and computers for 
about 14 months before he got a job as a system administrator. (Tr. 37) That job lasted 
five months. (Tr. 23) From September 2007 to July 2009, Applicant worked as an 
information assurance security officer for a small contractor employing seven people 
that supported 350 military personnel. (Tr. 27, 28) The job entailed setting up 
computers, diagnosing problems, trouble-shooting, upgrading machines, and keeping 
records. (Tr. 24, 26)  
 
 Initially, he interacted well with the unit’s commander and executive officer, an 
active duty lieutenant colonel and a major. A new lieutenant colonel became 
commander, and two months thereafter, a new major took over. The new major 
complained about Applicant to the point his company tried to find him a new position. 
When that failed, he was let go and received unemployment compensation. (Tr. 25) The 
major never gave him any indication there was a problem. (Tr. 41) He maintained a 
good relationship with the commander. (Tr. 41) The company never provided an 
explanation or reason for his termination. (Tr. 42) He received no written information 
from the company. (Tr. 43)  
 
 The state has traditionally recognized the employee “at will” doctrine, meaning 
that an employee works and a business employs on an “at will” basis. Under this 
doctrine, either may cease the employment relationship without cause at any time. (Tr. 
42) Cause for termination is not required. Applicant indicated his termination was “for 
 
3 
cause.” He referred to that phrase as a catch-all. Not having a more specific reason for 
his termination and not knowing how to describe his termination, he stated it was “for 
cause.” (Tr. 42) He never knew the specific reason for his termination, other than there 
were unspecified “complaints.” (Tr. 43) However, he received unemployment, which 
indicates the termination was not for cause.  
 
 At the time of his termination, another systems administrator was terminated, and 
the project manager left. (Tr. 48, 57) Within a year or so, the company lost the IT 
support contract and was no longer in the building where Applicant had worked. (Tr. 49)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
4 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 39 articulates the security concerns relating to 
misuse of information technology systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, and 
protection of information. 
 
 Applicant was an IT specialist who was terminated from his job in 2006 after 20 
years with the company for improperly accessing an internet site. In 2009, he was 
terminated from his job as an information assurance security officer.  
 
Two of the eight disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 40 is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
 (g) negligence or lax security habits in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management. 
 
 The only disqualifying condition applicable is AG ¶ 40(e), in that Applicant was 
not authorized to access the “peer-to-peer” web site. Although he went to the 
inappropriate site, it appears this occurred through accident, because he did not know 
the site he was going to was a “peer-to-peer” site. His action was not through 
negligence or lax security habits. Therefore, AG ¶ 40(g) does not apply. None of the 
other disqualifying conditions apply. Although he was terminated from employment in 
July 2009, there does not appear to be any unauthorized use of a government 
computer, negligence, or lax security habits. None of the disqualifying conditions apply 
to his July 2009 termination.  
 
 
5 
 Two conditions that could mitigate security concerns that potentially apply are 
listed in AG ¶ 41 and include:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
 
 It has been six years since his January-2006 termination. It happened under 
circumstances that are unlikely to be repeated. Applicant does not go to “peer-to-peer” 
sites even on his personal computer. The events of January 2006 do not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The second incident involved a 
new major coming into the work place, making complaints, not telling Applicant what 
those complaints were, and then having three of the seven individuals at the work 
location terminated. Applicant received unemployment compensation, which indicates 
this termination was not for cause. AG ¶ 41(a) applies. 
 
 The mitigating factor in AG ¶ 41(c) does not apply. The conduct was 
unintentional or inadvertent, but there was no prompt, good-faith effort to correct the 
situation. He made no notification to his supervisor.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
There are two Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16, which 
are potentially applicable: 
 
 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
6 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
 The Government argues, under personal conduct, that the two terminations, 
when considered as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations or other characteristics that indicate a person might not safely safeguard 
protected information. A single event of going to an unauthorized web site six years 
ago, even though it led to his termination, does not establish a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment or unwillingness to comply with rules.  
 
The record fails to show Applicant did anything wrong resulting in his 2009 
termination. Since he received unemployment compensation following that termination, 
the inference is that it was not a “for cause” termination. It appears, there was a change 
of command over a very small group of people – seven individuals. After the change of 
command, there appear to have been some “complaints.” The nature, seriousness, 
Applicant’s involvement, or number of complaints are not part of the record. The state of 
employment being an “at will” state allowed the employer to terminate Applicant and two 
others, including the site manager. Even with the termination of these individuals, it was 
a short time before the company was no longer employed on the contract. There is 
nothing in the record supporting a finding or inference that the second termination was 
based on questionable judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, or an unwillingness to 
comply with rules. None of the disqualifying conditions under personal conduct apply to 
either termination. The case under Guideline E, personal conduct, has not been 
established.  
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Six years ago, Applicant accessed 
an inappropriate “peer-to-peer” web site. He was 62 years old, had provided excellent 
service to the company for more than twenty years, and was being paid more than all 
but management at the company. Due to this one mistake, which he asserts was an 
inadvertent error, he was terminated. This single event of going to the inappropriate site 
may have been an unauthorized use of a government computer, but it was six years 
ago. The passage of time, without any repeat of the event, mitigates the single act.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from use of information 
technology systems and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Information Technology: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant 
 
8 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
  
