 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 11-01209    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James S. DelSordo, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen 
originally from Jordan. Although Applicant has several relatives who are citizens and 
residents of Jordan, his life is firmly rooted in the United States. Accordingly, he is 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 26, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the reasons for the 
action under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on October 24, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on 
December 13, 2011. At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of one 
witness. I received the transcript (Tr.) on December 21, 2011. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Without objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s written request 
that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Jordan. The request has been 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. The pertinent facts are set out below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He emigrated from 
Jordan in 1999, at age 17, with his parents and younger brother. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. He earned his bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university 
in 2006. Applicant married his wife, who is also a naturalized U.S. citizen from Jordan, 
in 2007. They have no children and have owned their home since 2008.2 
 
 Applicant has eight siblings. Two of his brothers are naturalized U.S. citizens 
residing in the United States. His oldest brother works as a federal contractor and holds 
a security clearance. His parents are permanent U.S. residents, who split their time 
between the United States and Jordan. When they are residing in the United States 
they live with Applicant. While in Jordan, Applicant’s parents live in the home they own 
there. His father is retired and his mother has never worked outside the home. Applicant 
and his two U.S.-citizen brothers provide financial support to their parents, as needed, 
to supplement the rental income they receive from renting portions of their Jordanian 
home.  Applicant’s six other siblings are residents and citizens of Jordan. None of 
Applicant’s family members are connected to or dependent on the Jordanian 
government. Both of his sisters are housewives. Two of Applicant’s four brothers 
operate a shop together. One brother works in construction, the other is a taxi driver. He 
does not provide any financial support to his siblings.  Applicant maintains contact with 
his siblings in Jordan by telephone a few times each year. He has not seen them since 
his last trip to Jordan in 2004, prior to his naturalization.3 
 
 Although Applicant considers himself a dual citizen of both countries, he 
surrendered his Jordanian passport to his security officer in early 2011. The passport 
                                                          
2 Tr. 24-25, 36-38, 40-47; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 30, 32-36, 43-47. 
 
3 
 
has been destroyed. Because he has not left the country since becoming naturalized, 
Applicant does not have a U.S. passport.4 
 
Jordan5 
 
Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with a developing economy and a modern 
infrastructure. Jordan has followed a pro-western foreign policy and has had close 
relations with the United States for more than six decades. The Jordanian government 
respects human rights in some areas, but its overall record continues to reflect some 
problems including torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, denial of due process, 
infringement on citizen’s privacy rights, political detainees, and restrictions on freedom 
of speech, press, assembly, association, and movement.  
 
Despite Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, drafting of counter-terrorism 
legislation, prosecution of terrorism cases, including both Al-Qaida and non- Al-Qaida 
defendants, and investigation and disruption of terror plots, the threat of terrorism 
remains high. Al-Qaida has focused terrorist activities against Jordan and U.S. interests 
in Jordan. Terrorist organizations have targeted the United States for intelligence 
through human espionage and by other means. International terrorist groups have 
conducted intelligence operations as effectively as state intelligence services.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
                                                          
4 Tr. 30-31, 42-43; GE 2-3. 
 
5 HE 1. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”6  
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates the disqualifying conditions that are applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has several family members who are residents and citizens of Jordan. 
His parents are citizens of Jordan and hold permanent resident status in the United 
States. They divide their time between both countries. Six of Applicant’s eight siblings 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
5 
 
are citizens and residents of Jordan. The mere possession of close ties with family 
members living in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.7  
Applicant’s ties to his parents and his siblings in Jordan create a heightened risk and 
give rise to a potential conflict of interest, which could put Applicant in the position of 
having to choose between protecting U.S. interests and his desire to help his foreign 
relatives.  
 
 The guideline also includes the following conditions that could mitigate the 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Both mitigating conditions apply. Family contacts and ties with persons in a 
foreign country are not automatically disqualifying, but require an applicant to present 
evidence in mitigation and extenuation that he qualifies for access to classified 
information. None of Applicant’s family members in Jordan are associated with or 
dependent upon the government of that country. As such, it is unlikely that he will be put 
in the position of having to choose between the interests of his Jordanian relatives and 
the interest of the United States. Furthermore, Applicant has lived in the United States 
since he was 17 years old. He has not returned to his native country in almost eight 
years. He has developed significant relationships in the United States. Two of his 
siblings are citizens and residents of the United States. His parents reside with 
Applicant while they are in the United States. He is married and owns a home. His life is 
firmly rooted in the United States, not Jordan. Viewed in totality, these factors lead me 
to the conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has spent his adult life in 
the United States. The evidence supports a finding that Applicant does not have divided 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
6 
 
loyalties between the United States and Jordan. This conclusion is reinforced by the 
facts that Applicant has not returned to Jordan since becoming a naturalized U.S. 
citizen and that he surrendered his Jordanian passport well in advance of the issuance 
of the SOR. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
Guideline B concerns raised in this case. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                     
  
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
