Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-9, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-C.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-03452
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Mark F. Riley, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 29 September 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline  E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a2
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 8 December 2011, and I convened a hearing
23 January 2011. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 30 January 2012.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR allegation. He is a 54-year-old business manager
employed by a Government contractor since January 2002. He seeks reinstatement of
the security clearance he was issued in January 2007.
Applicant was the subject of a favorable background investigation in January
2007. Consequently, he had both clearance and access, as necessary, until his access
to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) was denied in April 2009 (GE 3).
Applicant’s May 2009 appeal of that decision (GE 4) was affirmed in August 2009 (GE
5). Applicant contested this action at a personal appearance in March 2010 (GE, 6, 7).
The agency upheld its initial decision and Applicant did not appeal that action to the final
decision authority.
In September 2008, Applicant’s company nominated him for SCI access at
another Government agency (AGA). SCI access required him to pass a polygraph.
Applicant attended two company briefings about polygraphs and how to pass them. In
October 2008, Applicant underwent the first polygraph. The polygrapher told him that
the results were inconclusive and he would have to have another polygraph. Applicant
found the process nerve-wracking.
The week before his second polygraph, Applicant was interviewing a prospective
hire for the company. During the course of their conversation, the prospective employee
told Applicant about a website—polygraph.com—where he could view information about
passing a polygraph. The day before his polygraph, Applicant visited the site, bought
the materials, and reviewed them. He thought that what he was purchasing was in the
same vein as his company briefings. He discovered that much of the material covered
countermeasures to defeat the polygraph, something he was not interested in. He
concluded that he had wasted his money.
At his second polygraph, the polygrapher asked Applicant if he had done any
online research about polygraphs. Applicant fully disclosed the research he had done.
The polygrapher told Applicant he had passed the counterintelligence portion of the
polygraph, but as the polygraph continued she confronted him about his breathing and
asked him more questions about any countermeasures Applicant was taking to
influence the polygraph. This only made Applicant more nervous. The polygrapher
repeatedly instructed Applicant to breath normally and relax. The polygrapher became
increasingly agitated and angry, and by the end of the polygraph, the polygrapher was
“spitting mad.” (Tr. 54). His unsuccessful due process procedure ensued.
Applicant’s work and character references consider him honest and trustworthy.
They recommend him for his clearance, although his continued employment is not
contingent on his getting his clearance. His work performance is excellent (AE A-C).
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 15(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate with security processing,4
including but not limited to . . . cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation;
3
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
The Government failed to establish a case for disqualification under Guideline E.
Even if I found that the Government proved its allegation as stated—that Applicant
researched and used techniques for influencing polygraph examination results during a
polygraph in February 2009, I am not convinced that Applicant’s conduct constitutes a
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process that normally results in an
unfavorable clearance action.  Nor does it constitute deliberately providing false or4
misleading information, as argued by Department Counsel. Contrary to Department
Counsel’s argument, a polygraph examination is neither a medical nor psychological
evaluation. It is a tool of questionable reliability authorized for use in some Government
agencies. Finally, it does not constitute an unwillingness to follow rules or regulations.
However, Applicant denied the SOR allegation as stated, and I conclude, based
on his statements made during the course of his AGA appeals and his testimony, that
4
he did not attempt to improperly influence the polygraph results. Applicant found the
polygraph.com materials unhelpful, and ultimately there is little difference between
looking up polygraph information on the internet and attending the company’s polygraph
briefings. Further, I am not bound by the Government’s characterizations—either in the
SOR or AGA decisional documents—in making a decision, and I conclude that those
characterizations are not reasonable based on a reading of the entire record.
Regarding the SOR allegation, the facts or characterizations of AGA in revoking
Applicant’s clearances and access are entitled to little weight. While AGA is free to
make its own conclusions, the fact remains that the agency decisional document is an
advocacy document based, not on any irrefutable recording of Applicant’s statements
(i.e. sworn statement) but on a polygrapher’s (if not others) distillation of what Applicant
said, colored by an assessment of what the polygraph charts meant. Put another way,
not every twitch under a polygrapher’s gaze reveals nefarious intent. But a polygrapher
has no incentive to conclude benign intent, and a decisional document concluding
nefarious intent requires no marshaling of facts consistent with benign intent. Indeed,
that decisional document constitutes a statement of conclusions, not of fact.
Finally, Applicant has consistently stated—statements which I find credible—that
although he paid for and reviewed the materials he obtained at polygraph.com, he
quickly concluded that they were worthless. He told the polygrapher that, and the
polygrapher’s urgings to Applicant to relax only made him more nervous. Applicant
would not be the first honest subject to fail a polygraph because of nervousness. In
addition, AGA’s decision to deny Applicant’s access to SCI was ultimately based on the
conclusion that Applicant was unlikely to be able to get through the polygraph as
required, not necessarily on his attempt to manipulate the polygraph results. I resolve
Guideline E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted. 
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
