 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-03176 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 29, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 14, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 12, 2011. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on November 17, 2011. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
 
November 29, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 2, 2011, 
scheduling the hearing for December 13, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received into evidence without 
objection.  
 
I held the record open until December 23, 2011, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on her behalf. Applicant submitted AE F, 
which was received into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 21, 2011. The record closed on December 23, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations. Her answers 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. I found Applicant’s testimony to be credible. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old material manager, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2007. She is a first-time applicant for a security clearance and 
seeks a clearance to enhance her current company position. (Tr. 22-24, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in business 
administration in December 2003. She was subsequently awarded a Master of 
Business Administration in December 2009. (Tr. 11, 22-23, GE 1.) Applicant was 
previously married in March 1994. She and her husband separated in 2005 and 
divorced in September 2009. Applicant remarried in April 2011. She has custody of 
her three children from her first marriage – a 17-year-old daughter, a 14-year-old son, 
and a 6-year-old daughter. (Tr. 20, 24, GE 1.) Applicant’s current husband is 
employed as a floor technician in a retirement community and earns $10 per hour. (Tr. 
40.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her July 2010 e-QIP, her July 2011 DOHA Interrogatories; as 
well as her August 2010 and August 2011 credit reports. (GE 1 – 4.) Applicant’s SOR 
alleges 17 separate debts of which eight are unpaid medical co-pays and the 
remaining nine debts are consumer debts, for a total of approximately $23,000. (SOR 
¶¶ 1a – 1q.) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems stem from her separation and divorce from her 
first husband. During her separation, she was receiving $1,500 in monthly child 
 
3 
 
 
support from her husband, which combined with her income was “enough for me to be 
able to support my three children.” (Tr. 18.) However, around the time of their divorce 
Applicant’s former husband lost his job. At their divorce hearing, Applicant’s former 
husband testified he was unemployed and Applicant’s monthly child support was 
reduced to “about $400” a month. Shortly after the divorce hearing, Applicant’s former 
husband secured a high-paying job that required him to deploy to Iraq. Applicant 
diligently pursued an increase in child support, but was unable to locate her former 
husband because he was overseas and failed to provide her with a physical address. 
After trying self-help options to increase her child support, Applicant retained an 
attorney. In September 2011, Applicant brought her former husband to court and her 
child support was increased to $1,762.52 with a retroactive arrearage of $30,397.96. 
Her former husband was further ordered to pay $353 per month towards the arrearage 
until the arrearage was paid in full. Child support payments are to be made through 
wage garnishment. At the time of their September 2011 court hearing, Applicant’s net 
income was $3,156.23 and her former husband’s net income was $5,591.24. (Tr. 17-
20, 27-28, GE 1, AE B.)  
 
Although Applicant’s income stream has been reinstated, the income shortfall 
she experienced while her former husband evaded his support obligations directly led 
to her current financial difficulties. Before September 2009, Applicant was current on 
her bills. From 2009 to 2011, Applicant found herself in a “survival mode” as she 
attempted to meet the needs of her three children on her limited income. (Tr. 11-12.)  
 
Applicant fully acknowledged her debts and accepted responsibility for them. 
To address her debts, Applicant sought financial counseling through a credit 
counseling company (CCC). The CCC set up a debt consolidation plan (DCP) for 
Applicant in October 2011. Applicant’s DCP includes all of her SOR debts. Her 
monthly payments are approximately $523 per month. Although Applicant did not have 
the money to pay her creditors, she remained in contact with them throughout this 
process. (Tr. 13, 24-26, 35, AE F.)  
 
Applicant currently earns approximately $43,000 per year. (Tr. 33.) With her 
mother’s help, she is able to own her own home. Applicant’s personal financial 
statement reflects that she is living a modest lifestyle and living within her means. (Tr. 
32-34, SOR answer, GE 2.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has addressed each and every debt alleged. All of her 
SOR debts are enrolled in a debt consolidation plan. She is able to make her monthly 
payments pursuant to that plan as well as remaining current on her other monthly 
expenses. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a work-related reference letter from her supervisor, who 
has known her for four years. Her supervisor spoke of her high level of personal 
 
4 
 
 
integrity and dedication to “doing things right.” He considers Applicant to be a valuable 
employee, who is making a contribution to their company.  (AE A.) 
 
Applicant submitted her work performance evaluations spanning a three-year 
period from 2009 to 2011. These evaluations reflect sustained above average work 
performance. It is clear that Applicant has a documented record of service in the 
defense contractor industry and is a valued employee. (AE C – E.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by her admissions and the 
evidence presented. She accumulated approximately $27,000 in consumer debt and 
medical co-pays. These debts have been in various states of delinquency for several 
years. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. 
Her debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 
01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under 
AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because her separation, divorce, 
and reduction in child support were circumstances beyond her control, and she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Even though she did not have the funds for full 
repayment, she remained in contact with his creditors and has taken reasonable steps 
to resolve her debts.1
 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is fully applicable because Applicant sought financial counseling 
and her problems are being resolved and are under control. She has produced 
evidence that reflects she is living within her means and has regained financial 
responsibility. There are clear indications that her financial problems are being 
resolved. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d).2
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 Applicant is paying all of her SOR debts. She is following the advice of 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
 
7 
 
 
her CCC and is repaying her creditors consistent with her debt consolidation plan. 
Given her financial situation, Applicant has done all that can reasonably be expected 
of her. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable insofar as Applicant has not contested the validity 
of any debt alleged. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s record of service as a defense contract employee and the obstacles 
she overcame in caring for her three minor children under adverse circumstances 
weigh heavily in her favor. She is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of 
society. She is current on her day-to-day expenses, lives within her means, and her 
SOR debts have been and are being addressed in a meaningful and thoughtful 
manner. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
As noted by her supervisor and performance evaluations, she is making a 
significant contribution to the national defense. Her company fully supports her and 
recommends her for a security clearance. Due to circumstances beyond her control, 
her debts became delinquent. Despite Applicant’s recent financial setback, it is clear 
from her actions that she is on the road to a full financial recovery. These factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s employment record, 
the responsibility shown as a mother, her years of financial responsibility before falling 
into debt, her plan for financial recovery and substantial steps she has taken to 
resolve her financial situation, her potential for future service as a defense contractor, 
her reference letter and performance evaluations, and her testimony and demeanor. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude she has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude she is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a to 1q:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
