                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-00443
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
February 13, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations (e-QIP)
on July 26, 2010.  On June 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006.
 
The Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 25, 2011, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge.  Department Counsel issued
a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 20, 2011.  The Applicant acknowledged
receipt of the FORM on August 8, 2011, but failed to respond.  Based upon a review of
the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated June 25, 2011, the Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.c. through 1.n., 1.p. through 1.r., 1.u., and 1.x. of the
SOR, with some explanations.  She denied the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.a.
and 1.b., 1.o., 1.s., 1.t., 1.v., 1.w., and 1.y. of the SOR.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.c. through 1.n., 1.p. through 1.r., 1.u., and 1.x.  The Applicant admits that she is
indebted to 17 creditors for past due debts totaling about $30,221.  In her answer to the
SOR, she gives no further explanation other than to aver, “I agree.”  I find that these
debts are still outstanding.
1.a.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor A in the past due
amount of about $2,344.  The Applicant simply avers, “[I] don’t know what company
they represent.”  As this debt does appear on the Government’s March 2011 credit
report (CR), I find that this debt is still outstanding.  (GX 7 at page 1.)
1.b.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor B in the past due
amount of about $1,605.  The Applicant again simply avers, “[I] don’t know what
company they represent.”  As this debt does appear on the Government’s March 2011
credit report (CR), I find that this debt is also still outstanding.  (GX 7 at page 1.)
1.o.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor O in the past due
amount of about $1,523.  The Applicant avers, “My daughter’s account.”  As this debt
does not appear on the Government’s March 2011 credit report (CR), I find that this
debt is not outstanding.
1.s. and 1.t.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor S in a past due
amount totaling about $230.  The Applicant simply avers, “[I] knew nothing and was
never notified.”  As these debts do appear on the Government’s March 2011 credit
report (CR), I find that these debts are still outstanding.  (GX 7 at page 2.)
1.v.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor V in the past due
amount of about $6,422.  The Applicant avers, “[I] never had an . . . [Creditor V’s] card.”
As this debt does not appear on the Government’s March 2011 credit report (CR), I find
that this debt is not outstanding.
1.w.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor W in the past due
amount of about $3,296.  The Applicant avers, “[I] don’t know what company they
represent.”  As this debt does not appear on the Government’s March 2011 credit report
(CR), I find that this debt is not outstanding.
1.y.  It is alleged that the Applicant is indebted to Creditor Y in the past due
amount of about $208.  The Applicant simply denies this debt.  As this debt does not
appear on the Government’s March 2011 credit report (CR), I find that this debt is not
outstanding.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
4
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  The Applicant has significant past due debts.
I can find no countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.  The
Mitigating Condition found in Subparagraph 20(b) is applicable where “the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control, . . . and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@  Here, in her “Financial &
Interview Verification Interrogatory,” the Applicant avers that her husband “passed away
on Jun 06, and left subject with many financial obligations that have since been unmet
and largely unpaid.”  (GX 5 at page 6.)  However, she has failed to submit any evidence
showing she has now addressed the very substantial debts alleged and admitted to in
the SOR, which total in excess of $30,000.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
5
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me with
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
She has yet to demonstrate that she has addressed over $30,000 in admitted past due
debts.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from her Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.n. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.p.~1.u. Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.v. and 1.w. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
_________________
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
