KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s argument amounts to an alternative interpretation of the evidence and is
not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge erred.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-00074.a1
DATE: 02/28/2012
DATE: February 28, 2012
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-00074
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
James S. DelSordo, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 6, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
2
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On December 9, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Elizabeth M.
Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge mis-weighed the evidence
and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a software engineer
working for a Defense contractor.  He was born in a Middle Eastern country, although his father was
Libyan by birth.  After his father’s death, Applicant and his family moved to Libya and became
citizens of that country.  Through the efforts of his sibling, an official of the Libyan government,
Applicant studied abroad and eventually came to the U.S.   He received a degree in electrical
engineering.  
While in college, he attended meetings of those opposed to the political regime administered
by Qadhafi.  Applicant  remained in the U.S. and married a U.S. citizen.  After his Libyan passport
expired, he made no effort to renew it. He became a U.S. citizen in the early 1990s.  
A sibling of Applicant was imprisoned in Libya for political reasons, and he eventually died
while a prisoner.  Applicant has engaged with organizations critical of the Qadhafi regime.  From
time to time he had contact with various persons associated with Libya, at least some of whom
possibly worked for the  Libyan government.  A Libyan citizen made threatening phone calls to
Applicant, but the calls stopped after Applicant notified the police.  He has also had contact with a
person who is now with Libya’s transitional government.  One of the persons with whom Applicant
had contact was a named individual, whom the Judge identified as “Mr. X.”  Although he initially
believed that Mr. X shared his political views, Applicant came to believe that Mr. X posed a security
risk to Applicant’s family in Libya.  He also believed that this person was involved in the harassing
phone calls he had received.  
Applicant has two other siblings who worked for Libyan-owned businesses and another
sibling who owns a business in a Middle Eastern country.  In addition, Applicant has a sibling-in-
law who is a Libyan government official.  Applicant has provided financial support to the family of
his sibling who died while a prisoner.   
Libya was an authoritarian state under the control of Mu’ammar al-Qadhafi, from 1969 to
2011.  Under his regime, Libya committed acts of terrorism against western interests.  In 2011,
Libya declared itself liberated from the Qadhafi regime, following a popular uprising accompanied
by military support from western democracies.  Libyan affairs are currently administered by a
transitional government.  Various militias have assumed responsibilities formerly performed by state
police, although they are poorly trained.  Extremist groups continue to plan attacks against the U.S.,
though there have been no recent incidents in which U.S. citizens were targeted in Libya.  
3
In the Analysis portion of the Decision, the Judge noted positive things in the record, such
as Applicant’s efforts to secure his brother’s release from jail and his subsequent support of the
brother’s family.  She also noted, however, that Applicant’s conduct led him to contacts with
persons who supported the Qadhafi regime.  While Applicant dealt with threats to himself and his
family appropriately, the Judge noted other conduct which called his judgment into question.  She
cited to evidence that Applicant maintained regular contact with Mr. X for over a year after he
developed concerns over Mr. X’s intentions.  She also noted evidence that Applicant had made a
telephone call to his Libyan family, aware that their phone lines were probably tapped.  She stated
that the evidence suggests “a substantial risk” that Applicant may be placed in a position to choose
between the interests of his family and of the U.S.  
Applicant cites to evidence which, he believes, support a favorable decision.  His argument
amounts to an alternative interpretation of the record.  It is not sufficient to demonstrate that the
Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-11345 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010).  Applicant cites to other decisions which, he
argues, support his argument that the Judge’s Decision be reversed.  We have given these cases due
consideration.  However, they are not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge erred.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 10-02660 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2011).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this
record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
4
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
