 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 11-02154    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has approximately $54,000 
in unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 20, 2011, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
(SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the reasons for the action 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 27, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on November 12, 2011. 
He did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These items are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 trough 9. Applicant timely submitted a 
response, which is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on January 3, 2012. 
  
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since June 2010. He is single with no children.2  
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he is indebted to ten creditors for 
approximately $54,000. His financial problems began when he was laid off in February 
2009. He received only one week of unemployment compensation and returned to work 
four to five weeks later, earning significantly less money. He also incurred debt while 
living with his sister who did not always pay her share of the living expenses. He often 
used credit cards to pay his bills. Applicant tried to resolve his delinquent accounts 
using a debt consolidation loan, but could not qualify for the loan. He has consulted a 
debt management program and learned about the different options available to him to 
resolve his delinquent debt. In May 2011, he started the process of selecting a lawyer to 
help him with debt consolidation.3 
  
 In the meantime, Applicant asserts that he has made changes in his lifestyle to 
save money. He now lives with his girlfriend in a cheaper apartment and has traded in a 
more expensive car for a less expensive model.4  
 
 To date, he has not made any payments on any of his delinquent accounts.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
2 GE 5. 
 
3 GE 5, 6 -7.  
 
4 GE 7; AE A. 
 
5 GE 4; AE A. 
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Both disqualifying conditions apply. Since 2009, Applicant has accumulated $54,000 in 
delinquent debt, which remains unresolved. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 206 apply. Applicant has 
been gainfully employed for the past 18 months. In that time he has not made any 
payments toward the resolution of his delinquent debt. Nor does he have a concrete 
plan for doing so. He claims to have consulted a debt management program, but this 
                                                          
6 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
5 
 
consultation, for reasons unexplained, did not produce favorable results. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent, ongoing, and continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan7 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this 
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, 
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. This case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
