 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00721 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations; J, Criminal Conduct; G, Alcohol Consumption; and E, 
Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2011 and October 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant Statements of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F, J, G and E. The actions were taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SORs on August 4, 2011, and October 19, 2011, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to 
 
2 
 
 
another administrative judge on November 22, 2011, and was reassigned to me on 
December 7, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 15, 2011. An 
amended Notice of Hearing was issued on December 29, 2011, changing the time of 
the hearing. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 23, 2012. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objections. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through K, and they were admitted 
into evidence without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 
31, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 2.a, 2.c, 2.d, 2.f, 2.g, 
2.h, 2.j, 2.k, 2.l, 2.n, 2.o, 2.q, and 3.b. He denied the remaining allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He has never been married. He has a daughter who is 
32 years old. He did not graduate from high school. He has some technical training. He 
is an auto mechanic and has worked for a federal contractor in Iraq for periods of time 
from 2005 to 2008.1
 
 
 There are 13 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling approximately 
$49,418. Of those debts there are two federal tax liens totaling $37,913 that Applicant 
admitted he owed (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f). He also owes two state tax liens totaling 
approximately $8,926 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). He thinks the debts may be for tax years 
2006 or 2007, but was uncertain. In April 2011, he contacted a commercial tax 
consultant. Other than a one-page consultation report from the consultant with no 
substantive information, Applicant did not provide other evidence. He was told he owed 
the taxes by the tax consultant. He explained the tax consultant is going to try and have 
the tax debts placed in a non-collectible status because Appellant believes he is 
disabled. He does not dispute he owes the tax debts. He has not contacted the tax 
consultant in the past four months. Applicant believed he was exempt from paying taxes 
while he was working overseas. He admitted that he earned a salary of $120,000 at one 
time while working overseas. He also stated that he asked his daughter to file his tax 
returns for him while he was overseas, but she did not do so. Applicant admitted that 
when he returned from Iraq he was unable to obtain a loan for a mortgage to buy a 
house due to his poor credit, so he purchased a house with cash for $84,000. He did 
not use his earnings to pay his delinquent taxes. He does not have the money now to 
pay his tax debts. He did not provide any other information on what actions he has 
taken to resolve the delinquent tax debts.2
 
 
 Regarding the remaining nine debts, Applicant did not provide any evidence of 
actions he has taken to resolve them. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g ($315) 
                                                          
1 Tr. 29, 33, 94. 
 
2 Tr. 41-51, 98-103, 115; GE 3, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disputed, but did not provide any evidence to show actions he has taken to 
resolve the judgment.3 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.h ($459) is for a truck that Applicant 
financed. He was unable to make the payments in 2000 and it was repossessed. He 
was unable to make the payments because he stated he was in jail. The amount owed 
is the deficiency judgment. Applicant has not paid the debt.4
 
 
 Applicant agrees he likely owes the cable debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, but he does not 
have the money to pay it. He stated he is unsure of what the delinquent debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.i, 1.m are for. He did not provide any other information on actions he has 
taken to resolve the debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m are for medical 
services. Applicant admitted he owed them, but does not have the money to pay them.5
 
  
 Applicant has a long history of criminal offenses. He was arrested and charged in 
June 14, 1981, for aggravated assault. The charge was dismissed. He was arrested and 
charged with simple assault on June 18, 1981. He denied he committed the offense, but 
was found guilty. He did not serve a jail sentence. On April 28, 1994, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with simple assault and cruelty to children, a felony. He stated 
that he was taken to the police station and the charge was dismissed. Applicant was 
arrested in February 1990 and charged with simple assault-family violence. The offense 
was nolle prosequi. In August 1990, Applicant was charged with simple battery and theft 
by taking. He was convicted and sentenced to 12 months probation for the simple 
battery and was sentenced to three years probation for the theft by taking charge. He 
admitted he was charged with a felony. It appears he was found guilty of a 
misdemeanor battery and misdemeanor theft. He did not disclose the felony charge on 
his security clearance application. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.e)6
 
 
 Applicant denies he was charged with aggravated assault, a felony, on 
December 25, 1992. He was acquitted of the charge.7 Applicant was arrested on 
January 17, 1997, and charged with interference with custody. It is unclear if the charge 
was dismissed or he was acquitted of the charge. Applicant was arrested on March 17, 
1997 and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He admitted he was 
drinking alcohol at his friend’s house and drove a vehicle. He did not disclose this DUI 
offense on his security clearance application. He stated he failed to disclose it because 
he did the best he could in filling out the application. (SOR ¶¶ 2.f, 2g, 2.h).8
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 51-56; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 Tr. 34, 56-57. 
 
5 Tr. 23-41, 57-59. 
 
6 Tr. 32-34, 59-70; GE 6, 7, 8; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. 70-71; GE 6, 7, 8. 
 
8 Tr. 71-75; GE 6, 7, 8 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant was arrested on June 2, 1997, and charged with stalking and criminal 
trespass. He stated he was following his girlfriend in his car and was arrested. He pled 
guilty. On September 17, 1997, Applicant was arrested for “deposit account fraud/bad 
checks $499 or less and aggravated assault.” He stated he was convicted and received 
a 12-month suspended sentence. He was also fined and ordered to pay restitution. On 
October 9, 1997, he was arrested and charged with “deposit account fraud/bad checks 
$499 or less” and aggravated assault. He was convicted and given a 15-month 
suspended sentence, fined, and ordered to pay restitution. He paid the restitution.9
 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.i, 2.j, 2.k) 
 Applicant was arrested in November 1999 and charged with DUI and a probation 
violation. He admitted he was drinking alcohol. He had an open container of alcohol in 
his car and was driving. He was on probation at the time. He stated he just was not 
thinking when he committed this offense. He was arrested again on February 19, 2000, 
and charged with a probation violation. He was convicted and given a 25-month 
suspended sentence. He was unable to pay the fine because he did not have the 
money. He admitted he committed the offense. On July 30, 2002, Applicant was 
charged with DUI and probation violation. He admitted he was convicted of the lesser 
offense of reckless driving and was sentenced to six months of probation and fined 
$800. On October 4, 2003, Applicant was arrested for DUI. He was convicted and 
sentenced to three days confinement, 12-months probation, community service, and he 
was ordered to attend DUI school. Applicant stated that he attended a rehabilitation 
program for 12 months that was not court ordered. (SOR ¶¶ 2.l, 2.m, 2.n, 2.o) Applicant 
admitted he did not drink alcohol while he was in the rehabilitation program because he 
was regularly tested. He later went to Iraq and did not drink alcohol while he was there. 
He stated that the lesson he learned while attending the rehabilitation program was that 
it was not good to drink and drive. He resumed drinking when he returned from Iraq in 
approximately 2008. He continues to drink alcohol on the weekends and consumes 
about a six pack of beer and a couple of mixed drinks. He stated he does not drive now 
after consuming alcohol. He does not believe he has an alcohol problem.10
 
  
 On January 18, 2007, Applicant was arrested for disorderly conduct. He got in a 
fight with a friend over a gambling debt. In August 2010, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with reckless driving and improper lane change. He admitted he had been 
drinking alcohol in the afternoon and evening the day before he was arrested. He was 
arrested the following morning when he was following his girlfriend in his car and was 
stopped by the police. Applicant admitted that he was arrested and charged 
approximately five times for DUI or offenses that were alcohol-related. He admitted he 
has consumed alcohol other times and driven even though he was not stopped or 
arrested.11
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 75-77; GE 6, 7, 8. 
 
10 Tr. 32, 77-90, 94, 106; GE 6, 7, 8. 
 
11 Tr. 90-96; 106-112; GE 6, 7, 8. 
 
5 
 
 
 When Applicant completed his security clearance application on November 24, 
2007, he responded “no” to question 23 that asked if he had ever been charged with or 
convicted of any offense related to alcohol. His explanation for failing to disclose all of 
his past alcohol offenses was that he believed the question was asking him about drugs 
and did not think it was about alcohol. He did disclose one offense: that he had been 
charged with DUI on August 2003. He did not disclose any of his other alcohol-related 
offenses. He explained he failed to disclose his past arrests, charges, and convictions 
for the preceding seven years because he did not understand the question and he was 
not trying to hide anything. In response to the SOR dated August 4, 2011, Applicant 
stated: “most of the DUI charges were dropped. The last charge was almost 10 years 
ago. I have had a clean record since.” Applicant was aware he had more recent alcohol-
related offenses. I find he deliberately and intentionally failed to disclose his alcohol-
related offenses.12
 
  
 Applicant stated he will pay his delinquent debts. He stated he knows his record 
is bad. He does not believe he has an alcohol problem. He has not been employed 
since 2008. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
12 Tr. 96-98. 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to file his state and federal tax returns resulting in tax liens that 
are unpaid. He has a history of accumulating delinquent debts. Despite having money to 
 
7 
 
 
pay his liens and debts, he instead used it to purchase a house with cash. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has not taken action to resolve any of his debts and they are 
unresolved. The evidence does not support that his financial problems occurred under 
unique circumstances and are unlikely to recur. Applicant has had a long period of 
unemployment. However, at one point Applicant had a significant amount of savings to 
pay all of his debts, but chose to purchase a house for cash instead. I find his actions 
were not responsible under the circumstances. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude there are clear indications the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
There is no evidence he received counseling or that he made a good-faith effort to 
repay the debts. Appellant disputes certain debts, but failed to provide a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the delinquent debts and documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence to resolve the issues. I find none of the 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
Applicant has been arrested or charged five times with DUI or alcohol-related 
offenses. He has been arrested another 11 times for various criminal offenses from 
1981 to 2010. He has pled guilty and been found guilty for various criminal offenses 
over the past 19 years. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of criminal conduct spanning nineteen years. He 
clearly has difficulty abiding by the law. His most recent criminal arrest and charge were 
in August 2010 for reckless driving, and he admitted he had consumed alcohol prior to 
the arrest. There is insufficient evidence to conclude any of his multiple criminal 
offenses occurred under unique circumstances and they are unlikely to recur. There is 
insufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation. Applicant’s criminal conduct is a 
serious concern and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. I find 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 Applicant has five alcohol-related criminal arrests. He attended a rehabilitation 
program for a year. He resumed drinking alcohol after abstaining for a period of time. 
He continues to drink alcohol, despite the negative impact it has had on him. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the 
following potentially apply: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant attended an alcohol rehabilitation program, but resumed consumption 
of alcohol after a period of time. He has a long history of alcohol use and numerous 
instances where it has had a negative impact on him. He does not believe he has an 
alcohol problem. He continues to consume alcohol. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his use of alcohol will not continue to be a problem. Although he testified 
he completed a rehabilitation program, he did not provide any documentation to support 
his completion of that program or that he received a favorable prognosis. His most 
recent arrest in 2010 was after he had consumed alcohol during the afternoon and 
evening the day before and he was following his girlfriend. His actions raise concerns. I 
find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his alcohol-related arrests as well as his criminal 
arrests and charges for the previous seven years on his security clearance application. 
On his answer to the SOR, he falsified information by saying most of his DUI charges 
were dropped and the last one was almost ten years ago, and he has a clean record 
since then. These statements were misleading and false. I find Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose his alcohol offenses and criminal conduct on his security clearance 
application. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant’s personal 
conduct.  
 
 
11 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omissions, concealments, and falsifications. He actually continued to mislead the 
Government with his answer to the SOR. The offenses are not minor. Due to his 
numerous arrests, charges, and convictions over the past 19 years, Applicant may not 
have remembered each individual one, but he was aware that he had been arrested 
numerous times and alcohol was involved in some of them. He did not put the 
Government on notice as to the extent of his alcohol-related conduct and his criminal 
conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
12 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, F, G, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has a long history of criminal conduct spanning 19 years. Some of his criminal 
conduct is alcohol-related. He continues to consume alcohol even after attending a 
year-long rehabilitation program. He has numerous delinquent debts, included tax liens 
that remain unpaid. At one point, he had sufficient savings to address his debts, but 
instead purchased a house for cash. He was aware of his criminal past and his alcohol-
related issues and was not honest when he completed his security clearance 
application. He continued to mislead the Government in his answer to the SOR.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Personal Conduct, Financial Considerations, Alcohol Consumption, and Criminal 
Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs: 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
13 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a-4.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
