                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 11-05217
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant does not
mitigate personal conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Statement of Case
On July 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,  issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not
make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 11, 2011, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2012, and was scheduled for hearing on
January 27, 2012. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, or deny Applicant’s application for a security clearance. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of three exhibits. (GEs 1-3)  Applicant, in turn, relied on
2
one witness (himself) and three exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 8,
2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the closing of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with additional endorsements.  For
good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record.
Department counsel was afforded three days to respond. Within the time permitted,
Applicant furnished additional character references, which were admitted as AE D.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) falsified his security clearance
application (EQIP) of September 2005 by misstating the living status of his father; (b)
falsified his August 2008 EQIP by misstating his father’s living status; (c) committed time
card fraud between November 2002 and February 2003 while employed by a former
employer; (d) committed time card fraud between January 2005 and February 2005
while employed by his current employer; (e) falsified his September 2005 EQIP by failing
to disclose his termination by a previous employer for alleged fraudulent conduct; and (f)
denied falsifying his time cards in his October 2008 interview with an investigator from
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
provided no explanations. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old manufacturing manager for a defense contractor who
seeks to retain his security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted
by Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his wife in July 2001 and has two children from this marriage.
(GEs 1 and 2)  He earned a bachelors degree in technical management in October 2000
(GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 27) and has no military service. 
Applicant’s parents separated when Applicant was only five years of age. He did
not see his father very often when growing up. (AE 3; Tr. 31)  In 1994, his mother told
him his father had fled the U.S., was living in Mexico, and was possibly wanted by law
enforcement authorities due to his involvement in illegal drug activities. (GE 3; Tr. 31-32)
Applicant’s last contact with his father (now 51 years of age) was in June 2010 (Tr. 45-
46), and he still does not know why his father left the U.S. (GE 3) To the best of
Applicant’s knowledge, his father still resides in Mexico and works as an auto mechanic.
3
(GE 3; Tr. 30) Applicant last had face-to-face contact with his father in 1994 (just before
his father departed the U.S.), and he maintains telephonic contact with him annually. (GE
3)
While employed for a previous employer, Applicant overstated his reported hours
on several occasions between November 2002 and February 2003. (GE 3; Tr. 36-37)
Over a one-to-two month period he reported on his time cards that he was working more
hours than he actually logged. While he does not recall the actual hours overstated, he
reported more than he earned to make more money for his family. (GE 3) Applicant knew
what he was doing was wrong when he overstated his hours. When detected by his
employer, he was confronted with his time card overcharges and terminated from his
employment for cause. (GE 3)
Applicant joined his current employer in October 2004. (GEs 1 through 3)
Between January 2005 and February 2005, Applicant inflated his time cards on
approximately 20 separate occasions. (GE 3; Tr. 39-40) He inflated his time cards to
earn additional money and did not advise his employer of his actions. (GE 3) In April
2009, his employer’s facility security officer (FSO) called him into her office and advised
him his security clearance was being revoked. (GE 3) A short time later, Applicant
received a letter from DoD informing him that his security clearance had been revoked.
Applicant acknowledges falsifying his time cards with his current employer. (GE 3; Tr.
37-38) 
Despite his loss of a security clearance and access to sensitive compartmented
information (SCI) in May 2009 over his EQIP misstatements, Applicant’s current
employer did not take any disciplinary action against him. (GE 3) Applicant is still
employed by this employer. (Tr. 38)
When completing a security application for his current employer in September
2005, Applicant listed his father as deceased. (GE 1) He admitted to intentionally
misstating his father’s living status and attributed his misstatement at the time to primary
concerns over his father’s safety. (Tr. 33-34). Applicant also worried that his father’s
suspected involvement in drugs could adversely affect his security clearance application.
(GE 3; Tr. 33-34, 44-45) His stated reasons are not justifiable ones for avoiding
inferences of falsification of his 2005 EQIP.
In answering question 22 of his 2005 EQIP, Applicant left blank the box inquiring if
he was ever fired from a job and checked another box that he left a job for other reasons
under unfavorable circumstances. (GE 2) He explained that he was accused of charging
incorrectly on his time card, was sent home by his manager,  and subsequently received
a phone call from his human resources department. (GE 2) In this telephone call, he
explained that he wanted to quit and was told that he did not have a job anymore. (GE 2)
He provided no details, however, as to why the job was unavailable to him. 
While Applicant’s statement of being accused of time card and not having an
available job anymore might be technically true, his statements taken together are
4
unreconcilable with his omission of his being fired from a job and his subsequent
admissions to being terminated by his prior employer for time card fraud. By reciting he
was told he does not have a job anymore in the remark section of question 22, Applicant
provided the Government with notice of time card charges against him and the lack of
job availability to him, but no admissions of time card fraud or reasons for the elimination
of his job. 
Applicant’s termination for time fraud and his motives for wanting to keep his
termination concealed from his current employer were all covered in his pre-polygraph
statement (see infra), and make his answers to question 22 deliberately false and
misleading when considered contextually. (GEs 2 and 3) Applicant admitted his question
22 remarks were untrue when asked about them at hearing. (Tr. 39) He rationalized that
it was easier for him “just to not state anything, just to put that I left the company.” (Tr.
39) Not knowing how thorough his answers would be reviewed, he thought it would be
better not to admit that he was terminated. (GE 3; Tr. 39) Weighing and evaluating all of
the circumstances associated with Applicant’s answers to question 22, his pre-polygraph
statement, his pleading admissions, and his hearing testimony, his answers to question
22 are insufficient to avert inferences that he falsified his answers to the question in
completing his September 2005 EQIP.
Completing an EQIP in August 2008, Applicant reiterated his prior misstatements
about his father’s living status. Applicant attributed his continuing misstatements to his
concerns about keeping his story straight. (GE 3; Tr. 35-36) He reasoned that once he
lied about his father’s living status, “you are kind of stuck with it.” (Tr. 35)
In October 2008, an OPM investigator came to interview Applicant. (GE 3; Tr. 36)
At the outset of the interview, the investigator did not ask Applicant about his father’s
living status, and Applicant never volunteered any information. (Tr. 36) Asked whether he
ever falsified his time cards, Applicant assured he had not. He told the investigator in this
interview that he had never falsified or altered his time cards with his employer. (Tr. 47-
48)
In January 2009, Applicant was scheduled for a polygraph examination. Before
sitting for his polygraph examination, Applicant volunteered nothing to the polygrapher
about his father’s living status or his inflating his time cards. (AE 3; Tr. 43) Only after he
sat for the polygraph examination did he agree to disclose his prior misstatements about
his father’s living status, his time cards, and his termination for cause. (Tr. 43, 49-50)  In
his pre-polygraph statement to the polygrapher, Applicant admitted to falsifying his time
cards by deliberately adding one to two hours on his daily time cards over a three-month
period spanning November 2002 and February 2003. He admitted to first being
suspended by his prior employer for time card fraud and to being terminated for cause
three days later for the same offense (with no mention of his offering first to quit his job).
(GE 3) Applicant admitted, too, to inflating his time cards from January to February 2005
by adding an extra hour to his time cards, and to not wanting his current employer to
know he had been terminated for time card fraud. (GE 3) And Applicant admitted to
falsely listing his father as deceased in his prior EQIPs. (GE 3) 
5
Because of the high sensitivity of the SCI covered by Applicant’s EQIP
application, Applicant was denied access to SCI by the Air Force in April 2009. (GE 3)
Both in his answer and at hearing, Applicant acknowledged his misstating the living
status of his father, his falsifying his time cards with his employers between 2002 and
2005, and his termination for cause. (GE 3).  
Endorsements
Applicant documents excellent performance reviews and promotions for 2009 and
2010. (AE B). He is highly regarded by his co-workers, lab manager, and subordinates
he supervises. (AEs A and D) They uniformly characterize Applicant as honest, reliable
and trustworthy. (AEs A and D) Applicant has received achievement awards recognizing
his contributions to his employer’s missions. (AE C)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in reaching at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial, commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk.  
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
6
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability
to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate
with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the tenets framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an
applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is
clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons; and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis  
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of (a) his knowing and wilful inflating of his time
cards with different employers in 2002-2003 and 2005; (b) his misstatements of his
father’s living status and termination for time card fraud in the 2005 and 2008 EQIPs he
7
completed, and (c) his misstatements about his recurrent time card fraud in his 2008
OPM interview. By misstating his father’s living status, his termination for cause, and his
time worked with two of his employers, Applicant failed to furnish materially important
background information about his parents and employment history that was needed for
the Government to properly process and evaluate his prior security clearance
applications.
To be sure, Applicant did alert the Government of his potential problems with time
card fraud and job elimination when he included statements in his remarks to his
question 22 answers about his prior employers time fraud accusations, his brief
suspension, and his employer’s advising him that his job was no longer available.  But
the Appeal Board has consistently counseled against piecemeal decision-making when
individual conduct is being assessed contextually as part of an overall applicant design.
Cf. ISCR Case No. 00-0628 at 4 (Ap. Bd. Feb. 24, 2003); ISCR Case No. 99-0601 at 6-7
(Ap. Bd. Jan. 30, 2001). Unlike the narrow tailoring that is afforded conduct covered by
criminal statutes, behavior pertinent to trustworthiness evaluations by necessity must
take account of applicant designs and actions associated with the totality of the
information covered in the pleadings to ascertain if there is a recurring pattern of
questionable judgment or irresponsibility. See  AG ¶ 2(a) and ISCR Case No. 00-0628,
supra. And in Applicant’s case, he fully admits to concealing the truth about his being
terminated for time card fraud, and not for something else, by his previous employer.
Applicant attributed his recurrent inflation of his time cards with two employers to
his monetary needs. He cited somewhat different reasons for his repeated
misstatements in his EQIPs and OPM interview about his father’s living status and his
termination by his prior employer for time card fraud: embarrassment and concerns over
providing adverse information that could impact negatively on his job status with his
current employer and his eligibility to hold a security clearance. Separately and
collectively, his misstatements reflect his conscious and manifest decisions to omit and
mislead when answering questions concerning his father’s living status, his falsifying his
time cards, and his employment history. 
Applicant’s recurrent time card fraud, his misstatements about his father’s living
status and termination for time card fraud in his 2005 and 2008 EQIPs, and his
misstatements about his inflating of his time cards in his 2008 OPM interview invite
application of several disqualifying conditions under the personal conduct guideline: DC
¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” DC ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other government representative,” and DC ¶ 16(d), “credible
adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not
be sufficient for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
8
trustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may no properly safeguard
protected information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: DC ¶ 16(d)(3),
“a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”
While Applicant assures he promptly and voluntarily disclosed his father’s living
status, time card misstatements, and his termination from his prior employer for cause,
his disclosures were prompted by his confrontation by an OPM polygrapher preparatory
to his sitting for a polygraph examination. As such, Applicant’s disclosures cannot be
considered voluntary and unprompted. Applicant’s explanations of his father’s living
status and his recurrent inflation of his time cards followed specific questions asked of
him by the polygrapher and cannot, as such, be considered voluntary. 
Applicant’s answers were not sufficiently prompt, or voluntary to apply MC ¶
17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Applicant’s
corrections were prompted by his impending polygraph examination and, as such, were
not true voluntary disclosures. While manifestly forthcoming, his pre-polygraph
admissions do not meet either the prompt or good-faith prongs of MC ¶ 17(a), as these
terms are generally understood. Overall, Applicant’s misstatement explanations relative
to his time cards, EQIPs, and OPM interview are not persuasive enough to warrant
conclusions that the falsification allegations relative to his EQIP/OPM omissions of his
father’s living status, his termination for time card fraud, and his inflating his time cards
are mitigated by prompt, voluntary corrections.
From a whole person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of his overall honesty with his co-workers, lab manager, and
subordinates he supervises and has received solid performance reviews, achievement
awards, and promotions. Still of concern, though, are Applicant’s multiple misstatements
about the living status of his father in Mexico, his inflating his time cards, and his
termination for cause. Because motivation is never easy to objectively establish, the
placement of reasonable time lines on clearance applicants to test and absolve
themselves of recurrence risks makes safe and practical sense when balancing the
interests of protecting national security with the interests of  those who seek access to
the nation’s secrets.  
Considering the record as a whole, at this time there is too little seasoning of
Applicant’s mitigation efforts to avert foreseeable risks of making material misstatements
on security clearance applications and other forms designed to facilitate Government
background investigations. It is still too early to make safe predictions about his ability to
restore his honesty and trustworthiness sufficient to justify his eligibility to hold a security
clearance. Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
judgment and trust lapses, Applicant fails to mitigate security concerns related to his
personal conduct issues. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f of Guideline E.
9
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.f: Against Applicant   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
