1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 11-00070
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial difficulties were caused by circumstances beyond her
control. Currently, she is satisfying her delinquencies consistent with a payment plan,
and she has ample disposable income to continue adhering to the payment plan.
Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On July 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on December
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR on August 20, 2011, admitting subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.l, 1.o through 1.q, 1.s, 1.v, and 1.y. She denied the
remainder. Also, she  requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on November
4, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued on November 30, 2011, scheduling the case for
January 25, 2012. I held the hearing as scheduled and received six Government
exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and 14 Applicant Exhibits
(AE) marked as AE A through N. Also, I considered the testimony of Applicant. 
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s request, for the
submission of additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, she submitted eight additional
exhibits. Department Counsel had no objection, and I admitted them as AE O through
V. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 11, 2012. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old single woman. She has a high school diploma and has
earned two and a half years of college credit. (Tr. 28)
Applicant is the oldest of five children. She had a difficult childhood.  Both of her
parents were “in and out of the penitentiary,” her father was an alcoholic, and a brother
was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. Although the family received public
assistance, they were seldom able to make ends meet. Applicant and her siblings
constantly feared that the local social services agency would remove them from the
home and place them in foster care. (Tr. 23-25)
Determined to keep the family intact and stay “below the radar,” Applicant
gradually became the de facto head of the household. (Tr. 90) At age 12, she obtained
her first job, working at a neighborhood bakery. Although she was two years younger
than the state minimum working age, the proprietor, empathizing with her plight, paid
her “under the table,” and often gave her food to take home to the family. By the time
Applicant was 16 years old, she was the sole manager of her family’s finances. By then,
she was working part-time at a fast-food restaurant. (Tr. 23-25, 89-91) When Applicant
turned 18, she assumed legal responsibility for the lease on the family’s home.  (Tr.
106)
While struggling to support her family, Applicant was also dealing with major
health problems. At age 16, she was diagnosed with thyroid cancer. Subsequently, she
underwent a series of radiation treatments culminating in the removal of her thyroid
gland approximately a year later. Shortly after Applicant’s thyroid gland was removed,
she was diagnosed with breast cancer. She again underwent surgery and a series of
radiation treatments. (Tr. 90-92)
Despite these challenging issues that Applicant faced during childhood, she did
well in school. In approximately 1994, she participated in a special program through her
high school that offered students a chance to take courses at local colleges and
matched students with professional mentors from local corporations. Through the
3
program, she met the vice president of a major defense contractor at a banquet and
asked to be hired. He was so impressed with her initiative, that he “set [her] up for an
internship” the following week. (Tr. 31) Through the internship, Applicant became
exposed to  information technology product management. (Tr. 97)
Applicant graduated from high school in 1995 and entered college. Although she
continued to work with the defense contractor over breaks, she pursued a pre-med
curriculum. (Tr. 94-97) Applicant struggled in college because “the financial burden of
being a student and supporting [her]self completely, plus the medical procedures [she]
kept having to [undergo] began to be a burden on [her] GPA.”  (Tr. 94) In approximately
1997, Applicant met with the college dean. He  suggested that she quit school and
focus on her health because she would not get into medical school if she continued to
get C grades. (Tr. 25)
Applicant took her advisor’s advice, dropped out of school, and began working
full-time for the defense contractor with whom she had been interning. In 1998, she was
granted her first security clearance. She has remained in this field since then. When she
began, she earned eight dollars per hour. By 2011 when she began her current job, she
was earning $125,000 per year. (Tr. 110) Currently, she works as an information
technology  knowledge manager. (Tr. 127)
Although Applicant’s salary successively increased after she began working full-
time in the defense contracting industry, she continued to be hampered with financial
issues generated by her health problems. Also, the financial burden of her family
increased after her mother’s health began deteriorating. Applicant gradually became
unable to balance her medical expenses with her mother’s medical expenses. (Tr. 35-
37) 
In December 2001, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. In April
2002, the court discharged approximately $36,000 of debt, including the debt listed in
subparagraph 1.b. (Tr. 34)
Shortly before filing for bankruptcy protection, Applicant got married. Her
husband was not forthcoming about his personal finances and failed to disclose that he
had children for whom he owed child support. These issues strained the marriage and
ultimately led to their separation in 2005 and divorce in 2007. (Tr. 27, 35) Although their
finances were separate and her husband did not abuse her finances during the
marriage, she incurred the unanticipated cost of renting an apartment and managing it
on her own after they separated. (Tr. 35-37; 112)
After separating from her husband, Applicant experienced another period of
major illnesses. Treatment required, among other things, three uterine surgeries over
the next three years. (Tr. 108) As Applicant struggled with various ailments involving her
reproductive organs, she began experiencing trouble with one of her knees, and was
also diagnosed with reflexive sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), a sensory abnormality that,
among other things, periodically causes one’s limbs to malfunction. When Applicant’s
4
RSD flares up, she is unable to walk without either a cane or a walker. These problems
led to two more surgeries. (Tr. 100-102)
Burdened with health problems and mounting medical bills, Applicant gradually
began falling behind on her debts again. Her financial problems were compounded in
March 2010 when she had to pay her mother’s funeral expenses after her mother died
unexpectedly. By mid-2010, Applicant had accrued approximately $61,000 of delinquent
debt, as the chart below indicates:
Debt Type Amount SOR Subparagraph(s)
Student Loans $30,000 1.m, 1.n
Federal Income Tax $9,000 unlisted
Apartment Rent $14,900 1.c - 1.f
Medical Bills $1,300 1.g-1.i,1.k, 1.l
Bank Loans $3,600 1.r, 1.w
Utilities $1,438 1.t-1.v
Credit Card $1,049 1.q
Miscellaneous $1,825 1.j, 1.o, 1.p, 1.s, 1.x, 1.y
SOR subparagraphs 1.m and 1.n. are duplicates. (AE F, V) Applicant has been
making $210 monthly payments, as agreed, since January 2011. It is no longer in
delinquent status. (AE V)
Applicant’s federal income tax delinquencies stem from tax years 2002 through
2005. In August 2010, she voluntary submitted an IRS Payroll Deduction Agreement
form to her employer’s payroll department and requested that $75 be deducted each
pay period from her account. (GE 4) Applicant made these payments through these
automatic payroll deductions through December 2011. (GE 4) She then switched to the
IRS automatic payment system. Through this system, she will make $150 payments
once monthly. (AE S) She made her first payment as scheduled in January 2012. (AE S
at 2) The balance of the delinquency is approximately $8,000. (Tr. 74)
Applicant accrued the rental delinquency listed in subparagraph 1.c after she
separated from her husband. The delinquency represents costs she incurred for
breaking the lease by moving before its expiration. Applicant moved because she could
not afford a rent increase. Her attempts at negotiating a payment arrangement failed,
and the  landlord is demanding the entire amount ($3,390) in a lump sum. (Ex. C)
5
Subparagraph 1.d, totaling $2,041, is a rental delinquency her sister accrued.
Applicant is jointly responsible because she cosigned the lease.  Applicant satisfied this
delinquency in January 2011. (AE E)
Subparagraph 1.e, a duplicate of subparagraph 1.f, is a rental delinquency
Applicant accrued approximately two years after separating from her husband. As of
January 2011, the balance was $8,166. (AE A) That month, Applicant contacted the
collection agency and negotiated a payment plan. Since then, she has been making
$500 monthly payments. (AE A, B)
Applicant has not yet paid any of the delinquent medical bills. As for the bank
loans, she successfully disputed subparagraph 1.r (AE N), and satisfied subparagraph
1.w, consistent with a settlement she negotiated in December 2010. (AE I) Per the
settlement agreement, the debt was satisfied by January 2011 with two monthly
installments. (AE I, J)
Applicant suspects that one of her sisters accrued two of the utility bills
(subparagraphs 1.t, 1.u) listed in the SOR. The disputed amount totals approximately
$800. She has contacted both creditors. (AE C) Applicant is currently attempting to
settle the utility bill listed in subparagraph 1.v, totaling $412. (AE C at 2)
Subparagraph 1.q is an ongoing dispute Applicant has with a former employer
regarding what she contends were reimbursable business expenses charged to a
company credit card. (Tr. 53) Applicant decided to stop disputing this bill and pay it.
Accordingly, she contacted the creditor and agreed to satisfy it in six monthly
installments beginning in February 2012. (AE O at 2)
As for the miscellaneous debts, Applicant paid subparagraph 1.s, a $300 debt
owed to a municipality for back parking tickets, in December 2011. (AE U) She is
disputing subparagraph 1.x, totaling $536, through a complaint filed with the Better
Business Bureau. (AE T) She admits the other miscellaneous debts, but has not yet
begun satisfying them.
In sum, Applicant has satisfied approximately $15,000 of delinquent debt since
October 2011. Currently, she is working with a representative from her credit union to
help manage her debt repayment plan (Tr. 121). Per the plan, all of her outstanding
debts except the federal income tax debt and the student loan are scheduled to be
satisfied by August 2012. (AE O). 
Since 2008, Applicant’s annual salary has increased by $35,000. (Tr. 90, 110)
Moreover, she no longer supports two households because her mother is deceased, her
schizophrenic brother is being completely supported through federal and state
assistance, and her remaining siblings are adults. (Tr. 65) Applicant has approximately
$1,500 of discretionary monthly income. (Tr. 81)
6
Since the SOR, Applicant underwent another major surgery after one of her
Fallopian tubes ruptured. (Tr. 83) After the surgery, she was out of work for a month.
Because she is a temporary employee, she did not have any sick leave benefits, and
did not earn any money during this time. Consequently, her debt payment plans were
temporarily sidetracked. Applicant contends that because she no longer has to support
any family members, she still will have enough to satisfy her delinquencies on schedule.
(Tr. 103)  
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel  . . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). After obtaining a discharge of $35,000 through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy
process, Applicant, over the next nine years, accrued approximately $61,000 of
additional delinquent debt. AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
7
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems were primarily caused by major health problems,
and exacerbated by the added responsibility of providing for her indigent family.
Although her then-husband did not abuse her finances, the failure of their marriage was
nevertheless a financial setback because she had to accrue an unanticipated increase
in her apartment rental expenses when they separated.
Applicant has been steadily paying down her debt since October 2011, reducing
it by $15,000.  Currently, she is working with a representative from her credit union to
help her manage her debt repayment plan (Tr. 121). The plan provides that all of her
outstanding debts except the federal income tax debt and the student loan are
scheduled to be satisfied by August 2012. (AE O). 
Applicant successfully disputed several debts. Although she did not provide
documentary evidence supporting the basis of some of the disputed debts, she has
promised to pay them if the respective creditors resolve them against her. I conclude
that all of the mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Over the past 15 years, Applicant has cultivated a successful, lucrative career in
the defense contracting industry. In doing so, she overcame a childhood characterized
by abject poverty and family dysfunction, and a young adulthood characterized by a
series of grave illnesses.  Although she overcame these challenges, they impeded her
ability to manage her finances and caused her to accrue delinquent debt.
Currently, Applicant is no longer responsible financially for her family. Also, her
income has steadily increased over the years. She has been satisfying her delinquent
debts through a well-organized payment plan, and she has ample disposable income to
continue adhering to the plan in the future. 
Applicant’s health remains fragile, and another downturn may stall her debt-
reduction progress. However, if this were to occur, it would be  indicative of bad fortune,
rather than bad character or bad money-managing abilities. Upon evaluating Applicant’s
case in the context of the whole-person, I conclude she has mitigated Guideline F
security concerns.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.y: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
