 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00780 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to provide adequate information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On January 3, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 5) On September 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on September 29, 2011. 
(Item 3) 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2011, admitting the ten allegations 
under Guideline F. Applicant elected to have the matter decided on the written record. 
(Item 4) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 
23, 2011. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December 
8, 2011, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. He did not provide any 
additional information in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
February 6, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 35 years old and has worked for a defense contractor as a systems 
engineer since November 2006. Applicant is a high school graduate with approximately 
a year of college credit. He was married in May 2001, and divorced in July 2011. He has 
two young children. His employment history shows continued employment from at least 
November 1999. (Item 5) Applicant listed his net monthly income as $10,346. He has 
monthly child support, spousal support, and child care payments in excess of $2,000. 
His other monthly expenses are over $6,000, leaving a net monthly remainder for 
discretionary expenses of approximately $157. (Item 7 at 7)   
 
Credit reports (Item 8, dated May 11, 2011; Item 9, dated July 14, 2010; and Item 
10, dated January 23, 2008) show the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a credit 
card debt in collection for $10,018 (SOR 1.a); a telephone debt in collection for $207 
(SOR 1.b); a credit card debt in collection for $12,125 (SOR 1.c); a credit card account 
in collection for $1,914 (SOR 1.d); a car repossession debt in collection for $10,953 
(SOR 1.e); a credit card debt in collection for $6,840 (SOR 1.f); a credit card debt in 
collection for $3,936 (SOR 1.g); a credit card debt in collection for $1,104 (SOR 1.h); a 
medical account in collection for $100 (SOR 1.i); and a credit card account in collection 
for $35,656 (SOR 1.j). Applicant admits all the debts listed in the SOR. The debt at SOR 
1.j is the consolidation of other credit card debts not listed in the SOR. He is not aware 
of the medical debt at SOR 1.i since he always had medical insurance. The total 
delinquent debt alleged in the SOR is approximately $82,853. 
 
Applicant and his wife had well-paying jobs and enjoyed good credit until 2007 
when his wife left the workforce to take care of their two children. The couple lived off 
credit cards when they lost her almost $100,000 a year salary. Applicant’s wife became 
addicted to prescription drugs costing between $500 and $600 per month. Applicant and 
his wife divorced in July 2011. Applicant has kept his present bills current. The debts 
are marital debts and have not been paid. Applicant told a security investigator that he 
planned to satisfy his delinquent debts and he would consult with a debt consolidation 
company. (Item 6 at 11-12) In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted he does not 
have an agreement with a debt consolidation company, does did not have the financial 
 
3 
 
 
ability to resolve or pay his debts due to his court-ordered child and spousal support 
obligations, and has no options available to remedy the situation. (Item 4) 
 
Policy 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts, listed in credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant, raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). The delinquent debts show a history of both an inability 
and an unwillingness to pay debts.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions as required in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The burden shifts to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation 
or prove a mitigating condition. The burden does not shift to the Government. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debt starting in 2007 when his wife left employment to stay home to take 
care of their two children. She also incurred a significant monthly expense because of 
an addiction to prescription drugs. The information presented by Applicant shows that 
he and his wife continued their same lifestyle by incurring significant credit card debts. 
He presented no information to indicate that the debts were incurred under such 
unusual circumstances that the debts would not recur. In fact, it appears the debts were 
 
5 
 
 
incurred by Applicant in the normal course of living. His wife leaving the work force to 
care for their children was a foreseeable circumstance. The resulting financial situation 
was not beyond his ability to control. He did not adjust his financial situation so he did 
not act financially responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant indicated to a security 
investigator that he would make an agreement with a debt solution company to assist 
him to pay his credit card debts. Applicant presented no information, evidence, or 
documentation to verify his assertions of an agreement with the debt resolution 
company or any payments on the debts. With evidence of delinquent debt and no 
documentation to support responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that his 
financial problems are not under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control). Applicant presented no information to indicate an agreement with a 
debt solution company which may require that Applicant receive credit counseling. 
There is no indication his financial problems are being resolved or under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. A promise to pay debts in the future is not evidence of a 
good-faith intention to resolve debts. Applicant has to show a "meaningful track record" 
of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. 
All that is required is a plan to resolve financial problems coupled with significant action 
to implement that plan.  
 
 Applicant failed to establish such a meaningful track record. Applicant did not 
present sufficient evidence to show either an agreement with creditors or any payments 
on the debts. He has sufficient income to meet his financial obligations and has many 
years of steady employment. Applicant's lack of documented action to pay his debts is 
significant and disqualifying. Based on the acknowledged delinquent debts and failure to 
establish payment of the debts, Applicant has not acted responsibly towards his debts 
and finances. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not established a 
meaningful track record of paying his delinquent debts. He has not provided sufficient 
credible documentary information to show he acted reasonably and responsibly to 
address his delinquent debts and resolve his financial problems. He has not even 
shown that he has a credible plan to resolve and pay his delinquent debts. Applicant 
has not demonstrated responsible management of his finances or a consistent record of 
actions to resolve financial issues. The lack of responsible management of financial 
obligations indicates he may not be concerned or act responsibly in regard to classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
