1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]  )  ADP Case No. 11-03459 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for a public trust position information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on March 
24, 2010. On October 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
recommended denial his application. DOHA set forth the basis for its recommendation 
in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 1, 2011; answered it on November 15, 
2011; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on November 17, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
2 
 
December 13, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on December 21, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on January 5, 2012, scheduling it for January 19, 2012.1 I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of 
one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX G, which was admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX G are attached to the record 
as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 26, 2012. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Pakistan. The request and the documents attached as enclosures were not 
admitted in evidence but are attached to the record as HX II. I took administrative notice 
as requested by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a in part. He denied SOR 
¶ 1.b and admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old systems engineer employed by a federal contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since January 2010. He has never held a public 
trust position.  
 
 Applicant was born in Pakistan, in a small town near the border with India. He 
came to the United States with his mother in January 1994. His father was already living 
in the United States and operating a restaurant. Applicant completed the eighth grade, 
high school, and college in the United States. He obtained an associate’s degree in 
information systems in May 2004 and a bachelor’s degree in information systems in 
May 2004. He is currently working toward a master’s degree in information assurance. 
(Tr. 39-42.) He became a citizen of the United States in January 2009. He allowed his 
Pakistani passport to expire and shredded it. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, he has 
used only his U.S. passport for foreign travel. (GX 2 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Pakistan for about two weeks in 2007 to visit his aunt (his 
mother’s sister) and two cousins, who live in a small village in the eastern part of 
Pakistan. (Tr. 44-45.) He visited his aunt again in 2009, and was introduced to his future 
wife. He returned in early 2010 and was married, but his wife remained in Pakistan, 
waiting for her visa to immigrate to the United States. (Tr. 47-50.) 
 
                                                          
1 The hearing date was suggested by Applicant’s attorney on December 29, 2011. Applicant did not 
object to proceeding less than 15 days after the date of the formal hearing notice.   
3 
 
Applicant’s wife came to the United States in April 2011, lives with Applicant, and 
intends to become a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 51-52.) She is a medical doctor and is preparing 
to take a medical licensing examination so that she can practice in the United States. 
(Tr. 62.) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, two sisters-in-law, and two brothers-in-
law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. His father-in-law is retired from a medical-
related profession, and his mother-in-law has never worked outside the home. 
Applicant’s wife has contact with her parents about once a month. Applicant does not 
initiate any contacts with his wife’s family. (Tr. 63-65, 72-73.) 
 
 One of Applicant’s brothers-in-law works for a cell phone company and the other 
works for a private company that provides services for educational institutions. One 
sister-in-law is a housewife married to the owner of a construction company and the 
other is an unmarried college student. (Tr. 68-72.) None of his in-laws are connected 
with the government. 
 
 Applicant recognizes the security issues raised by his family members with 
foreign connections, and he does not talk about his work with his wife, her family 
members, or his parents. He does not bring his business laptop home and does not use 
his personal computer for work. (Tr. 66-68, 82.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are U.S. citizens. (Tr. 58.) He asserted that his mother 
renounced her Pakistani citizenship, but there is no documentary evidence of a 
renunciation. (Answer to SOR.) Applicant’s parents live in his house. (Tr. 53.) Applicant 
estimates that the house is worth between $550,000 and $600,000. (AX A.) 
 
 In addition to his house, Applicant has about $21,000 in a 401k retirement 
account, an IRA account worth about $6,000, and $30,000 in savings and investments. 
He has no financial interests outside the United States. (AX A; Tr. 75.) 
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor, a technical manager for their employer, met 
Applicant when they were coworkers for another employer. His supervisor recruited him 
to work for their current employer in early 2010. His supervisor testified that he “does 
great work.” His supervisor considers him a team player, very dedicated, dependable, 
and ethical. (Tr. 24-33.) 
 
 A senior vice-president of Applicant’s company has known Applicant since 
January 2010. She regards him as a person with strong ethics and high integrity. (AX 
B.) A former coworker, two current coworkers, and a former classmate expressed the 
same favorable opinion of Applicant’s character and ethics. (AX C-F.) Applicant’s facility 
security officer has no doubts about his commitment to protect sensitive information or 
his loyalty to the United States. (AX G.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Pakistan is a parliamentary federal 
republic with whom the U.S. has had diplomatic relations since 1947. Until 1990, the 
United States provided substantial military aid to Pakistan, but it was suspended as part 
4 
 
of the sanctions imposed in response to Pakistan’s nuclear weapons program. After 
September 11, 2001, the sanctions were suspended in recognition of Pakistan’s support 
for the U.S. campaign against terrorism, but its record in dealing with terrorists and 
militants has been mixed. It has persistently pursued militants it considers dangerous to 
Pakistan’s interests, but it maintains its historical support of the Taliban and it considers 
militant groups to be important in its efforts to counter India’s military and economic 
advantages. Many Al Qaeda and Taliban fugitives use the loosely-controlled border 
regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan as a safe haven. Travel to Pakistan is 
dangerous for U.S. citizens, because extremist groups in Pakistan target American and 
other Western interests, senior Pakistani officials, and members of minority indigenous 
and religious groups. Pakistan has a poor human rights record and suffers from wide-
spread government corruption. There is no evidence that Pakistan targets the United 
States for economic, scientific, or military intelligence.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
5 
 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s wife is a citizen and resident of Pakistan (SOR 
¶ 1.a); his mother is a dual citizen of Pakistan and the United States and resides in the 
United States (SOR ¶ 1.b); and his father-in-law, mother-in-law, sisters-in-law, and 
brothers-in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan. (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). The 
security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “[E]ven 
friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States over matters 
they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). We know that friendly 
nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the 
economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant has partially refuted SOR ¶ 1.a with evidence that his wife resides with 
him in the United States. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b that his mother is a dual 
citizen, and he asserted that she renounced her Pakistani citizenship. The Government 
produced no evidence of Pakistan’s laws regarding dual citizenship and did not include 
information about dual citizenship in its request for administrative notice.  
6 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). The evidence shows that Applicant’s contacts with his in-laws are minimal. 
However, “there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). While Applicant 
expressed no affection for his in-laws, he has not rebutted the presumption that he has 
ties of obligation to them. 
 
There is no evidence that Pakistan targets the United States for military, 
scientific, or economic intelligence. However, the presence of hostile terrorist and 
insurgent organizations in Pakistan and Applicant’s wife’s close ties with her family 
members in Pakistan create the “heightened risk” contemplated by AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) 
and the “potential conflict of interest” contemplated by AG ¶ 7(b). Thus, I conclude that 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) are established. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that 
“the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons 
are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it 
is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant’s wife resides with him in the United States, making it 
unlikely that she would be forced by terrorists or insurgents to make the hard choice 
between foreign interests and the interests of the United States. However, the presence 
7 
 
of hostile terrorist and insurgent groups in Pakistan and his wife’s close relationships 
with her family members in Pakistan preclude application of this mitigating condition. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
“there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). Applicant and his family have lived in the United States for 18 
years. He completed his grade school, high school, and college tuition in the United 
States. He owns a home and has substantial financial assets in the United States, and 
he has no financial assets outside the United States. He has earned the trust of his 
supervisors and coworkers. He has carefully compartmentalized his work life to avoid 
risking inadvertent disclosures of sensitive information. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is 
established. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing 
that “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG 
¶ 8(c). There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family 
member in a foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 1, 2002). Applicant has no immediate family members in Pakistan, and he has 
virtually no contact with his wife’s immediate family. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(c) is not 
established for his relationship with his wife, but it is established for his contact with his 
in-laws. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline(s), but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has lived his entire adult life in the United States. All his immediate 
family members are citizens and residents of the United States. He has a reputation for 
reliability and integrity. He conscientiously protects information related to his 
employment. He was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant 
him eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
