 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04327 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 26, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017. Due to a 
hurricane and delays associated with federal funding, the hearing was scheduled and 
canceled several times. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on April 2, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 19, 2018. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A and B. There were no objections to any exhibits, and they were admitted into 
evidence.2 The record was held open until May 3, 2018, to permit the submission of 
additional documents. Applicant submitted AE C through E. There was no objection and 
they were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 27, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He attended a military service academy for three years, 
but sustained an injury, had academic difficulty, and did not graduate. He then attended 
a state college, took off two semesters, returned to college, and received his bachelor’s 
degree in 2012. He is not married and has no children. He has been employed since 
graduating college.3  
 
 Applicant credibly testified that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c were paid in 
March 2016. He stated that he was unaware the debts were delinquent, but he likely did 
not receive the bills because he moved several times. He stated they are no longer on 
his November 2017 credit report. He was unable to obtain receipts because they were in 
his vehicle, which had been broken into.4 
 
 Applicant’s student loans became delinquent when he stopped attending school 
for two semesters. When he reenrolled in school, the student loans remained in default 
status, and were due immediately even though he was back at school. He could not pay 
them at that time. The student loans are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.m. In March 
2016, he consolidated the student loans. He stated that one of the student loans was not 
consolidated, and it is either ¶ 1.h or ¶ 1.m, but he has been unable to determine which 
one. Despite researching, he was unable to determine why this loan could not be included 
in the consolidation. He has the money to pay it, but is still trying to find the correct 
creditor. He has been paying $592 a month since March 2016 toward the consolidated 
loans. He increased his monthly payments based on his income since he began paying. 
He testified that he was not proactive in paying his student loans after he graduated 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is the Government’s discovery letter.  
 
3 Tr. 14-19. 
 
4 Tr. 22-24; AE B. 
 
3 
 
 
because he had other debts, and wanted to wait until his finances were stable. He knew 
he was responsible for his student loans and always intended on paying them. He felt 
overwhelmed with them, but since his student loans were consolidated, he feels his 
finances are under control. He agreed that receipt of the SOR was the impetus for him to 
address his delinquent student loans.5  
  
Applicant took a loan from his 401(k) account in approximately March 2018. He 
planned to use the loan to pay any remaining outstanding accounts he has and once he 
finds the correct creditor on the last student loan, he will pay it. He then intends to repay 
the pension loan.6 
 
After the hearing, Applicant stated that he attempted to contact the creditor for the 
student loan that he could not consolidate. He was unable to find the current creditor of 
the loan. The original creditor transferred him to a third party that handled the loan and 
twice he was informed that the loan had been paid in full and had a zero balance. He was 
then referred to the national student loan data base that maintains a record of all current 
and former student loans and grant. Applicant attached an image of his profile from the 
data base, which did not show any outstanding loans. He indicated that it is possible that 
the student loans were not updated after he consolidated them, or he has not yet found 
out the new creditor, if that loan was sold. He stated he would continue to search for a 
definitive status on the loan and will pay it in full once he locates the creditor. He has his 
401(k) loan money to resolve the student loan.7   
 
 Applicant testified that in the past he had contacted a debt-repair company 
regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($1,969). It was an old loan he received when he started 
college. Because of its age, it was close to the statute of limitations, and he was advised 
to not start payments, which would revitalize it. He stated he was in college then and did 
not have the money to pay it when it became due. Applicant provided a document after 
the hearing to show he recently paid the debt. Applicant does not have any other 
delinquent debts. All of his current expenses are paid.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 21, 30-36, 53-54; AE A. 
  
6 Tr. 28-30, 46-48. 
 
7 AE C and D.  
 
8 Tr. 25-28, 48-49; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts and student loans from at least 2012 that he was 
unable or unwilling to resolve. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts and student loans that he did not address until after 
he receive the SOR. He explained his financial problems began when he stopped 
attending college for two semesters and his student loans became due. Because he had 
returned to college, he did not have the money to pay the loans. He was aware of a 
 
6 
 
 
student loan that went unpaid for years. These factors were within his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant was working 
full time and has no dependents. His failure to address his debts and student loans until 
after receipt of the SOR does not equate to acting responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant paid the medical debts he was unaware of. He recently paid the student 
loan that he was advised to not pay and let the statute of limitation run. He consolidated 
his student loans and has been making steady payments since March 2016. He obtained 
a loan from his pension plan to cover one student loan that he is continuing to research. 
Applicant’s resolution of his delinquent debts and consistent payments toward his 
consolidated student loans since March 2016 shows that there are clear indications that 
his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Although his actions 
did not take place until after receipt of the SOR, he has resolved his delinquent debts and 
is repaying his student loans. I find he is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors and resolve his financial issues. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He does not have a stellar financial record, but he made 
an earnest effort to begin resolving his delinquent debts and student loans after receiving 
the SOR. I considered his age when he accumulated the debt and student loans, and his 
recent actions as a more mature adult. Applicant understands the importance of 
continuing to pay his student loans and to not accumulate new delinquent debts. I believe 
 
7 
 
 
he is committed to paying all of his financial obligations. The record evidence does not 
leave me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
