 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08525 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
        Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
March 2, 2015.1 On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which revised and replaced the 2006 AGs and 
became effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied the newly revised AGs to this decision. 
 
                                                          
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 23, 2016, admitting all of the allegations in 
the SOR except SOR ¶ 1.e. She requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing for February 26, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – G, including a custody and 
visitation order, a child support order, a gift letter, and two character-reference letters. I 
agreed to leave the record open until March 12, 2018, for supplemental documentation. 
(Tr. 36) Post-hearing, AE H through AE K were admitted without objection. AE H (two 
pages) is an agreement to allow the creditor at SOR ¶ 1.a to automatically debit 
Applicant’s bank account starting on July 20, 2016. AE I is a statement from the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.e, stating that Applicant’s account has been closed with no further 
obligations. AE J is a statement from the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c stating that this account 
was satisfied on July 6, 2017. AE K is a March 9, 2018 credit report.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She graduated from high school in 2003, and took 
some college courses. (Tr. 26) She never married but reports one son, age 11. (Tr. 19) 
The father of her son was incarcerated for 10 years in 2012. (AE C) He is in arrears on 
his child-support obligations for over $9,000. (AE D) Applicant receives no child support. 
She has been employed as a senior logistician for a federal contractor since June 2015, 
and she was previously employed as an administrative assistant by a federal contractor 
since June 2010. She reports a previous security clearance granted in 2004.  
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling $35,292, including debts placed 
for collections, and charged-off debts. Applicant admitted all of the alleged delinquent 
debts in her Answer to the SOR, except for ¶ 1.e, and ¶ 1.i. The latter was paid in full. 
(Tr. 40) SOR ¶ 1.e was not her account. (AE I, Tr. 38) The telecommunications 
company creditor conceded that it was mistakenly attributed to Applicant, and it no 
longer appears on her credit report. (AE K, Tr. 38)  
 
Applicant’s financial issues started when she was laid off in 2010 by her previous 
federal-contractor employer. She remained unemployed for three months.3 Applicant 
moved in with her family to cut her expenses. She is also a single mother and receives 
no child support. (Tr. 27) She engaged a credit counseling firm from 2012 to 2014 to 
help her resolve her financial problems, but she quit because that firm paid no interest 
on payments that she made to the firm. (Tr. 29.) She stated in her Answer “I have made 
arrangements with my creditors to resolve all debts by 2019.” 
           .    
 Applicant attached to her Answer an agreement with the creditor to make five 
payments of $100 each, starting on August 1, 2016, to satisfy the debt at SOR ¶ 1.a. 
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 2, 2015 SCA. 
(GE 1)  
 
3 Answer, and Item 1.  
 
3 
 
 
She also attached documentation showing payments of $100 a month starting on March 
31, 2014, by automatic debit from her bank account to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Applicant testified that she made a final payment on September 28, 2016 to the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.h. (Tr. 18). She attached a separate agreement with the creditor at SOR ¶ 
1.b to pay $50 each month starting in July 2016. Applicant testified that the delinquent 
debt in  SOR ¶ 1.f has been paid in full. (Tr. 39) The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c has been paid-in 
full. (AE J)   
 
Applicant testified that she recently purchased a home and her mortgage 
payments are $3,655 per month. (Tr. 16, AE A) She had to improve her credit in order 
to qualify for a mortgage. She has been making mortgage payments for four months. 
She received a $75,000 gift from her now deceased grandmother to help her pay off 
debts, and make a down payment on the house. (Tr. 22, AE E) She used $13,000 from 
that gift as a down payment on the house, which cost $540,000 to purchase. (Tr. 43) 
Applicant splits the monthly mortgage payments with her boyfriend. (Tr. 52) Her salary 
is $65,000 per year. Her latest credit report reflects that she is current on all accounts 
and she has no additional delinquencies. Her credit score is now 665. (AE K) She also 
provided two character references attesting to her good character, honesty and 
trustworthiness. (AE F and AE G) 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant admitted to most of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, which are 
supported by her credit reports. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
  (c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the  
 problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has now resolved, or entered into a payment plan to resolve virtually all 
of the alleged delinquent debts. She had compelling family and economic 
circumstances that explained her financial problems, including a period of 
unemployment. She is a single mother receiving no child support since the father of her 
child is incarcerated. These were factors beyond her control. Applicant has since 
contacted her creditors to make payment arrangements. She followed through with a 
demonstrated track record of consistent payments pursuant to installment plans with her 
major creditors. Virtually all of her delinquent debts are now being addressed by 
payment plans, or otherwise resolved. Applicant has produced evidence that she 
substantially paid or addressed eight of the nine alleged delinquent debts in the SOR. 
She has received financial counseling and she has a viable plan going forward. 
Applicant has acted responsibly despite adverse circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
20(c) and 20(d) apply. I am satisfied that her delinquent debts are being resolved.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s finances are no longer a security concern. There are ample 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She provided two 
character references attesting to her trustworthiness. The record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.i:             For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                   
    _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
 
7 
 
 
 
