 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 15-06042 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq. and Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant paid the only delinquent debt listed on the statement of reasons (SOR) 
in 2016. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. He did not mitigate 
personal conduct security concerns related to false statements about earning a bachelor’s 
degree in 2004. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 28, 2010, and December 9, 2014, Applicant completed and signed 
Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance applications 
(SCA). Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 2. On March 29, 2016, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006. Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). HE 2. 
 
On August 29, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a hearing. Transcript (Tr.) 9; HE 3. On November 28, 2016, Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed. On August 15, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On September 22, 
2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
setting the hearing for October 19, 2017. HE 1A. On November 1, 2017, DOHA issued 
the second notice of hearing, setting the hearing for November 20, 2017. HE 1B. On 
November 20, 2017, DOHA issued the third notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
December 13, 2017. HE 1C. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled on the third 
notice.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 18 exhibits; Applicant offered 16 
exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
Tr. 13-15; GE 1-18; Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1-AE 16. On December 21, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. On February 8, 2018, the record closed. 
Tr. 58. No post-hearing documentation was received.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), which are applicable to all covered individuals who require 
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a 
sensitive position. The new AGs are effective on June 8, 2017. I have evaluated 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he made partial admissions to the SOR allegations 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. HE 3. His SOR response also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old logistics specialist. Tr. 6, 9. He served in the Army from 
1983 to 2009 (26 years). Tr. 27, 35. In 1984, he married, and in 2010, he divorced. GE 1. 
In 2011, he married, and his child was born in 1989. GE 1. He retired from the Army as a 
master sergeant. In 2005, he deployed to Afghanistan, and in 2006, Applicant injured his 
back in Afghanistan. Tr. 32-33. He received 4 major back surgeries and 15 other medical 
procedures. Tr. 33. He held a security clearance while in the Army, and there are no 
allegations of security violations. Tr. 28. 
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant has a Social Security Administration (SSA) debt 
placed for collection for $29,949. Around 2007 or 2008, Applicant received a briefing from 
a SSA representative about applying for benefits while he was receiving medical 
treatment for his back. Tr. 34-35. He believed he was authorized SSA benefits, and he 
applied for benefits. Tr. 35. He said he did not understand that SSA disability benefits are 
limited if someone is receiving a salary, and he was receiving his Army salary for active 
duty service at the same time he was receiving SSA payments. Tr. 41-42. In 2016, SSA 
advised Applicant of the $29,949 debt, and in 2016, he paid it. Tr. 36, 41; AE 7; AE 8; GE 
9.  
 
Applicant provided a budget. AE 9. He has monthly gross income of $9,000 and a 
monthly remainder of $5,908 after paying his debts. AE 9. The SOR does not allege any 
other delinquent debts.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Applicant had a total of 32 college credits from two colleges before he joined the 
Army in 1983. Tr. 29. While in the Army, he earned 48 additional credit hours from a 
college. Tr. 29.  
 
This case involves two universities. One university is located within 500 miles of 
Miami, Florida (University H), and the other university is located within 300 miles of 
Washington D.C. (University K). The names of the two universities are similar.  
 
Applicant said that in 2003, he provided all of his college-education documentation 
through the Internet to University K. Tr. 30, 46. He completed a “pre-application test 
online,” and he did not take any classes, generate any papers, or take any tests. Tr. 38, 
46-47. In 2004, he received a bachelor’s degree in logistics management from University 
K. Tr. 30, 46. He said he received a transcript from the on-line university, and he assumed 
“at that time it was all valid.” Tr. 30. He paid $500 for the bachelor’s degree. Tr. 39.  
 
In 2012 or 2013, Applicant learned the university was not an accredited university. 
Tr. 31. SOR ¶ 2.a alleges Applicant was terminated from his employment from Company 
A in January 2014 because he falsified or used “for unauthorized purposes, any 
[c]ompany records or credentials.” Company A’s facility security officer (FSO) said 
Applicant needed a bachelor’s degree to be employed in his position at Company A. GE 
8. Applicant told his FSO that he had a bachelor’s degree. Tr. 40. In 2014, Company A’s 
FSO confronted Applicant with the allegation that he provided false information about his 
educational background. Tr. 39-40. The FSO said Applicant told him he received a degree 
from a university located within 500 miles of Miami, Florida (University H), and Applicant 
provided a transcript that “looked real.” Tr. 40; GE 8. The FSO said that University H is a 
“non-traditional university and only issued diplomas based on life experience.” AE 8. At 
his hearing, Applicant denied that he said he went to University H, and instead claimed 
he told his FSO about attending University K. Tr. 40. 
    
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant provided documentation from the Internet about University H that 
indicates University H is accredited. AE 10. On October 4, 2017, a student advisor at 
University H emailed Applicant and told him that he should provide $5,000 so that 
University H could begin the “credit transfer process.” AE 10. University H told Applicant 
that the credit transfer process required submission of “documents to multiple 
universities,” apparently to verify completion of courses at other universities. AE 10. 
Department Counsel provided documentation that University H is not accredited, and in 
one instance, an MBA degree was purchased from University H for an animal. GE 12-GE 
18. 
 
Applicant said at the time he obtained the degree, and when he applied for 
employment with Company A, University K was accredited. Tr. 48. He did not save any 
documentation about his research concerning the accreditation of University K. Tr. 48. 
He said, in November 2014, that he learned from his FSO that University K was not 
accredited. Tr. 51. University K appears to be an institution that offers an annual course 
about local government, and it does not provide bachelor’s degrees. GE 10.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c allege Applicant falsified his June 28, 2010, and December 9, 
2014 SCAs in which he stated that he attended University K “from 4/2002 to 11/2004 
(estimated),” and he was awarded a bachelor’s degree in November 2004. Applicant 
admitted he provided the information as indicated in the two SORs. Tr. 44. He said 
University K gave him the address within 300 miles of Washington D.C., and before his 
hearing, he received the address for the city where University H is located. Tr. 44. He 
insisted his degree was from University K, and he did not understand how University H 
was involved. Tr. 45.3 The statement that he attended University K for two years was a 
“mistake,” and he regretted that he gave a false impression that he attended University K 
for two years. Tr. 46. At the time he listed University K in his December 9, 2014 SCA, he 
knew it was not an accredited university. Tr. 52.   
 
Applicant attempted to obtain documentation from University H because he gave 
his documentation to an employer and lost his personal copy of the documentation he 
received in 2004. Tr. 32. He sent emails to University H, and he said University H refused 
to provide documentation unless he paid $5,000. Tr. 32, 37; AE 12. Applicant did not 
attend classes at University H’s physical location. Tr. 38. 
 
Applicant’s May 1, 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject 
interview (PSI) indicates Applicant said he did not receive a degree from University K; 
however, Applicant said he told the OPM investigator that he did receive a degree from 
University K. Tr. 42. He said he told the OPM investigator that he did not physically attend 
the university. Tr. 47. Once he learned the diploma was invalid, and the school was not 
accredited, he lost the diploma. Tr. 48. Applicant did not provide, and the file does not 
contain, diplomas or transcripts from Universities H or K. 
                                            
3 Applicant provided information about University H downloaded from the Internet on September 
29, 2017, as an exhibit for his hearing indicating University H was accredited, and he provided a confusing 
explanation for his rationale for providing this information. Tr. 53-54; AE 10. Department Counsel provided 
documentation showing some unaccredited universities were using unreliable Internet accreditation 
services. GE 15-17. 
 
5 
                                         
 
Applicant’s resume indicates, B.A. in Logistics Management [GPA: 3.6], University 
K in 2004. GE 6 at 2. Submission of a false resume was not listed in the SOR, and this 
allegation will not be considered for any purpose in this decision. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
A federal government employee has known Applicant for about 10 years, and he 
supervised Applicant for a time. Tr. 17-19. Applicant is professional, honest, diligent, 
trustworthy, and reliable. Tr. 20-26. Letters from five friends or colleagues describe 
Applicant as honest, trustworthy, and reliable. AE 12-AE 16.  
 
Applicant has received the following ribbons and medals: five Meritorious Service 
Medals (MSM), two Army Commendation Medals (ARCOM); four Army Achievement 
Medals (AAM); eight Army Good Conduct Medals (AGCM); and other medals and 
ribbons. AE 1. He completed numerous military training courses and received several 
certificates of achievement and letters of commendation. Tr. 28-29; AE 1; AE 3; AE 4. His 
reason for separation on his DD Form 214 is indicated as permanent disability. AE 1. He 
has excellent noncommissioned officer evaluation reports (NCOERs) and civilian 
performance evaluations. AE 2; AE 6. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
 
6 
                                         
 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and Director of National Intelligence have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
 
7 
                                         
 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
One financial considerations mitigating condition under AG ¶ 20 is potentially 
applicable in this case: “(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”4  
 
The record in this case does not establish that Applicant fraudulently obtained the 
SSA overpayment of $29,708. In 2016, Applicant repaid the SSA debt, and he established 
his good faith under AG ¶ 20(d). There are no other allegations of delinquent debts. 
Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.5 
 
The record establishes AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant falsified his June 28, 2010, and 
December 9, 2014 SCAs in which he stated that he attended University K “from 4/2002 
to 11/2004 (estimated),” and he was awarded a bachelor’s degree in November 2004. He 
did not “attend” University K for two years. He did not receive a bachelor’s degree from 
University K. Applicant’s Company A FSO confronted him about the diploma issue, and 
then Applicant was fired for using a false credential (bachelor’s degree) to obtain 
employment.   
 
AG ¶ 17 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns under Guideline E: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
                                         
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant falsified his June 28, 2010, and 
December 9, 2014 SCAs about attendance at University K “from 4/2002 to 11/2004 
(estimated),” and award of a bachelor’s degree in November 2004. He lied to his 
employer, Company A, about having a bachelor’s degree. His falsifications are serious 
and not mitigated. Applicant cannot be trusted to admit embarrassing negative 
information even when that information is sought in a security context. Personal conduct 
security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
10 
                                         
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old logistics specialist. He served in the Army from 1983 to 
2009. He medically retired from the Army as a master sergeant. In 2005, he deployed to 
Afghanistan. In 2006, Applicant injured his back in Afghanistan. He received 4 major back 
surgeries and 15 other medical procedures. He held a security clearance while in the 
Army, and there are no allegations of security violations.  
 
Five letters and one hearing statement from Applicant’s friends or colleagues 
describe Applicant as diligent, professional, honest, trustworthy, and reliable. He has 
received the following awards and medals: five MSMs, two ARCOMs; four AAMs; eight 
AGCMs; and other medals and ribbons. He completed numerous military and civilian 
training courses and received several certificates of achievement and letters of 
commendation. He has excellent NCOERs and civilian performance evaluations. He paid 
the only delinquent debt alleged on the SOR. 
 
 The evidence against mitigation of security concerns is more substantial. 
Applicant’s falsely indicated on his SCAs in 2010 and 2014 and to his employer in 2014 
that he had a bachelor’s degree, when he knew that he did not have a legitimate 
bachelor’s degree. His false statements were deliberate, improper, and made with intent 
to deceive. AG ¶ 15 indicates, “Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes.” Applicant’s falsifications raise serious security concerns. The protection of 
national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes security, even 
when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant cannot be trusted to 
disclose potentially derogatory information related to security issues. He did not establish 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct 
security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
 
11 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
