 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03413 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding personal conduct and criminal 
conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 24, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (1st e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On October 5, 2015, he submitted another Security Clearance 
Application (2nd e-QIP). On December 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
 
2 
                                      
 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.1 The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct), and Guideline C (Foreign Preference),2 and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on January 1, 2017. On January 5, 2017, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on March 20, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017.  A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
May 3, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 20, 2017. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 5, and Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE S were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 28, 2017. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that opportunity and timely 
submitted additional documents, which were marked and admitted as AE T through AE 
W, without objection. The record closed on June 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant partially admitted, with comments, several of 
the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 1.b. through 1.g., and 1.i.), but 
denied the remaining portions of those allegations as well as other allegations; and the 
factual allegations pertaining to criminal conduct (¶ 2.a.) in the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been with his 
current employer since June 2017, serving in a flexible position inspecting and repairing 
airplanes and boats, and fabricating parts. He had been a field service representative 
(FSR) or engineer with other employers until mid-2015, when he was let go because the 
security clearance review process was not concluded fast enough to retain him. He has 
also owned a company since 1989, working on European automobiles. Foreign-born and 
                                                          
1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 
10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were 
established to supersede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. 
Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on September 1, 2006, under which this security 
clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the two versions, there is no substantial 
difference that might have an effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
2 Upon a motion by Department Counsel during the hearing to withdraw the foreign preference 
allegations under Guideline C, and there being no objection, the motion was granted and the allegations 
were withdrawn. No further references to the Guideline C allegations appear below. See Tr. at 15-16. 
 
3 
                                      
 
a 1987 naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant earned his foreign version of a high school 
diploma in 1972, and a master’s degree in automotive engineering and technology in 
1976. He has also received an associate’s degree in 1999. Before he came to the United 
States in 1979, Applicant was required to complete one year of compulsory Austrian 
military service, but he contended that because of a medical condition, he was drafted 
and discharged four decades ago. In 1981 he enlisted in the Air National Guard and he 
remained in an active capacity until he was honorably discharged as an airman (E-2) in 
September 1982.3 Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in 1981, and 
maintained it until 1991, and again in 2012, and in 2014, he was granted eligibility for a 
moderate risk public trust (MRPT) position in 2014.4 Applicant was married in 1980 and 
divorced in 1987. He remarried in 1990 and divorced in 1996.  He again remarried in 
1998. He had three sons, born in 1982 (died in 2017), 1984, and 1986.  
 
Applicant has spent a substantial amount of time working overseas in a civilian 
capacity in support of U.S. military objectives in Iraq and Afghanistan. He was assigned 
to Iraq from April 2005 until April 2006, from April 2006 until November 2007, and from 
November 2007 until November 2010. He was assigned to Afghanistan from July 2012 
until February 2013, and from April 2013 until July 2013. 
 
Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct5 
 
 The SOR alleged eight incidents of criminality by Applicant over a period of two 
decades, commencing in 1990 and continuing until 2010. In addition to those incidents, 
the SOR alleged two incidents of personal conduct in 2015 associated with Applicant’s 
alleged falsifications on his 2nd e-QIP. The alleged incidents of criminality are as follows: 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): Applicant was arrested in about January 1990 and charged with hull 
identification number removal, a felony.6  Applicant contends that the boat in question 
                                                          
3 AE J (Report of Separation and Record of Service); AE J (Honorable Discharge Certificate). 
 
4 Tr. at 9-10. 
 
5 General source information pertaining to the alleged incidents of criminality discussed below can 
be found in the following exhibits: GE 4 (U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Report of 
Investigation (ROI) - Personal Subject Interview, dated March 16, 2012); GE 3 (U.S. Department of State 
(DOS) ROI – Subject Interview, undated, but after December 11, 2013); GE 2 (OPM ROI – Personal Subject 
Interview, dated February 8, 2016; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated January 5, 2017). 
  
6 GE 3, supra note 5, at 10-11; GE 4, supra note 5, at 6; GE 2, supra note 5, at 9-10. The state law 
associated with hull identification removal states: 
 
(2) No person shall operate, use, or store on the waters of this state a vessel the 
construction of which was completed before November 1, 1972, for which the department 
has issued a certificate of title or which is required by law to be registered, unless the vessel 
displays a hull identification number. The hull identification number shall be clearly 
imprinted in the transom or on the hull by stamping, impressing, or marking with pressure. 
In lieu of imprinting, the hull identification number may be displayed on a plate in a 
permanent manner. A vessel for which the manufacturer has provided no hull identification 
number or a homemade vessel shall be assigned a hull identification number by the 
department which shall be affixed to the vessel pursuant to this section. 
 
4 
                                      
 
was his, and it was at his own workshop location when it was damaged while he was 
backing up a truck, and he accidently backed into the back and side of the boat, tearing 
off the transom which had the hull identification number attached to it. Shortly thereafter, 
two police officers visited his shop to question him about a stolen vehicle, and while they 
were questioning him, they noticed his boat. They accused him of altering the hull 
identification number and arrested him. Applicant initially said he did not recall ever going 
to court and the incident was dropped.7 He subsequently said that he went to court and 
explained that all charges were dropped, without fines or probation, and the boat was 
returned to him.8  The 2016 OPM investigator reported that adjudication was withheld for 
two years, and there was ten days probation.9  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): Applicant was arrested in about January 1990 and charged with 
perjury in an official proceeding, a felony.10 Applicant contends that his brother used one 
of his vehicles while on vacation in this country and he received a ticket. Although his 
brother had a driver’s license, and he purportedly signed the traffic citation, it was 
Applicant’s brother and not Applicant who was the driver who signed the citation. 
Applicant denied that he was ever involved in the incident.11 The 2016 OPM ROI stated 
the perjury “disposition: 2 years 10 days,” and a fraud “disposition: 2 years of probation.”12  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): Applicant was arrested in June 1996 and charged with aggravated 
assault – weapon, a felony.13 Applicant offered two scenarios. He initially said he was not 
aware of the incident and denied ever having been charged with anything like that.14 He 
subsequently said that he did not recall the incident.15 However, in his Response to the 
SOR, Applicant remembered the incident. He said he was attacked at a traffic light by a 
man with a machete in an incident of road rage. Applicant used his son’s baseball bat to 
                                                          
(3)(a) No person, firm, association, or corporation shall destroy, remove, alter, cover, or 
deface the hull identification number or hull serial number, or plate bearing such number, 
of any vessel, except to make necessary repairs which require the removal of the hull 
identification number and immediately upon completion of such repairs shall reaffix the hull 
identification number in accordance with subsection (2). 
 
Title XXIV, §328.07, Hull identification number required 
 
7 GE 4, supra note 5, at 6. 
 
8 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11; Tr. at 44-45. 
 
9 GE 2, supra note 5, at 9. The OPM ROI did not provide a source or basis for this statement. 
 
10 GE 2, supra note 5, at 9-10. 
 
11 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 5, at 2; Tr. at 55-56. 
 
12 GE 2, supra note 5, at 10. The OPM ROI did not provide a source or basis for this statement. 
 
13 GE 4, supra note 5, at 8; GE 2, supra note 5, at 9-10. 
 
14 GE 4, supra note 5, at 8. 
 
15 GE 2, supra note 5, at 10. 
 
5 
                                      
 
defend himself against the machete-wielding aggressor. He also named a witness to the 
incident. He contends the charges were dismissed.16 The 2016 OPM ROI indicated that 
the charge of aggravated assault may have been combined with resisting or obstruction 
an officer without violence. While one section of the ROI said “no disposition,” another 
section said court costs $105, and a third section said disposition “unknown.”17  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f.): Applicant was arrested in November 1998 and charged 
with retail theft, a felony; kidnap of a minor, a felony; custodial interference; and out of 
state fugitive.18 When Applicant was divorced, his ex-wife was granted sole physical 
custody of their youngest child, and he was granted sole physical custody of the two older 
children, with each parent having reasonable visitation rights.19 Several years later, 
Applicant’s ex-wife asked him if the two older boys could come back to her to reside for 
“a little while.” He verbally agreed without formally altering the custody status. At about 
the same time, the youngest child, then around 16 years of age, came to visit Applicant 
during a school break. That child asked Applicant if he could remain with his father rather 
than returning to his mother. When Applicant informed his ex-wife of the situation, she 
was infuriated. He did not hear from her again, but unbeknownst to him, his ex-wife had 
contacted the authorities and reported that Applicant had kidnapped their son. A warrant 
was issued for Applicant’s arrest.20 
 
Applicant and his youngest son were shopping together, and as they left the store, 
a security guard stopped them and inquired about items that the son had taken. 
Applicant’s son had shoplifted two watches, worth about $12 each. In a moment of panic 
and instinct, and concerned about his son’s future of potentially staining his record at such 
a young age, Applicant took responsibility for the theft. Applicant and the security guard 
then got into an altercation and the police arrived to break them up. The police ran a 
criminal check on Applicant, and it resulted in the report that a warrant was outstanding 
for kidnapping a minor.21 Applicant offered two scenarios. He initially said he was released 
that same day after posting bail, and that the charges were dropped before the scheduled 
court date because Applicant did have custody of the child.22 He subsequently indicated 
that he spent 14 days in jail, but was released after his story and the legal custody status 
were verified. He appeared in court and presented his explanation to the judge, and all 
charges were dropped. There were no fees, penalties, or probation.23 The 2016 OPM ROI 
                                                          
16 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 5, at 2; Tr. at 56-57. 
 
17 GE 2, supra note 5, at 9-10. The OPM ROI did not provide a source or basis for this statement. 
 
18 GE 4, supra note 5, at 8; GE 2, supra note 5, at 10; GE 3, supra note 5, at 11. 
 
19 AE V (Stipulation and Amendment to Final Order, dated August 12, 1988). 
 
20 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11; GE 4, supra note 5, at 8; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra 
note 5, at 2; Tr. at 64-66. 
 
21 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11. 
 
22 GE 4, supra note 5, at 8. 
 
23 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11; Tr. at 61. 
 
6 
                                      
 
indicated that the charges of kidnap of a minor and custodial interference were turned 
over to another agency, and there was no disposition for the kidnap charge. The charge 
of retail theft was not mentioned.24 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): Applicant was arrested in October 2003 and charged with driving on 
a suspended or revoked license; simple assault on officer, firefighter, emergency medical 
care provider, traffic accident investigation officer, traffic infraction enforcement officer, 
inspector, analyst, operator, law enforcement explorer, parking enforcement specialist, 
public transit employee or agent, or security officer engaged in the lawful performance of 
his or her duties, a misdemeanor; and resisting officer/obstructing justice without violence, 
a misdemeanor.25 Applicant explained that he was driving with his two older sons to a 
church function when he was stopped by the police for having an expired tag. Applicant 
explained to the officer that he had already paid for the tag but that it had not yet been 
received. When the officer ran Applicant’s name through his computer, he learned that 
Applicant’s license had been suspended. When the officer told him of the suspension, 
Applicant asked how that was possible, the officer refused to respond. Instead, the officer 
poked him in the chest and Applicant poked him back, telling the officer not to touch him. 
The officer grabbed him by the arm and pushed him to the ground. When other officers 
arrived at the scene, Applicant’s two sons jumped out of the car to stop the officers from 
hurting their father. All three were arrested and charged.26 Applicant appeared in court, 
explained what had happened, and presented evidence of the registration. All charges 
were dismissed.27 The 2016 OPM ROI confirmed that the charges were dismissed.28 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): The SOR alleged that Applicant was charged with failure to appear 
in about August 2004. With regard to this allegation, the information appearing in 
Applicant’s 2012 OPM ROI appears to be inconsistently garbled. It refers to an arrest on 
August 30, 2004 for failure to appear, to which Applicant initially denied ever being 
charged, and he denied having any knowledge of the incident to which it referred.29 The 
ROI also referred to an arrest in August 2005 for theft, as reported by Applicant in his 1st 
e-QIP.30 Applicant explained that in approximately 2002, he rented a storage container, 
placed it on his property, and used it for his business. Sometime in 2003, the container 
owner called to tell him that he needed the container back, and Applicant told him to come 
and get it. The owner never came to get it, and Applicant simply forgot about it. In August 
2005, upon returning home from Iraq, Applicant was arrested because the container had 
                                                          
 
24 GE 2, supra note 5, at 10. The OPM ROI did not provide a source or basis for this statement. 
 
25 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11-12; GE 4, supra note 5, at 8; GE 2, supra note 5, at 10. 
 
26 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11-12; GE 4, supra note 5, at 8; Tr. at 68-69. 
 
27 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11-12; GE 4, supra note 5, at 8; GE 2, supra note 5, at 10. 
 
28 GE 2, supra note 5, at 10. The OPM ROI did not provide a source or basis for this statement. 
 
29 GE 4, supra note 5, at 8. 
 
30 GE 4, supra note 5, at 5; AE N (1st e-QIP, dated August 24, 2010), at 48. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
been reported as stolen. He posted bail that same day. Applicant never had to go to court, 
and the charge was dismissed.31  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): Applicant was apprehended by military police in March 2010 and 
charged with larceny of less than $100 from the military exchange in Iraq.32 An 
investigation determined that Applicant had been observed selecting one compact disc 
(CD) and placing it in another CD case, and that he went through all final points of sale, 
and as he exited the facility, he was stopped and detained. Although there were several 
statements reportedly attached to the original Police Report, including one from a 
supposed eyewitness and another in which Applicant supposedly admitted the offense, 
no such attachments were submitted to me.33 Applicant contended that he purchased a 
backpack for over $150, and as he was departing, he was accused of theft and detained. 
A $15 CD was found in the backpack, but Applicant denied he put it there. When he was 
told that there was a video of him, he demanded to see it, but that request was denied. 
No charges were ever brought against him.34 
 
Additional Personal Conduct 
 
 In addition to those incidents of joint criminal conduct and personal conduct 
described above, the SOR alleged two incidents of personal conduct in 2015 associated 
with Applicant’s alleged falsifications on his 2nd e-QIP. The alleged incidents of personal 
conduct are as follows: 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): On October 5, 2015, when Applicant completed his 2nd e-QIP, he 
responded to a question pertaining to foreign military service found in Section 15. That 
question asked if he had ever served, as a civilian or military member in a foreign 
country’s military, intelligence, diplomatic, security forces, militia, other defense force, or 
government agency. Applicant answered “no.”35 He certified that his response to that 
question was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief. Before 
Applicant came to the United States in 1979, he was drafted into the Austrian Army over 
four decades ago and was medically discharged without serving.36 He contends he was 
accurate when he said he did not serve in the Austrian Army, and the earlier interpretation 
of what he said about foreign military service was misinterpreted. 
 
                                                          
31 GE 4, supra note 5, at 6. The 2012 OPM ROI does not cite to any information source, or source 
documents such as a FBI information record, police report, or court record, regarding the failure to appear 
charge or the theft charge, and there is no indication if the two charges are related. 
 
32 GE 5 (Military Police Report, dated March 7, 2010). 
 
33 GE 5, supra note 32, at 5. 
 
34 GE 4, supra note 5, at 2; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 5, at 3; Tr. at 75-76. 
 
35 GE 1 (2nd e-QIP, dated October 5, 2015), at 29. 
 
36 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 5, at 2; Tr. at 85. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.j.): On October 5, 2015, when Applicant completed his 2nd e-QIP, he also 
responded to a question pertaining to a question in Section 13A – Employment Activities. 
That question of particular interest was his reason for leaving his employment activity in 
December 2014. Applicant answered that he left because “end of contract.”37 He certified 
that his response to that question was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the response to that question may have been, in fact, false, for 
a number of reasons. The SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that 
he was discharged for unsatisfactory performance. 
 
Initially, there is a confusing statement attributed to Applicant in the 2012 OPM 
ROI in which he purportedly stated that following the March 2010 incident at the military 
exchange in Iraq, although his employer never wrote him up for the incident, Applicant 
“resigned to make the situation go away.”38 During the hearing, he repeated that 
scenario.39 Something in the timeline of events does not ring true for the incident occurred 
in March 2010, and Applicant did not leave his employer until December 2014. 
 
According to the Employee Guide issued by Applicant’s employer in October 2013, 
performance reviews are completed by the employee’s first line supervisor during the 
ninth month of employment in Afghanistan.40 On June 15, 2014, Applicant was given a 
formal counseling for unsatisfactory job performance and unproductive use of time. His 
manager/supervisor noted that Applicant had been trained for 30 days in Afghanistan; he 
had been counseled numerous times on his shortcomings; and during his 90 days in 
country, he did not possess the skills to work without direct supervision. Upon Applicant’s 
return from his R & R break, his supervisor said he would begin a 30-day Performance 
Improvement Opportunity Worksheet (PIOW) to better evaluate Applicant’s strengths and 
weaknesses.41 Applicant’s PIOW commenced on July 26, 2014, and during the period 
from that date until October 12, 2014, he was tasked with a multitude of assignments. He 
mastered some tasks, had a good working knowledge of other tasks, and he was 
experiencing difficulties because of a lack of confidence or lacking attention to detail on 
two tasks.42 Applicant successfully completed the PIOW, and his Program Quality Control 
Director acknowledged that it generally took an employee about six months to become 
proficient on one particular program, and Applicant was at the six-month point into his 
contract at that time.43 
 
                                                          
37 GE 1, supra note 35, at 19-20. 
 
38 GE 4, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
39 Tr. at 76-77. 
 
40 AE R (Employee Guide, dated October 1, 2013). 
 
41 AE O (Memorandum for Record, dated June 15, 2014). 
 
42 AE Q (PIOW, dated October 12, 2014). 
 
43 AE W (E-mail, dated June 27, 2017). 
 
9 
                                      
 
Applicant contends he was hired to be a quality control inspector in February 2014 
while in the United States, and because he was considered a rehire from a previous 
contract with the employer, he was held back, and it took almost two weeks before he 
could get on a computer to complete all mandatory training classes. The employer 
expected Applicant to be “turn-key” before his arrival in Afghanistan, but Applicant only 
received minimal guidance before his departure from the United States, and he had still 
not completed his job-qualification packet. He eventually completed it with one hundred 
percent accuracy.44  
 
Another issue was raised regarding Applicant’s employment in Afghanistan. 
Applicant was entitled to three meals per day, but because of his schedule, he could only 
eat once a day. On occasion he would take milk powder for three days using his meal 
card to do so. One management individual objected to Applicant’s practice, and he 
threatened Applicant that he would be written up if he did so again. As a result, Applicant 
sent an e-mail to both his program quality control director (PQCD) and the Human 
Resources (HR) Manager complaining about the meal issues.45 That same day, the HR 
Manager said she would look into the matter.46 Applicant’s PQCD believes that 
Applicant’s e-mail and his harsh comment about the in-country management team 
snowballed in an employee termination. His mediation efforts ultimately failed.47 
 
Applicant denied that he was fired for unsatisfactory performance. He successfully 
completed his PIOW, and he eventually went on approved leave. He subsequently 
received a notification from his employer that he had been terminated – an action which 
he considered unjust.48 He steadfastly contends that he resigned two weeks before his 
contract ended, and before he ever received notice of termination.49 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 The PQCD observed Applicant’s work ethics and character while he in-processed 
and completed his state-side training. Applicant appeared to be a good employee by 
following the work schedule and completing the necessary training. He attests to the fact 
that Applicant successfully completed the PIOW, and he noted that Applicant’s problem 
had to do with one particular program which normally takes an employee about six months 
in which to become proficient. Applicant was at that point. After Applicant contacted him 
about the food issue, he checked with that manager who told him there was an in-country 
policy on food items, but when asked, that manager was unable to produce a copy of the 
                                                          
44 AE P (Applicant’s Response to Memorandum for Record, dated June 15, 2014). 
 
45 AE S (E-mail, dated September 29, 2014). 
 
46 AE S, supra note 45. 
 
47 AE W, supra note 43. 
 
48 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 5, at 3. 
 
49 Tr. at 79-80, 83. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
policy. He believes this incident set the stage for continued hostilities between the 
parties.50 
The senior brigade maintenance technician, a Chief Warrant Officer 4, observed 
Applicant’s performance for one year while in Iraq. While serving as an International 
Military and Government (IMG) Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicle FSR 
during Operation Iraqi Freedom, Applicant quickly established himself as an asset for 
Soldiers working to maintain the newly field MRAPs. He spent countless hours training 
mechanics and developing their ability to repair the vehicles, and he went above his 
normal scope of work by fabricating repair parts needed to repair battle damaged MRAP 
and return them to the fight. Applicant’s efforts had a direct result in the decrease of 
Soldiers injured on the streets of Baghdad. He has seldom seen an FSR that can match 
Applicant’s knowledge. Applicant has demonstrated the mental and physical toughness 
to meet any challenge in a combat environment.51 
The executive officer of the Task Force Military Police for the forward operating 
base in Iraq, a major, noted that Applicant’s performance as the IMG MRAP FSR has 
been simply outstanding. Applicant’s overall mechanical expertise and analytical prowess 
have been vital in maintaining their MRAPs operational readiness. Applicant routinely 
spent long hours working side by side with the mechanics repairing damaged or dead-
lined MRAPs, ensuring that the Military Police going out in sector will have a fully 
operational MRAP. He considers Applicant a consummate professional who accepts 
nothing less than excellence from himself and those around him. His potential is unlimited 
and he will thrive when challenged.52 
The commander of forward support company operating in Iraq, a captain serving 
on his third deployment, was very high on Applicant because of his technical expertise, 
his proactive professional development and networking, and his ability to motivate. 
Applicant’s efforts directly influenced an operational readiness rate of over 96 percent. 
His accuracy in trouble shooting and diagnostic analysis saved the battalion millions of 
dollars which resulted in maximum time employed against the enemy, and contributing to 
the survivability of Soldiers in combat. Applicant taught classes to Combat Repair Teams 
and used his superior networking abilities and contacts to retrieve any part needed.53 
For his outstanding service and dedication in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom 
during the periods December 2004 until January 2005, and again during 2008 until 2009, 
Applicant was presented with a Certificate of Appreciation and several challenge coins.54 
                                                          
50 AE W, supra note 43. 
 
51 AE E (Character Reference, dated October 31, 2008). 
 
52 AE D (Character Reference, dated October 29, 2008). 
 
53 AE F (Character Reference, dated February 2, 2009). 
 
54 AE B (Certificate of Appreciation, dated February 6, 2005); AE H (Photographs of various 
challenge coins dated October 3, 2013). 
 
11 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”55 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”56   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”57 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.58  
 
                                                          
 
55 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
56 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
57 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
58 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”59  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”60 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, including those in the DOD CAF 
case file, those submitted by Applicant, his testimony, as well as an assessment of 
Applicant=s demeanor and credibility, and after application of all appropriate legal 
precepts and factors, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in 
the SOR: 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes two conditions under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security 
concerns: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
                                                          
59 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
60 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
With one exception related to an alleged incident in March 2010, there are 
allegations in a variety of ROIs that Applicant was, on a number of occasions, between 
January 1990 and March 2010, arrested and charged, or charged without being arrested 
with a variety of crimes. Applicant disputed the underlying bases of most of the incidents, 
and steadfastly denied one particular incident. It is troubling that the information pertaining 
to the alleged crimes were offered only through the ROIs without citing any information 
source, or source documents such as a FBI information record, police report, or court 
record. Furthermore, some of the information appears to have been relying on written or 
oral statements made by others adverse to Applicant relating to controverted issues, and 
Applicant has had no opportunity to have those statements, much less cross-examine 
those persons.61 Nevertheless, while the information of criminality is of poor quality,62 it 
has generally been “admitted” by Applicant, raising that information to the level of 
substantial evidence. Accordingly, based on the actions described above, AG ¶¶ 31(a) 
and 31(b) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from criminal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense;  
and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(c) apply, and AG ¶ 32(d) partially applies. As noted above, on 
a number of occasions between January 1990 and March 2010, Applicant was arrested 
and charged, or charged without being arrested with a variety of crimes. Reviewing the 
circumstances associated with the hull identification removal; the perjury; the aggressive 
                                                          
61 Directive, Encl. 1, § 4(a): “An applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to cross-examine persons 
who have made oral or written statements adverse to an applicant relating to a controverted issue except 
that such statement may be received and considered without affording such opportunity in the 
circumstances described in either of the following paragraphs:” - (neither of which apply). 
 
62 See Directive, Encl. 1, §§ 5 (a) and (b), with respect to using investigative reports. 
 
14 
                                      
 
assault during the road rage incident; the kidnapping; the assault of an officer; and the 
retail theft by his son, for which there were either dismissals or no clear evidence of 
convictions, leads to a conclusion that Applicant’s explanations are true. With regard to 
the alleged failure to appear charge, one which Applicant denied, the offense is not 
substantiated.  The alleged 2010 larceny was supported by a Military Police Report, but 
the supporting statements were missing. There was no evidence that Applicant was 
disciplined, leading one to question the validity of the charge.  
 
Because the ROIs did not report more than sketchy minimal information regarding 
those incidents, and some of the information was internally inconsistent or substantially 
incomplete, Applicant became the major source of the information regarding those 
incidents. With few exceptions, his explanations have gone unrebutted. For most of the 
alleged incidents, it appears that the charges were dismissed. However, even assuming 
that Applicant may have been found guilty of the alleged charges, so much time has 
elapsed since that alleged criminal behavior happened – at least eight years since the 
last alleged incident – and they happened under such unusual circumstances, and there 
have been no more recent similar behavior of conduct, it appears that it is unlikely to 
recur. Applicant has had, with the exception of one questionable issue with an employer, 
a good employment record, and placed himself in harm’s way, performing essential 
services for the U.S. military missions in Iraq and Afghanistan.  
 
A person should not be held forever accountable for misconduct from the past, and 
in this instance the most recent alleged criminal conduct is eight years ago. There are no 
concerns about future criminal conduct. Applicant’s past history of criminal conduct, under 
the circumstances, no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
15 
                                      
 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
My discussion related to Applicant’s criminal conduct is adopted herein. At the time 
Applicant completed his e-QIP in October 2015, he denied any foreign military service. 
He was drafted into the Austrian Army four decades earlier and subsequently medically 
discharged. He credibly said he did not actually serve in the Austrian Army. It was also 
alleged that Applicant was discharged by an employer for unsatisfactory performance, an 
allegation which Applicant disputed and denied when he said he departed the position at 
the end of contract. While there is evidence of early poor performance, there is zero 
evidence that the employer discharged him for poor performance, especially when his 
Program Quality Control Director acknowledged that Applicant successfully completed 
the PIOW. Applicant steadfastly contends that he resigned two weeks before his contract 
ended, and before he ever received notice of termination. Applicant’s Program Quality 
Control Director believes that Applicant’s e-mail complaining about the so-called food 
policy snowballed into an employee termination.  
 
Deliberately providing false or misleading information, or concealing or omitting 
information, requires some evidence of intent to deceive. Furthermore, errors in facts or 
misunderstandings do not necessarily rise to the level of deliberate falsifications, 
omissions, or concealments. Nevertheless, as to the allegations regarding the alleged 
criminal conduct, AG ¶ 16(c) has been established. As to the two allegations pertaining 
to the deliberate falsifications on the e-QIP, neither disqualifying condition has been 
established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
16 
                                      
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) applies. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(f) partially apply. My comments associated 
with the criminal conduct section also applies in an assessment of personal conduct 
concerns. As noted above, without citing any information source, or source documents, 
there are allegations in a variety of ROIs that Applicant was, on a number of occasions, 
between January 1990 and March 2010, arrested and charged, or charged without being 
arrested with a variety of crimes. However, so much time has elapsed since that alleged 
criminal behavior happened – at least eight years since the last alleged incident – and 
they happened under such unusual circumstances, and there has been no more recent 
similar behavior of conduct, it appears that it is unlikely to recur. Most of those who know 
him attest to his trustworthiness, reliability, and outstanding performance. It is unlikely that 
Applicant’s alleged personal conduct, especially that which was associated with his 
criminal conduct, will recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
 
17 
                                      
 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.63   
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. On a number of 
occasions between January 1990 and March 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged, 
or charged without being arrested with a variety of crimes. He also had problems with one 
employer.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been with his current 
employer since June 2017, serving in a flexible position inspecting and repairing airplanes 
and boats, and fabricating parts. He had been an FSR or engineer with other employers 
until mid-2015, when he was let go because the security clearance review process was 
not concluded fast enough to retain him. He has also owned a company since 1989, 
working on European automobiles. In 1981 he enlisted in the Air National Guard and he 
remained in an active capacity until he was honorably discharged one year later. 
Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in 1981, and maintained it until 1991, 
and again in 2012, and in 2014, he was granted a MRPT in 2014.  
 
Applicant has spent a substantial amount of time working overseas in a civilian 
capacity in support of U.S. military objectives in Iraq and Afghanistan. He was assigned 
to Iraq from April 2005 until April 2006; from April 2006 until November 2007; and from 
November 2007 until November 2010. He was assigned to Afghanistan from July 2012 
until February 2013; and from April 2013 until July 2013. He was a well-respected member 
of the MRAP teams.  
 
In addition, while I had the opportunity to review Applicant’s statements, his 
Response to the SOR, and listen to his testimony, I have concluded that Applicant is 
unusually sensitive, defensive, and verbally combative when confronted with unfavorable 
information or allegations. His responses to police authorities, security guard authorities, 
and even investigators, are to contest their assertions, especially when he feels that they 
are unjustified. His comments in his Response to the SOR and during the hearing about 
what he considered a poor investigation or prosecution simply fortify my impressions. 
Nevertheless, while Applicant may present as a rather testy individual, that impression 
does not, by itself, establish a reason for denying him a security clearance. The 
combination of Applicant’s actions, explanations, and beliefs no longer cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG 
¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and 
personal conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
                                                          
63 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
18 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j.:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
    
Paragraph 3, Guideline C:   WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:    Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
           ________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
