 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03470 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 30, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On January 19, 2015, Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Government Exhibit 3.)  On January 17, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
June 27, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine Items, was 
received by Applicant on July 13, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM on 
August 15, 2017.  Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s documents and 
they are admitted into evidence.  DOHA assigned the case to me on November 9, 2017.  
Applicant had no objection to Government’s items.  Therefore, items 1 through 9 are 
admitted into evidence, and hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 9. 
 
 The Government amended without objection, allegation 1.b., of the SOR.  Due to 
an inadvertent clerical error, the creditor in allegation 1.b., was misidentified as the 
State of Maryland for a tax lien, instead of the “United States on a Federal tax lien.”     
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 63 years old.  He has a bachelor’s degree.  He is self-employed as a  
defense contractor, and holds the position of senior information security consultant.  He 
is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.   
  
Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1975 
until July 1979 when he received an honorable discharge.  He has been working for his 
current employer since August 2014.  He has held his current security clearance since 
about 2004.   
 
The SOR identified three allegations under this guideline concerning Applicant’s 
owing state and Federal back taxes; and his failure to timely file his state income tax 
return for tax years 2015.  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits allegations 1.a 
 
3 
 
and 1.b, and denies allegation1.c.  Applicant attributes his failure to pay his income 
taxes to problems he encountered with an accounting software program he used to 
prepare his tax returns.  He contends that the problem was discovered in 2014 and that 
he is currently resolving the issue.   
 
 Applicant is indebted to the state for a tax lien entered against him in 2014 in the 
approximate amount of $14,708.  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he has 
been making payments of $500 per month to the state for his back taxes owed and by 
March 28, 2017, he has reduced the balance to $11,458.  In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant provides evidence of payment in full to the state for his tax liability and a 
release of lien.      
 
 Applicant is indebted to the United States for a Federal tax lien entered against 
him in 2014 in the approximate amount of $50,281.  In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant stated that he entered into an installment agreement with the IRS on October 
16, 2014, and has continued to pay $850 per month toward this debt.  Applicant has 
provided proof of this payment to the United States by providing copies of his bank 
statements from 2014 through 2017 showing payments without interruption.  (See 
Applicant’s Response to FORM.)  Applicant is also saving money to put toward an offer 
in compromise to settle this matter sooner.  
 
 Applicant denied the allegation that alleges that he failed to file his state income 
tax return for tax year 2015.  Applicant provided a copy of his 2015 state tax return 
submitted by a professional tax firm indicating that he had filed an extension in which to 
file his return, and that it was filed prior to October 15, 2016   (See answer to SOR, 
specifically letter from his accountant dated May 9, 2016.)  
 
 Applicant deeply regrets that this tax problem ever occurred.  He states that this 
was a one- time occurrence and an oversight that he did not know about until it was 
brought to his attention.  Since learning of the problems, he has worked diligently to 
resolve them.  Applicant has corrected his tax problems, and has paid, or is currently 
paying the taxes owed.  He states that this situation will not recur again.    
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
 
4 
 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is possibly applicable in this case:   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
  The mistake that impacted the Applicant here could happen to anyone.  Applicant 
used a tax accounting system that was mistaken in its calculations.  Upon learning of 
the error, he responded by correcting his problem and resolving the issues.  He is 
currently paying his Federal back taxes, and has already paid off his state back taxes in 
full.  Applicant has demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability required to 
hold a security clearance.  He had filed the state income return in question in a timely 
fashion and allegation 1.c. should never have been alleged.     
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations guideline 
are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
 
6 
 
  To reiterate, Applicant actually timely filed the state income tax return for tax year 
2015, and he has corrected his other tax problems.  He has resolved his state tax lien 
and is paying his Federal back taxes.  He understands that he must always comply with 
Federal and state law. He also understands that going forward he must be careful to 
ensure that the problem does not occur again.  In order to continue to be eligible for 
access to classified information, Applicant must demonstrate good judgment and 
reliability in every area of his life, including his financial affairs and tax issues.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
