 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-03606 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 15, 2015. On 
February 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines D, J, and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on May 19, 2017, and the 
case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. On February 12, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for March 6, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence. GE 1 and 5 
were admitted without objection. GE 2 through 4 were admitted over Applicant’s objection. 
I appended to the record correspondence the Government sent to Applicant as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s exhibit list as HE II. At the hearing, Applicant testified 
and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through J, which I admitted into evidence, without 
objection. One witness testified on behalf of Applicant. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on March 14, 2018. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they were 
in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would have been 
the same under either version. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Counsel for Applicant objected to the admissibility of GE 2 through 4. GE 2 is a 
letter from another government agency (AGA) containing redacted reports of Applicant’s 
polygraph examinations. GE 3 is a letter from AGA containing a redacted clearance 
decision. GE 4 contains Applicant’s answers to DOHA interrogatories that include 
adopting an investigator’s summary of his personal subject interview from a report of 
investigation. I construed the bases of Counsel’s objections to be a lack of authenticating 
witnesses (Directive ¶ E3.1.20) and an inability to cross examine witnesses (Directive 
E3.1.22). I overruled each of his objections based on long-established Appeal Board 
precedent holding that, under circumstances similar to those at issue here, these types 
of documents are admissible under ¶ E3.1.20 without authenticating witnesses, and that 
¶ E3.1.22 does not provide a right of cross examination concerning out-of-hearing 
statements that are admissible under other provisions of the Directive. Counsel conceded 
this precedent but averred that he disagreed with the Appeal Board.3  
 
  
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD 4), establishing a “single, 
common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD 4 ¶ B, Purpose). The SEAD 4 
became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD 4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The new AG, which are found at Appendix 
A to SEAD 4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or continued access to classified national security 
information. (SEAD 4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 07-18324 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 2011); ISCR Case No. 11-12461 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 
2013); ISCR Case No. 11-07509 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2013); and ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 
3, 2014). 
 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant, age 48, has been married for 20 years. He has a son, age 26, and a 
daughter, age 20. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1994 and a master’s degree in 2004. 
He has been employed by the same defense contractor since 2003, and for three years 
prior with a company absorbed by it. He was initially granted a DOD security clearance in 
1994, which he maintained until it was suspended in 2015 in connection with this matter.5 
 
The SOR cross-alleged under Guidelines D, J, and E that Applicant inappropriately 
touched his daughter’s vagina from approximately 2000 until 2001 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.b, and 
3.a); and that he was charged, in 2014, with felony sexual abuse and misdemeanor 
second degree sexual offense of his daughter (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 2.b, and 3.a). Under 
Guideline J, the SOR alleged that, in 2015, Applicant was found guilty of misdemeanor 
second degree assault, for which he was placed on supervised probation for three years 
(SOR ¶ 3.b). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant, during a 2001 interview 
with AGA, falsified material facts in order to conceal the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a (SOR 
¶ 2.a). In his SOR Answer, Applicant admitted the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and denied 
the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, 2.b, 3.a, and 3.b. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.b, and 3.a 
 
 Applicant was interviewed on two occasions in 2001 by AGA in connection with a 
security clearance adjudication (to determine his suitability for access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI)), during which he was administered several 
polygraphs. The second interview was convened because of “inconsistencies” that 
occurred during the first interview.6  
 
During the first interview in November 2001 (Interview 1), Applicant revealed that 
he shoplifted an item from his university book store on an unspecified date. During the 
second interview in December 2001 (Interview 2), Applicant stated that he made up the 
shoplifting incident. Applicant further stated that he believed that if he told the polygrapher 
that false statement, he would not be queried anymore about his reactivity to an 
unspecified crime topic.7  
 
During Interview 2, after administering several polygraphs, the polygrapher 
queried Applicant about his reactivity to an unspecified crime topic. Thereafter, Applicant 
stated that he had been touching his daughter’s vagina for his sexual gratification from 
approximately October 2000 through August 2001 (when she was between approximately 
two and three years old). He explained that he would rub her vagina with a washcloth 
                                                          
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from Applicant’s 
SOR answer and his SCA (GE 1).  
 
5 GE 1 at 5, 11-12, 16, 21, 37-38; Tr. at 93-95. 
 
6 GE 2; Tr. at 108. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
while giving her baths, and that he would get sexually aroused from doing so. He clarified 
that he did not get a full erection, but that he would feel his penis getting partially erect. 
Applicant also reported that he masturbated on one occasion after rubbing her vagina. 
On that occasion, he took his daughter out of the bathtub and put her in another room, 
while he masturbated. He denied fantasizing about his daughter while he masturbated on 
that occasion, but admitted that he had fantasized about her after rubbing her vagina – 
just not while masturbating. Applicant estimated that he had been bathing his daughter 
three times per week, during which he would touch her vagina approximately one to two 
times per week.8  
 
During Interview 2, Applicant also revealed that his daughter had been present in 
his bedroom on occasions (during unspecified periods) when him and his wife were nude 
while getting ready for work or going to bed. On approximately five to ten such occasions, 
his daughter walked up to him and pulled his penis. He became sexually aroused on 
approximately two to three of those occasions. After an occasion in which Applicant 
became aroused from his daughter pulling his penis in August 2001, he realized that it 
was wrong to become sexually aroused. At that time, he advised his wife (who had not 
been aware of any of the incidents) that they needed to stop allowing their daughter to 
see him nude. He did, however, continue to give his daughter baths, but denied touching 
her vagina after August 2001.9 
 
In 2002, AGA denied Applicant’s SCI access after concluding that the conduct 
revealed during Interviews 1 and 2 demonstrated poor judgment and untrustworthiness. 
Applicant did not to exercise his right to appeal that decision.10 In his 2015 SCA, Applicant 
reported the denial and provided the following explanation: “Due to misinterpretation of 
information provided during a polygraph, I was investigated on alleged activity later to be 
found unsubstantiated.”11  
 
During a DOD security clearance adjudication interview in 2016, Applicant 
explained differently the contact with his daughter that he previously revealed during 
Interview 2. He admitted that he scrubbed her with a washcloth and tickled her vagina 
with a washcloth, but claimed that it was only in the act of cleaning her. He also admitted 
that he would occasionally masturbate after washing his daughter with a wash cloth. 
However, Applicant maintained that AGA misconstrued the information that he revealed 
during Interview 2 and wrongfully concluded that he touched his daughter 
inappropriately.12 
 
                                                          
8 GE 1 at 21; GE 2. 
 
9 GE 2. 
 
10 GE 3. 
 
11 GE 1 at 39. 
 
12 GE 4, Interview at 2-3. 
 
 
5 
 
At the hearing, during his direct testimony, Applicant recounted the following facts 
(to the best of his recollection) that he shared with the polygrapher during Interview 2: 13 
 
 He masturbated after bathing his daughter and after she touched his 
penis, but that there was no connection between his masturbation and 
those events.  
 He would tickle his daughter “all over her body” in an effort to make her 
bath time enjoyable. However, he maintained that “bath time was an 
innocent father giving his daughter a bath.”  
 He had to clean his daughter’s vaginal region with a washcloth because 
she was not potty-trained and could not clean herself well.  
 He never touched his daughter’s vagina without a washcloth.  
 His routine had been to put her to bed in her bedroom after bath time 
and, occasionally, masturbate “sometime later” in another room (with a 
time gap in between the events).  
 On the occasions that he masturbated after his daughter touched his 
penis (during the mornings while he was getting dressed), he would do 
so “at some point later after everyone would leave.” “The masturbation 
would happen certainly not with [his daughter] present and not 
necessarily the same time frame of getting dressed in the morning.” 
 Sometimes his wife would see his daughter touch his penis and 
sometimes she did not see it.  
 
 During his cross-examination at the hearing, Applicant stated the following with 
respect to Interview 2:14 
 
 He did not recall ever telling the polygrapher that he touched his 
daughter for “sexual gratification.” 
 He cleaned his daughter’s vagina with a washcloth because she was “a 
little girl” that needed to be taken care of to prevent “owies down there.”  
 He would take care of his daughter “in a natural parenthood manner,” 
assisting his wife who was her primary caregiver. 
 He took a washcloth with soap on it and rubbed it over his daughter’s 
vagina “in an effort to make fun of it” and to have his daughter “giggle” 
and to clean her at the same time. He further stated that he believed 
there was nothing wrong with him doing that. 
 He did not recall stating that he got “sexually aroused” from rubbing his 
daughter’s vagina with a washcloth while giving her baths. 
 When he mentioned to the polygrapher that he had partial erections, he 
meant “just a tingling feeling, not necessarily during the act of bathing 
[his daughter].” 
 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 106, 111-114, 130-136. 
 
14 Tr. at 111-114. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant believed that the polygrapher tied together facts gleaned from a series 
of questions that were “seemingly untied together” in his report “in a different fashion” 
than what he “meant to tell the polygrapher.”15 He also claimed that his religious beliefs 
influenced his disclosures to the polygrapher.16 
 
After the polygrapher reported the incidents revealed during Interview 2, Applicant 
was investigated by his local sheriff’s office and child protective services. While he was 
instructed not to be alone with his daughter for a certain unspecified period, he was not 
otherwise charged with any crime.17 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a 
 
 Applicant emphatically denied that he fabricated the shoplifting story. During the 
hearing, Applicant asserted that he shoplifted an unrecalled item from his college 
bookstore during his first year in 1991. He recalled that, during Investigation 2, Applicant 
was asked by the polygrapher whether he made up the shoplifting incident to which he 
responded with a shrug, and no verbal words. He intended his shrug to convey that he 
did not make it up. He did not recall ever stating to the polygrapher that he made it up.18 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 2.b, 3.a, and 3.b 
 
 In June 2014, after an investigation that began in 2013, Applicant was charged 
with (1) felony sexual abuse of a minor and (2) misdemeanor second degree sexual 
offense. In March 2015, as part of a plea deal, count (1) was amended to misdemeanor 
second degree assault and count (2) was nolle processed. The court found Applicant 
guilty of the amended count (1) to which he had entered an Alford plea. The court 
sentenced him to eighteen months in jail (with all but one day suspended) and placed him 
on supervised probation for three years. Special conditions of his probation included that 
Applicant was not to have any contact with his daughter, and that he was not to enter or 
be found near his residence until his daughter turned 18 years of age or left for college, 
whichever occurred first. Other conditions included that he was not to travel out of state, 
except for work purposes, and that he had to receive permission from his supervising 
agent before leaving the jurisdiction. Applicant stated that he had successfully complied 
with the terms of his probation through the date of the hearing and expected to be 
released as scheduled on March 25, 2018.19 
 
 Neither party presented a police report or any other documents detailing the 
specific allegations underlying the 2014 charges. However, during the hearing, Applicant 
                                                          
15 Tr.at 98-103. 
 
16 Tr. at 98-99, 109, 114,   
 
17 Tr. at 98, 118. 
 
18 Tr. at 106-107, 108-110. 
 
19 GE 5; AE G; Tr. at 121, 139-140. Applicant was granted permission to travel to Virginia for the hearing. 
 
 
7 
 
and his wife (who testified on his behalf) discussed them. His wife stated that she 
understood the allegations to be that Applicant “would start touching” his daughter when 
he was home alone with her between 2007 and 2008 (when she would have been 
between approximately 10 and 11 years old). Applicant stated that he was told that he 
was accused of touching his daughter’s breast and vaginal area, when she was between 
approximately 8 and 10 years old. He was told that the alleged incidents occurred “more 
than once.” He was also told that he was accused of touching both breasts “under her 
clothes.” Applicant acknowledged that the amended second degree assault charge 
related involved an “unwanted touch.” However, he maintained that he never 
inappropriately touched his daughter in any way, including touching her breast or vaginal 
area, putting his finger or fingers in her vagina, or otherwise abusing her physically.20 
 
Applicant and his wife claimed that their daughter lied about the incidents 
underlying the 2014 charges. In support of their position, they claimed that she had a 
history of lying, including that she was sexually abused by a fellow classmate when he 
lifted up her skirt and put his fingers in her vagina, which she later recanted. Applicant 
acknowledged that the allegations against the classmate involved similar contact that was 
alleged to have occurred between him and his daughter. He and his wife also claimed 
that their daughter reported the incidents in 2013 to retaliate for her anticipated 
punishment for an incident that Applicant and his wife deemed inappropriate (Incident A), 
during which time she had also been going through a rebellious stage. To support their 
claims, Applicant submitted affidavits by his wife and his wife’s sister, and a November 
2013 clinical evaluation undergone by their daughter.21   
 
Applicant’s wife’s affidavit consisted of 11 pages and 6 exhibits, including a copy 
of text messages exchanged between their daughter and a male friend in June 2012 (that 
his wife obtained during a 2013 search of their daughter’s email account), a letter from 
their daughter written to a classmate in approximately 2012 or 2013 (that his wife found 
during a 2013 search of their daughter’s bedroom), class notes exchanged between their 
daughter and a friend at school (that his wife found during a 2013 search of their 
daughter’s school books), apology notes that their daughter wrote to Applicant and his 
wife in connection with Incident A, and a note from their daughter that his wife found 
during a 2013 search of her belongings.22  
 
Applicant’s sister-in-law’s affidavit included her observations of Applicant’s familial 
relationships. It also included her opinion about the accusations that Applicant’s daughter 
made against him and others, based on discussions that she had with Applicant’s 
daughter, Applicant, and Applicant’s wife. She believed that Applicant’s daughter had lied 
about the incidents underlying the 2014 charges and that Applicant did not commit any of 
the alleged offenses. However, she recounted a conversation that she had with the 
daughter about the allegations underlying the 2014 charges. She stated that the daughter 
                                                          
20 Tr. at 88, 91, 106, 119, 130-136. 
 
21 Tr. at 46, 96-97; AE H and I. 
 
22 AE H. 
 
 
8 
 
told her that she was about nine years old when it began, and that Applicant “sexually 
assaulted” her for a “few years.” She also stated that Applicant “sexually penetrated her,” 
that she “bled all over the place,” and “was damaged and torn and could not sit or walk 
for days.”23 
 
The report of Applicant’s daughter’s “youth clinical profile” included assessments 
by a licensed clinical counselor about her basic traits of inclusion (social orientation and 
intellectual energies), control (willingness to make decisions and to accept responsibility 
for self and/or others), and affection (the need to express and receive love, affection, and 
approval). Based on those assessments, the counselor provided a list of suggestions 
about his daughter’s “most vital needs” with respect to each trait. The counselor also 
provided a list of suggestions in order for Applicant and his wife, as parents, to “help” their 
daughter and “alleviate tension and severe problems in the home.” The counselor noted 
that the report was based on their daughter’s “temperament” and “not actual behavior.” 
There were no facts contained in the report about the daughter’s truthfulness.24  
 
Whole Person 
 
In March 2017, Applicant underwent a psychological evaluation by a psychologist, 
who was retained by his attorney in connection with this security clearance adjudication. 
Based on a two-hour clinical interview, a review of the SOR and SCA, and results of a 
psychological test, the psychologist opined that Applicant met “no criteria for any mental 
health diagnosis” and was “psychologically healthy.” The psychologist emphasized that 
the “validity finding” of Applicant’s psychological test was “rather rare” and supported the 
psychologist’s “clinical conclusion” that Applicant “had been honest during the interview.” 
The psychologist recognized that he was “not in a position to confirm” whether Applicant’s 
daughter made numerous false allegations, all in contexts that lead to some benefit to 
herself, as Applicant averred. The psychologist also acknowledged that he could not 
“[o]bviously . . . assert that [he knew] the truth regarding [Applicant’s] most recent criminal 
charges.” Nevertheless, he concluded, “to a great degree of psychological certainty,” that 
Applicant “committed no crimes.”25  
 
 Applicant is very active in his church.26 Seven fellow church members wrote letters 
on his behalf praising his character and trustworthiness, including the couple with whom 
he resided for a year and a half during the condition of his probation that required him to 
stay away from his home.27 His work performance met or exceeded expectations between 
                                                          
23 AE I. 
 
24 AE J. 
 
25 AE F; Tr. at 121-122. 
 
26 Tr. at 98. 
 
27 AE C. 
 
 
9 
 
2011 and 2017.28 Applicant’s wife has observed Applicant to be an “honest, truthful, and 
trustworthy” man during the 23 years that she has known him.29 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”30 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”31 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”32 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”33 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
                                                          
28 AE B. 
 
29 AE H. 
 
30 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
31 Egan at 527. 
 
32 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
33 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.34 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”35 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.36 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.37 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.38 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”39 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”40 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information . . .  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 13(a) (sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether 
or not the individual has been prosecuted); and AG ¶ 13(c) (sexual behavior that causes 
an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress). They have not been 
mitigated by either of the following potentially applicable factors under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 14(b): the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; and 
                                                          
34 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
35 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
36 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
37 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
38 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
39 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
40 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
11 
 
AG ¶ 14(c): the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s inappropriate sexual touching and sexual assault of his daughter in 
approximately 2000, 2001, 2007, and 2008 (when she was between the ages of 3 and 
10) are egregious offenses. The fact that he was never charged for the 2000 and 2001 
offenses is inconsequential. I found Applicant’s attempt to explain his conduct as merely 
exercising his parental duties incredulous. Whether criminally charged or not, Applicant’s 
rubbing of his daughter’s vagina and allowing her to pull on his penis (not only more than 
once but over an extended period), for his sexual gratification, was criminal behavior. 
Even if not deemed criminal behavior, these incidents were extraordinary lapses in 
judgment. 
 
 Despite Applicant’s protestations of innocence as to the 2013 charges, I find that 
he did sexually assault his daughter between approximately 2007 and 2008. While the 
Alford plea was not an admission of guilt on Applicant’s part, a court convicted him of 
assaulting his daughter based on his admission (as part of that plea) that the evidence 
developed during the investigation was sufficient to prove his guilt and sustain a 
conviction, albeit of a lesser charge. 41 There is no evidence in the record that Applicant 
assaulted his daughter in any manner other than sexual. The special conditions of his 
probation (that he have no contact with his daughter and was not permitted to enter or be 
found near his residence until his daughter turned 18 years of age or left for college) 
denote the severity of Applicant’s conduct. I found compelling the fact that his daughter 
shared some details about the sexual abuse she suffered from Applicant with her aunt. I 
also found persuasive not only the phraseology of the polygrapher’s report, but also the 
fact that Applicant did not to appeal AGA’s decision that was based on it. By contrast, I 
accorded little weight to Applicant’s psychological evaluation, and found that his 
daughter’s 2013 clinical evaluation had no probative value. 
 
 Even assuming arguendo that Applicant’s wife and sister-in-law believed the facts 
and opinions to which they attested, their testimony is undermined by the substantial 
evidence weighing against mitigation. After having an opportunity to observe Applicant’s 
demeanor at the hearing and considering his inconsistent statements within the record, I 
did not find his testimony credible. I have substantial doubts about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
  
                                                          
41 In an Alford plea, a defendant enters a plea of guilty without making an admission of personal guilt. See 
North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970). This enables a defendant to enter a guilty plea while 
maintaining his or her innocence. However, before a court can accept an Alford plea, the defendant must 
admit that there is sufficient evidence to prove his or her guilt, and the court, in turn, must satisfy itself that 
the plea is supported by facts sufficient to sustain a conviction. See North Carolina v. Alford, supra, 400 
U.S., at 37-39; ISCR Case No. 07-03307 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2008). A court that receives an Alford 
plea “must independently determine that the plea has a factual basis.” See Crowfoot v. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 761 F.2d 661 at 665, at n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 1985). 
 
12 
 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline establish the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(c): individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
They have not been mitigated by any of the following potentially applicable factors under 
this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 32 (c): no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed 
the offense; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Incorporating my comments under Guideline D, Applicant has not mitigated the 
concerns raised by his 2014 arrest and criminal charges of felony sexual abuse of a minor 
and misdemeanor second degree sexual offense; his Alford plea to an amended to 
misdemeanor second degree assault charge; and his three-year period of supervised 
probation. I have assumed Applicant was released from probation on March 25, 2018 as 
expected and considered the significant time passed since the most recent alleged 
incident. However, the nature and circumstances of Applicant’s inappropriate sexual 
touching and sexual assault of his daughter (especially given his failure to accept any 
 
13 
 
responsibility for his actions) continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
Sexual Behavior and Criminal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s inappropriate sexual touching and sexual assault of his daughter 
establishes the general concerns under Guideline E involving questionable judgment and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also establishes the following 
additional disqualifying condition: 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
Falsification 
 
If deemed deliberate, security concerns raised in the SOR concerning the 
shoplifting incident could establish the following disqualifying condition under this 
guideline: 
 
 
14 
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative; 
 
When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative 
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time of the omission.42 An applicant’s level of education and business 
experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
on a security clearance application was deliberate.43  
 
Applicant admitted that he intentionally fabricated the shoplifting story to avoid 
disclosure of his inappropriate sexual touching of his daughter. I did not find credible his 
emphatic denial. The polygrapher’s report contains details and terminology that could only 
reasonably be attributed to Applicant’s self-report. Accordingly, I find substantial evidence 
of an intent on the part of Applicant to deliberately provide false or misleading information 
to the polygrapher. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have not been mitigated by 
either of the following applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and  
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Given the passage of time since 2001 when that false statement was made, 
Applicant might have been able establish mitigation. However, his continued lack of 
candor about that false statement and his inappropriate sexual touching and sexual 
assault of his daughter brings current its security significance. Incorporating my 
aforementioned comments under this guideline and Guidelines D and J, I have grave 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, which call into 
question his ability to safeguard classified information. 
 
  
                                                          
42 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
43 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
15 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
adjudicative guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole 
person. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines D, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines D, J, and E, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated security concerns raised by his sexual behavior, criminal conduct, and personal 
conduct. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
  
 
16 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
