 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02858 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alka R. Sharma, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (1st e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On November 14, 2015, he submitted another Security Clearance 
Application (2nd e-QIP). On December 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
 
2 
                                      
 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.1 The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on December 9, 2016. On January 5, 2017, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on February 16, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on May 26, 2017.  A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on August 4, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 23, 2017. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 6, and Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE L were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
and two witnesses testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 1, 2017. I 
kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that 
opportunity and timely submitted an additional document, which was marked and 
admitted as AE M, without objection. The record closed on October 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, nearly all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to alcohol consumption (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.), but denied 
portions of ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.i.; and all of the factual allegations pertaining to criminal conduct 
(¶¶ 2.a. through 2.g.), in the SOR. Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a field 
service engineer with the company since January 2009. He previously held an identical 
position with another employer from July 2007 until January 2009, and before that he was 
an electronic technician for another employer. He is a 1975 recipient of a General 
Equivalency Development or General Equivalency Diploma (GED). He also earned a 
number of vocational credits, but no degree. Applicant has never served in the U.S. 
military. Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in 1997, and again in 2008. 
Applicant was married in July 1985 and divorced in January 1992. He remarried in 
February 2007 and divorced in May 2015.  He has three children, born in 1986, 1987, 
and 2009.  
                                                          
 
1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have an effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct 
 
 Appellant used a variety of substances, and his choice of substances was 
apparently alcohol, marijuana, and barbiturates. His use or possession of those 
substances, as well as other criminal activities, has, directly or indirectly, led to 
approximately one dozen incidents over a four-decade period that resulted in actions 
taken by police and court authorities:  
 
○He was arrested on August 1, 1975, when he was 18-years old, and charged with 
contributing to the delinquency of a minor, a misdemeanor.  He was released on bail or 
his own recognizance that same day. On August 4, 1975, the charge was dismissed.2 
Applicant attributed the incident to being at a friend’s house where a girl he knew said 
she was a little buzzed and not feeling good, and she asked him to drive her to her home. 
He claimed he did so. The following day, the police called him and requested that he 
speak with the girl’s father. Applicant denied he was arrested;3 
 
○He was arrested on April 18, 1976, when he was 18-years old, and charged with 
(a) possession of marijuana (not specified as a felony or misdemeanor), and (b) loitering 
or prowling, a misdemeanor. On May 3, 1976, both charges were dismissed.4 Applicant 
described the incident as one where he was siphoning gas out of a church bus at the 
church, but he did not recall being arrested for possession of marijuana. He recalled 
spending one day in jail, but could not recall if he paid a fine.5 
 
○He was arrested on October 9, 1976, when he was 19-years old, and charged 
with (a) possession of marijuana (not specified as a felony or misdemeanor), and (b) 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), a traffic offense.6 He was released on bail or own 
recognizance that same day. Applicant was convicted of DWI on October 18, 1976, and 
the possession of marijuana charge was dismissed. Applicant was fined $152, his driver’s 
license was suspended for 90 days, and he was ordered to attend an alcohol 
counterattack program.7  
 
○He was arrested on July 7, 1977, and charged with (a) driving under the influence 
of drugs, a felony, (b) possession of drug paraphernalia (not specified as a felony or 
misdemeanor), and (c) possession of a controlled substance without a prescription, a 
                                                          
2 GE 5 (Criminal History Record, dated December 1, 2015), at 2. 
 
3 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated January 5, 2017, at 3-4. 
 
4 GE 5, supra note 2, at 2-3. 
 
5 GE 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 21, 2016), at 5. 
 
6 The SOR erroneously alleged that the incident took place on October 18, 1976, but that was 
actually the date the court took action on the charges. The actual arrest occurred on October 9, 1976. 
 
7 GE 5, supra note 2, at 4-5. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
misdemeanor. All charges were dismissed on July 22, 1977.8 Applicant presented two 
different stories related to this incident. He acknowledged that after consuming four to five 
beers at a bar and a friend’s house, they were returning to Applicant’s house at 7 a.m. 
when the car ran off the Interstate exit ramp and wrecked. Applicant could not recall who 
was driving his car at the time. A police search of the vehicle found barbiturates in the 
ashtray, but Applicant denied that they were his or put there by him.9 The other story was 
that he was asleep riding in the back seat of his vehicle with several friends, and the driver 
had placed drugs in his ashtray. He remembered waking up in jail.10 
 
○He was arrested in August 1981, and charged with battery, a misdemeanor. 
Applicant presented two variations related to this incident. He initially said that he and his 
band were playing at a rented hall to celebrate a friend’s birthday party and his girlfriend 
was collecting admission fees at the door. An individual without a shirt and armed with a 
weapon in his belt refused to pay the admission fee. A fight ensued with Applicant 
swinging a club against armed intruders, and when the police arrived, he was cited to 
appear in court. He pled no contest to battery and adjudication was withheld and he was 
placed on six month’s self-probation.11 The second variation was that the band was 
rehearsing and Appellant merely tried to break up a fight so that the rented hall was not 
damaged. Applicant and his girlfriend were both arrested for battery. He denied that he 
was under the influence of alcohol at the time. Applicant accepted a plea bargain on the 
advice of his attorney.12 
 
○He was arrested on July 7, 1991, and charged with DUI, reduced to reckless 
driving, a misdemeanor. He failed the field sobriety test and spent the night in jail. He was 
eventually convicted and sentenced to attend a DUI school during one weekend; receive 
counseling for one to two hours per week for four weeks; serve 40 hours of community 
service; placed on probation for one year; fined $1,600; and his driver’s license was 
suspended for one year.13 Applicant explained that he was going through a rough time 
after his divorce because two of his sons went with his ex-wife to reside with her and her 
new significant-other, and he made a poor decision to drive while he was intoxicated.14  
 
○He was arrested on June 30, 1995, and charged with soliciting prostitution, 
lewdness, or assignation, a misdemeanor. He spent the night in jail and was released. 
On August 7, 1995, he entered a plea of nolo contendre and was sentenced to a fine of 
                                                          
8 GE 5, supra note 2, at 5-7. 
 
9 GE 3, supra note 5, at 6; Tr. at 41. 
 
10 1st e-QIP, dated January 9, 2015, at 59. 
 
11 GE 3, supra note 5, at 6. 
 
12 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 9-10; Tr. at 42. 
 
13 GE 5, supra note 2, at 7; GE 6 (Court Case Information, dated February 15, 2017, at 3-4; GE 3, 
supra note 5, at 6-7. 
 
14 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, a 4-5. 
 
5 
                                      
 
$150.15 Applicant denied that alcohol was involved or that he ever solicited the woman 
(an undercover police officer) who approached him at a stop sign, but on the advice of an 
attorney, it was cheaper to enter a plea than to fight the charge and face costs of $1,000.16 
 
○He was arrested on August 19, 1996, and charged with battery domestic 
violence, a misdemeanor. He spent the night in jail. His ex-wife withdrew the charges 
against him, and on November 12, 1996, the charge was dismissed.17 Applicant 
contended that on one occasion he returned home and found his ex-wife leaving his 
residence with items that belonged to him and his father. He took the items from her and 
she left. He went for a run, but when he returned home, the police were waiting for him. 
He denied that alcohol was involved in the incident.18 
 
○He was arrested on June 25, 2003, and charged with (a) possession of cannabis 
and (b) possessing an open container of alcohol in vehicle. In October 2003, both charges 
were dismissed provided that Applicant attend drug and alcohol counseling one night per 
week for four weeks, and submit to random drug tests once a month for an unspecified 
period. Applicant acknowledged that the program was good.19 Applicant denied the 
marijuana or open container were his, and he contended that his son had borrowed the 
vehicle the night before. He did not want to create a problem for his son, so Applicant 
took responsibility for the items.20 This allegation is listed twice in the SOR (¶¶ 1.e. and 
2.f.) 
 
○He was arrested on April 6, 2013, and charged with DUI. In December 2013, he 
was sentenced to 24 hours of community service, ordered to attend counseling, placed 
on probation for one year, and fined $390.21 Applicant acknowledged that while 
celebrating his son’s return from a deployment in Afghanistan, he consumed alcohol, and 
he was remorseful about getting behind the wheel of his vehicle.22 
 
○He was arrested on February 26, 2015, and charged with (a) DUI, a felony; (b) 
DUI with property damage, a misdemeanor; (c) careless driving, an infraction; and (d) 
refusing a breath-urine-blood test after a previous suspension, a misdemeanor. Applicant 
                                                          
 
15 GE 5, supra note 2, at 8; GE 6, supra note 13, at 7-8; GE 3, supra note 5, at 7. 
 
16 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 10; Tr. at 42. 
 
17 GE 5, supra note 2, at 8-9; GE 6, supra note 13, at 11-12; GE 3, supra note 5, at 7. 
 
18 GE 3, supra note 5, at 7; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 11; Tr. at 42. 
 
19 GE 3, supra note 5, at 7-8; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 5, 11; Tr. at 45. 
 
20 GE 3, supra note 5, at 7-8; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 5, 11. 
 
21 GE 4 (Incident History, dated February 15, 2017), at 1; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra 
note 3, at 5-6. 
 
22 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 5-6. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
performed poorly on the field sobriety exercises. On March 10, 2015, charge (b) was 
dismissed, and on July 10, 2015, charge (c) was dismissed. Adjudication on charge (a) 
was purportedly withheld as part of a plea agreement. On July 10, 2015, upon his plea of 
nolo contendre to charge (d), Applicant was found guilty as charged and sentenced to 
one year of supervised probation, fined $632.49, and ordered to attend a driver 
improvement course and a victim awareness program.23 Applicant contended that the day 
in question on the way home from work he stopped by a friend’s home to talk. He claims 
he did not consume any alcohol. After he departed, he was thinking about a conversation 
he had with his spouse before leaving for work and not paying attention to his driving. He 
ran into the rear of another vehicle, deploying Applicant’s air bag. Standing by the side of 
the road after the accident, Applicant claims he was dazed and unable to understand 
what the police officer was saying to him.24  
 
○He was arrested on October 14, 2015, and charged with (a) DUI, a misdemeanor, 
reduced to reckless driving; (b) refusing a breath urine blood test after a previous 
suspension, a misdemeanor; and (c) violation of probation. On January 26, 2016, upon 
his plea of guilty, Applicant was convicted of charges (a) and (b) and sentenced to 59 
days in jail (less 29 days’ time served); probation for 11 months; fined; 100 hours of 
community service; no consumption of alcohol; no possession or consumption of illegal 
drugs; random testing for alcohol or illegal drugs; completion of DUI Level 2 school and 
any follow-up deemed necessary; and completion of Victim Awareness Program. 
Because the probation stemming from his July 2015 conviction was violated and 
unsuccessfully completed, he was sentenced to an additional 18 days in jail, with credit 
for time served. Applicant paid $1,544.54 in court costs and fines, completed 100 hours 
of community service, completed the Victim Impact Panel Class, completed the Risk 
Reduction/DUI School, completed substance abuse treatment, and successfully 
completed his probation on October 13, 2016.25  
 
Applicant claimed that he was at a restaurant for dinner after returning home from 
a trip and he only had his company credit card in his wallet. When he went out to his car 
to retrieve his personal credit card the manager thought he was skipping without paying 
his bill, and he called the police. Applicant returned to the restaurant, paid his bill, and 
departed as the police were arriving. He thought the police were coming to speak with 
him so he pulled back into his parking space. Applicant was ordered to step out of his 
vehicle and when asked if he had consumed any alcohol, Applicant responded that he 
had two beers. He was administered a field sobriety test which he passed. He was 
administered a breathalyzer test which he also passed because it indicated a level of 
                                                          
23 GE 5, supra note 2, at 9-10; GE 6, supra note 13, at 14-16; GE 3, supra note 5, at 8; GE 4, supra 
note 21, at 1-2; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 6. 
 
24 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 3, at 6. 
 
25 AE C (Notice/Order of Completion of Probation, dated October 13, 2016); AE K (Judgment 
Placing Defendant on Probation, dated January 26, 2016); GE 4, supra note 21, at 3; AE L (Certificate of 
Completion, dated February 23, 2016); AE L (Certificate of Completion, dated September 29, 2016).  
 
 
7 
                                      
 
.046, whereas the legal limit was .08. The officer then requested a urinalysis, but he 
refused to take one because he had already passed the other two tests.26 
 
 One of the treatment program requirements was that he enter an outpatient 
treatment program. Commencing on April 1, 2016, and continuing for five months, until 
September 29, 2016, Applicant attended and successfully completed 39 hours of required 
treatment groups.27 During the period February 12, 2016 through September 21, 2016, 
Applicant underwent random urinalysis tests for a variety of drugs and alcohol, and the 
test rests were always negative.28 His initial treatment plan called for him to abstain from 
all mind and mood altering substances, and attend one Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or 
Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meeting per week. No individual counseling or 12-step 
program were listed as objectives.29 Applicant claimed to have abstained from alcohol as 
of October 2015.30 Although the initial diagnostic impression on April 1, 2016 by the 
Certified Recovery Support Specialist (CRSS) was substance use disorder severe 
(303.90),31 that initial written diagnostic impression is inconsistent with the numbers cited, 
for 303.90 refers to alcohol dependence.32 No final diagnosis was made upon the 
successful completion of the program. 
 
Applicant underwent a substance abuse evaluation on January 20, 2017.  He was 
administered SASSI Institute SASSI-3 Adult Screening test (versus the SASSI-3 Mild 
Substance Use Disorders (SUD) test), and he scored a 6 for face valid other drugs 
(FVOD) which indicates a low probability of substance use disorder, and he scored 8 for 
face valid alcohol (FVA) which indicates a low probability of moderate to severe 
substance use disorder. The recommendations were that Applicant seek “participation in 
a support system outside his home environment to reduce any risk of alcohol abuse. 
Further evaluation may be needed in the future.”33 
                                                          
26 GE 3, supra note 5, at 9; Tr. at 51-52. 
 
27 AE M (Letter, dated January 11, 2017). 
 
28 AE E (Test Results, various dates). 
 
29 AE M (Treatment Records, various dates). 
 
30 AE M (Client Information and Medical History, dated April 1, 2016), at 2. Although Applicant 
seemed to have written in a specific date in October 2015, it is impossible to decipher the exact date. 
  
31 AE M (Initial Treatment Plan, dated April 1, 2016). 
 
32 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth Edition Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) 
(2000), at 213. 
  
33 AE F (SASSI-3 Alcohol and Drug Evaluation, dated January 20, 2017). It is significant to note 
that the SASSI Institute issued the following notice regarding the SASSI-3 Interpretation: 
 
The initial intent in developing SASSI-3 was to identify adults with a high probability of 
having substance use disorders of any severity. However, the samples that were used to 
develop the SASSI-3 included too few individuals diagnosed as having mild substance use 
disorder to produce reliable decision rules regarding this level of substance use severity; 
therefore, clinicians may wish to use the SASSI-3 Mild SUD Guideline to flag tentatively for 
 
8 
                                      
 
Appellant acknowledged to an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) that he began drinking beer in high school when he was 16-years 
old. He had an average of two beers on the weekend. After high school, and continuing 
up until January 21, 2016, he averaged two to three beers on Friday and Saturday nights. 
He did not drink during the week. He also might have a couple of glasses of wine or one 
or two margaritas if he goes out to eat on the weekend. Applicant explained that alcohol 
relaxes him. He added that he does not feel that he has a problem with alcohol as he can 
stop and has stopped when required with no issues being encountered.34 
 
During the hearing, Applicant’s story evolved. He acknowledged that he consumed 
alcohol at times to excess and to the point of intoxication from about 1976 until October 
2015, especially during periods when he was going through divorces.35 Following his July 
1991 DWI arrest, he started to recognize that he had some issues with alcohol. He 
addressed those issues by abstaining for what he called “quite some period of time,” but 
then he acknowledged he relapsed. Following the relapse, he attended AA every now 
and then, but when he stopped going to AA, he started drinking again.36 Following the 
April 2013 DUI arrest, he again quit drinking for over a year.37 He returned to regular 
attendance at AA, but did not have a sponsor.38 Following the February 2015 DUI arrest, 
he returned to more regular AA attendance, and started working on the 12-step program, 
eventually reaching step 3.39 While he was sitting in jail following the October 2015 DUI 
arrest, he decided that he needed to make changes regarding his use of alcohol.40 
Applicant now attends AA meetings at two different groups periodically when he feels he 
needs them. His most recent AA meeting was a week before the hearing. Although he 
now has a sponsor, as of the hearing, they had not started working together. He still has 
not returned to the 12-step program.41 He has received coins commemorating his 
anniversaries of abstinence, with one indicating one year of abstinence starting on 
                                                          
further evaluation for mild substance use disorder. But, there should be a clear 
understanding that SASSI-3 is not empirically validated as a screening tool for this 
diagnosis. 
 
SASSI Institute News & Reports, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2013, at www.sassi.com 
 
34 GE 3, supra note 5, at 11-12. 
 
35 Tr. at 42-43, 68. 
 
36 Tr. at 44. 
 
37 Tr. at 46, 48. 
 
38 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
39 Tr. at 49. 
 
40 Tr. at 71-72. 
 
41 Tr. at 55-56, 63, 66. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
December 9, 2015.42 Applicant acknowledges that he is an alcoholic, that he has issues, 
and that he can’t drink.43 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 The Training Department Supervisor has known Applicant since September 2010. 
Applicant has been on loan to his department since June 2016, and he has been selected 
for cross training as an instructor. Applicant excelled in all aspects of his duties. His 
enthusiasm is contagious within the department. Applicant is trustworthy, honest, and 
stable of mind and body. He gets accolades for his work ethic, humility, and enthusiasm.44 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor and manager stated that Applicant meets 
expectations for all aspects of performance and provides integral contributions to the 
mission in a variety of capacities. Applicant is considered a valued employee from the 
perspective of work ethic and performance. With the exception of his inability to report to 
work when he was being detained following a DUI; his avoidance of assignments that 
required travel when his driver’s license was suspended; and his record is red flagged 
because of the security clearance issues, Applicant is very dependable and capable.45  
A coworker at work and an associate pastor at a local church has known Applicant 
for about seven years. When they initially met, Applicant was what he called a “partier.” 
Because Applicant did not have a driver’s license, they drove to work each day and back 
in the afternoons. At times, he could smell alcohol on Applicant’s breath, but over the 
course of their relationship, he noticed changes in Applicant. They discussed Applicant’s 
activities in AA, and there is no odor of alcohol. They now work together on a daily basis. 
Applicant told him that he no longer drinks alcohol, and he believes him. Applicant is very 
knowledgeable. He is a “good guy” and a “go-getter.” There are no questions about 
Applicant’s reliability or trustworthiness because Applicant has always proven himself 
trustworthy.46 
A next-door neighbor who has resided in the community for nearly five decades 
knew that Applicant had made bad choices just out of high school when he started to 
drink. She watched Applicant grow up. He lost his driver’s license a number of times and 
paid for his bad choices. She has noticed changes in Applicant. She is aware that he has 
gone through the AA program and she sincerely believes that he is on the road to recovery 
                                                          
42 Tr. at 64-65. 
 
43 Tr. at 59, 67. 
 
44 AE H (Character Reference, dated January 10, 2017). 
 
45 AE A (Character Reference, dated August 21, 2017); AE B (Character Reference, undated); AE 
I (2016 Performance Appraisal, dated February 11, 2016). 
 
46 Tr. at 20-28. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
and will continue to grow. She believes Applicant is truly taking one step after another to 
have a full recovery.47 
Applicant’s AA sponsor has known Applicant since October 2015. During that time, 
Applicant has regularly attended AA meetings, worked the 12-step program, and is 
making good progress. Applicant has abstained since their relationship commenced. He 
is very confident of Applicant’s continued sobriety. He also noted that Applicant has been 
active in the community through volunteer work with both the local historical museum and 
the local soccer club.48 It should be noted that this witness’s recollection of Applicant’s 
participation in the 12-step program differs from Applicant’s testimony, reflected above, 
that as of the hearing he has still not returned to that program. 
The secretary of the local soccer club verified that Applicant was a volunteer for 
two seasons working for five hours each Saturday in the concession stand. Applicant is 
a reliable and honest volunteer.49 Applicant’s “volunteer” service with the soccer club was 
part of his court-mandated community service.50 
 A vice admiral, the director of a major defense program, commented on 
Applicant’s unwavering dedication and relentless push of the team with which he was 
associated, to ensure a system was set up, tested, and operational, and when hardware 
was discovered missing from the shipment, the team went above and beyond to find the 
missing hardware or secure replacements, to make the system operational.51 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”52 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”53   
 
                                                          
47 Tr. at 28-32. 
 
48 AE J (Character Reference, undated). 
 
49 AE D (Character Reference, undated). 
 
50 GE 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 25, 2016); Tr. at 72. 
 
51 AE G (Flag Letter of Commendation, dated October 3, 2013). 
 
52 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
53 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
11 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”54 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.55  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”56  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”57 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
                                                          
54 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
55 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
56 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
57 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, including those in the DOD CAF 
case file, those submitted by Applicant, his testimony, and the testimony of others, as well 
as an assessment of Applicant=s demeanor and credibility, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts and factors, I conclude the following with respect to the 
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set forth 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence. 
 
13 
                                      
 
Applicant consumed alcohol at times to excess and to the point of intoxication from 
about 1976 until at least October 2015, and that use of alcohol has, directly or indirectly, 
led to a number of incidents over a four-decade period that resulted in actions taken by 
police and court authorities. He was repeatedly charged with some alcohol-related 
charges, and while some of those charges were reduced or dismissed, several charges 
resulted in convictions. He stands convicted of a 1976 and 1991 DWI, a 2013 DUI, a 2015 
DUI reduced to reckless driving, and a 2015 refusing a breath urine blood DUI test. In 
addition, Applicant attended court-mandated substance abuse treatment programs and 
alcohol education programs, he has undergone evaluations by a qualified mental health 
professional, and received an initial diagnosis, but not a closing diagnosis of alcohol use 
disorder. While his consumption of alcohol appears to be repetitive in nature, there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that such consumption constituted binge drinking status. 
Appellant successfully completed the court-ordered programs and the requirements of 
those programs. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) have been established, and AG ¶ 22(d) has been 
partially established, but none of the other conditions have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes several examples of conditions under AG ¶ 23 that 
could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 AG ¶ 23(b) partially applies, but none of the remaining conditions apply. Because 
of their relative recency, Applicant’s 2013 and two 2015 alcohol-related incidents are the 
most significant, as far as his security clearance review is concerned. Applicant’s 
behavior, stemming from his association with alcohol, has not been infrequent, and the 
circumstances developed do not appear to be unusual. While Applicant now 
acknowledges his pattern of maladaptive alcohol use, for far too long he seemingly gave 
lip-service to it. He abstained briefly after earlier incidents. He continued to abstain for 
longer periods when required to do so, like during periods of treatment or some periods 
of probation. However, relapses continued to occur. Moreover, it is troubling that for most 
 
14 
                                      
 
of the incidents, Applicant seems to blame others for his arrests: his friend, his son, the 
restaurant manager, or others who purportedly placed him in a position where the police 
were forced to take action. Between October 1976 and October 2015, Applicant failed to 
demonstrate a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations. 
 
After decades of alcohol-related incidents, brief periods of abstinence, and 
relapses, Appellant now claims he is abstinent once again. Unfortunately, the reported 
date of the commencement of his abstinence is inconsistent. He claims to have been 
abstinent for over one year as of his January 2017, according to his Answer to the SOR; 
since October 15, 2015, according to his answers in his client information and medical 
history and his evaluation interview; since December 9, 2015, according to his testimony 
during the hearing; and after January 21, 2016, according to his statement to the OPM 
investigator. Applicant’s “sober date” should be one specific date, not a variety of possible 
dates. Even crediting him with the earliest date offered by him, Applicant would be 
abstinent since October 2015, only two and one-half years, but that would be after 
decades of alcohol consumption and abuse.  
 
Appellant successfully completed the series of programs that were court-
mandated, and based on his expressed intentions and the testing results, it appears that 
he has modified his consumption of alcohol, possibly to the point of abstinence. Despite 
his acknowledgement that AA is a good program for him, he only attends meetings on an 
irregular basis, when he thinks he needs to do so, and, contrary to the testimony of his 
sponsor, he is not working the 12-step program. Because of his lengthy history of 
maladaptive alcohol use, his indefinite period of abstinence, and his irregular attendance 
at AA, there remain significant questions as to whether such maladaptive alcohol use will 
recur. Nevertheless, Applicant should be encouraged to remain abstinent for a much 
longer period. He has failed to demonstrate a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence, and under the circumstances, there remain doubts on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes two conditions under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security 
concerns: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
 
15 
                                      
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and  
 
(d) violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a 
court-mandated rehabilitation program. 
 
My discussion related to Applicant’s Alcohol Consumption is adopted herein. In 
addition, Applicant violated his court-mandated probation as a result of his October 2015 
arrest and conviction. Accordingly, based on the actions described above, AG ¶¶ 31(a), 
31(b), and 31(d) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from criminal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32(d) partially applies. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Applicant has a four 
decade history of criminal conduct, commencing in August 1975 and continuing 
periodically until at least October 2015. He was arrested and charged with a variety of 
crimes numerous times, spent time in jail, was fined, placed on probation, lost his driver’s 
license, ordered to perform community service, required to attend several treatment and 
educational programs, and ordered to submit to random urinalysis tests. Over that 
extensive period, nothing seemed to work, for after completing his sentences, he 
subsequently returned to the court system for further action. As with his position regarding 
his alcohol-related incidents, he continued to blame others for his criminal involvement: 
his friend, his son, his ex-wife, or an undercover police officer. There is evidence of the 
successful completion of various court-mandated programs, community service, and a 
good, but partially limited employment record. However, those periods of successful 
rehabilitation were frequently overcome by relapses and a routine return to criminal 
conduct. He violated one period of probation, and for that violation, he was jailed and his 
probation was renewed. 
 
While there is evidence that certain charges have been dismissed or otherwise not 
prosecuted, those dismissals and non-prosecutions do not, without substantially more, 
necessarily reflect that Applicant did not commit the individual offenses charged. 
Generally, the passage of time without recurrence of additional criminal activity can be 
construed as some evidence of successful rehabilitation. However, in this instance, the 
 
16 
                                      
 
criminal activities have continued over four decades. While a person should not be held 
forever accountable for misconduct from the past, in this instance the past is relatively 
recent, and the concerns about future criminal conduct are continuing. Applicant’s past 
history of criminal conduct, under the circumstances, continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.58   
 
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 
60-year-old employee of a defense contractor, serving as a field service engineer with the 
company since January 2009. He was granted a secret security clearance in 1997, and 
again in 2008. He has a good employment record and is highly thought of by his manager, 
supervisor, a coworker, and neighbors. He has made efforts to remove himself from the 
clutches of alcohol, and has successfully completed several court-mandated programs. 
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a justice-involved individual whose history of criminal conduct took place over 
a four decade period. Included in that history are various incidents, some fueled by his 
consumption of alcohol, which led to criminal charges, arrests, convictions, and 
dismissals, for a variety of actions.  He also unrealistically contended that several of his 
incidents of criminal conduct were caused by the actions of others. All of the above, when 
added to his minimizing the significance of alcohol on his conduct, his self-proclaimed 
periods of abstinence, and his position that he will attend AA only when he needs to do 
so, raises the likelihood that additional alcohol consumption and criminal conduct will 
                                                          
58 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
17 
                                      
 
recur. The combination of Applicant’s actions, explanations, and beliefs cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG 
¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.g:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
           ________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
