 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                      )  ISCR Case No. 16-03625 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark Zaid, Esq. 
04/18/2018 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the People’s Republic of China 
(China). In 1985, when Applicant was 28 years old, he entered the United States. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1998. He has frequent contact with his father, and 
two sisters, who are citizens and residents of China, and visits them almost every year. 
Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 21, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant a clearance. On December 28, 2016, the DOD Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
January 20, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on September 26, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 26, 2017, scheduling a hearing 
for January 23, 2018.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered one exhibit. (GX 1) Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted exhibits (AE) A through I. All 
exhibits were admitted into the record as evidence without objections, except for HE 2 
(admitted for the limited purpose of taking administrative notice), and GE 3 (attached to 
the record to show compliance with discovery requirements). I kept the record open for 
additional submissions and Applicant submitted two exhibits, one which was a 
continuation of AX C and another, which was marked as AX J. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 31, 2018. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
the government of China. (GX 2) There were no objections, and I took administrative 
notice as requested. Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is quoted 
in the section labeled, “China,” infra. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e.  
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact:   
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old, who formed his own U.S. company doing machinery 
design. It was very successful, and in 1996, he formed another business (ASTM) that 
received government contracts. (Tr. 37)  He was born, raised, and educated in China to 
Chinese parents. He received his bachelor’s degree and master’s degree in China. (GE 
1) He came to the United States in 1985. In 1993, he obtained a doctorate in civil 
engineering from a university in the United States. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 1998. (GX 1) 
 
In 1985, Applicant married a Chinese citizen-resident, but divorced in 2007. (Tr. 
38)  She helped Applicant build his company and was in charge of customer relations.  
As a result of that marriage, Applicant has two adult daughters who are U.S. citizens.  
He remarried in 2016.  
 
He served as CEO of his company, but due to lack of a security clearance, he 
had to resign from that position in 2015. He received a Temporary Exclusion Resolution 
(AX A) which prohibited access to all classified information until eligible for a security 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearance. Before 2015, he participated in day-to-day management affairs and worked 
on classified projects. He now is on the Board of Directors for the company. (AX A)  
 
Applicant acknowledged that he has two bank accounts in China. He estimates 
the monetary value is about $26,000. He has the accounts so that his father has access 
to the money for his needs. Applicant also sends his father, who is ill, money every year 
that amounts to about $5,000. Lately, he has not sent his father an annual sum.  He has 
no other financial or property interests in China. On the other hand, he has three real 
estate properties, retirement accounts, and substantial financial interests in the United 
States. (AX B)  
 
Applicant’s 90-year-old father is a citizen and resident of China. In 1988, his 
father and mother came to the United States for almost five years. However, when his 
father became ill, they decided to go home to China permanently to better communicate 
with doctors. His parents did not speak English. (Tr. 42) Applicant’s father is retired from 
a University in Beijing, where he served on the administrative staff. (Tr. 41)  Applicant’s 
father completed mandatory military service in China. He receives a pension from the 
state. Applicant spoke to his father on the phone before he became so ill. He last saw 
him in 2016 in China and last spoke to him about one and a half years ago. Applicant 
texts his sister or the caretaker and asks how his father is doing. His father does not 
know the nature of Applicant’s work in the United States. (Tr. 45)  When Applicant 
communicated with his father, the telephone discussions were about family and health. 
Applicant traveled to China every year from 2008 until 2016. He acknowledged at the 
hearing that he has not gone the past few years due to his security clearance 
investigation. (Tr.44)  Applicant averred he will not inherit anything when his father dies.  
 
Applicant’s most recent visit to China was about two years ago when he saw his 
father. (Tr. 44) His visits usually lasted 10 to 20 days according to his 2014 SCA. On 
some occasions in the past, he would visit twice a year. (GX 1) He would go for the 
Chinese New Year and to commemorate the anniversary date of his mother’s death.  
    
Applicant’s sister is a 58-year-old citizen and resident of China. She was an 
accountant and is now retired. She worked for a private company and has no 
connection to the Chinese government. She is married to an editor. (Tr. 46) Applicant is 
not certain about the nature of the magazine. He stated that it is possible that it is 
government sponsored. (Tr. 46) Applicant communicates with his sister about once or 
twice a week by text. (Tr. 46) They generally discuss their father’s health. He spoke with 
her on the telephone about three or four months ago. (Tr. 48) She has no knowledge of 
Applicant’s work or that he seeks a security clearance. Applicant sponsored her to come 
to the United States and she was approved in 2008, but she is waiting to hear from the 
Chinese government. She and her husband would hope to come to the United States. 
(Tr.47)  
 
Applicant’s other sister is 54 years old and is a resident and citizen of China. She 
is the vice-president of a private school. He believes it is a private school. (Tr. 48)  She 
is married and her husband is an art teacher. Applicant does not believe that his 
brother-in-law has any connections to the Chinese government. (Tr. 49) Applicant does 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
not speak to him, but he talks to his sister once a week or every couple of weeks.  He 
usually texts. The conversations are about the family, especially his father’s health.  
Applicant stated that he has not talked to her in about half a year. He last saw her in 
2016 in China. (Tr. 50) His sister has never visited the United States. Applicant has 
sponsored this sister for a green card. He does not know if this sister knows about his 
work. (Tr. 51) She has never asked about his work.  
 
Applicant admitted that he had sponsored a citizen of China since 2012 for 
residence in the United States on a student visa. (Tr. 51) She is now his current wife.  
They were married in 2016. He met her through an international dating system. At first 
they emailed and a few months later, he met her in China. Her family lives in China in a 
rural area. He does not believe they have any connections to the Chinese government. 
He has not had any contact with them. (Tr. 52) His current wife is a permanent resident. 
She will be eligible for U.S. citizenship next year.  She went back to China once to finish 
school matters, but has not been back for six years. (Tr. 53) She is a stay-at-home wife.  
Applicant’s wife has an older brother in China, who is a stock broker. She speaks to her 
family in China once a week. They usually text. When Applicant’s wife gets her 
citizenship, she hopes to sponsor her parents to come to the United States.  
 
Applicant votes in U.S. elections. He loves to work.  He jogs and travels, but his 
“hobby” is work. He does not socialize with the Chinese-American community.  Most of 
his friends are from the company.  His friends are U.S. citizens.  
 
Applicant’s witnesses at the hearing spoke about his work ethic and loyalty to the 
United States. Both witnesses have known Applicant for many years and both possess 
security clearances. Applicant is described as a person who follows all rules. He is 
trustworthy, honorable and reliable. (Tr. 23)  A former commander from the U.S. Navy 
stated that he has known Applicant professionally and socially. He has no doubt as to 
Applicant’s ability to follow all rules and regulations that are required for a clearance. 
(Tr. 31) He believes that Applicant would report anything suspicious to the FSO for the 
company. (Tr. 34) 
 
Applicant submitted seven letters of reference from members of the company. 
Their statements support approval of a security clearance for Applicant. His FSO wrote 
a letter stating that he has known Applicant since 2005 and he has no concerns about 
Applicant. His company manager knows the SOR allegations and recommends 
Applicant highly. Each letter attests to Applicant’s excellent work ethic and his 
willingness to safeguard classified materials. He has made important contributions to 
the company. Their statements support approval of his security clearance.  (AE D-J)  
 
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning the government of 
China: The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as 
the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or email. 
  
In assessing the military and security developments in China, the U.S. 
Department of Defense has reported that: 
 
 Chinese actors are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and 
economic information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing 
and persistent threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat 
will evolve with continuing technological advances in the global information 
environment. 
 
 China uses its intelligence services and employs other illicit approaches that 
violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security and 
export-restricted technologies, controlled equipment, and other materials not 
readily obtainable through commercial means or academia. 
 
 China is using its computer network exploitation (CNE) capability to support 
intelligence collection against the U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense 
industrial base sectors that support U.S. national defense programs. The 
information targeted could potentially be used to benefit China’s defense 
industry, high technology, policymaker interest in U.S. leadership thinking on 
key China issues, and military planners building a picture of U.S. network 
defense networks, logistics, and related military capabilities that could be 
exploited during a crisis. 
 
 China uses State-sponsored industrial and technical espionage to increase 
the level of technologies and expertise available to support military research, 
development, and acquisition. 
 
 The organizational network of China’s military-industrial complex is such that 
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is able to access sensitive and dual-use 
technologies or knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research 
and development. 
 
 China has in place a long-term, comprehensive military modernization 
program designed to improve its armed forces’ capacity to fight short-
duration, high-intensity regional conflicts and, as China’s global footprint and 
international interests grow, its military modernization program has become 
progressively more focused on investments for a range of missions beyond 
China’s periphery. 
 
In assessing the national security implications of the bilateral trade and economic 
relationship between the U.S. and China, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission has reported: 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 Since at least the mid-2000s, the Chinese government has conducted large-
scale cyber espionage against the United States. China has compromised a 
range of U.S. networks, including those of DoD, defense contractors, and 
private enterprises. China’s material incentives for continuing this activity are 
immense and unlikely to be altered by small-scale U.S. actions. 
 
 China’s progress modernizing its defense industry is due in large part to 
China’s substantial and sustained investment in defense research and 
development (R&D). China’s large-scale, state-sponsored theft of intellectual 
property and proprietary information also has allowed China to fill knowledge 
gaps in its domestic defense and commercial R&D. 
 
 Since the 1990s, China has promoted civil-military integration to facilitate the 
transfer of commercial technologies for military use. As part of this effort, 
China has encouraged civilian enterprises to participate in military R&D and 
production, sponsored research into dual-use science and technology, and 
developed common military and civilian technical standards. 
 
 With the emergence of a more modern and able domestic defense industrial 
base, China is gradually shifting its focus from purchasing complete foreign 
systems to procuring foreign military and dual-use subsystems and 
components via open sources, trade, and traditional and nontraditional 
espionage. Among China’s most effective methods used to acquire sensitive 
U.S. technology are cyber espionage, witting and unwitting collection by 
Chinese students, scholars, and scientists; joint ventures; and foreign 
cooperation. 
 
With respect to human rights concerns observed in China in 2014, the U.S. 
Department of State reported: 
 
 The Peoples Republic of China (PRC) is an authoritarian state in which the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is the paramount authority. CCP members 
hold almost all top government and security apparatus positions. 
 
 Repression and coercion were routine, particularly against organizations and 
individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy and public interest 
issues, ethnic minorities, and law firms that took on sensitive cases. 
 
 Human rights concerns that were observed during 2014 also included a wide 
variety of human rights violations from extrajudicial killings to various 
violations of due process. 
 
The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms (including meeting rooms), offices, cars, taxis, 
telephones, Internet, usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and personal possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched 
without knowledge or consent.  
    
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in China. Applicant’s father and two 
sisters are citizens and residents of China. His mother died in 2007.  He is close to his 
father and visits China almost every year. Applicant has frequent contact with his family. 
He provides financial support to his father living in China. He has bank accounts in 
China.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection for 
her mother and sister as indicated by her frequent contact with them and her almost 
annual visits to China to visit her mother.   
 
Applicant’s relationships with residents of China create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help his relatives, who live in China. For example, if intelligence agents or government 
officials in China wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on 
his father or sisters residing in China. Applicant would then be subject to coercion 
through his relatives and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
An applicant’s possession of close family ties with their family living in a foreign 
country are not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
collection operations against the United States. The relationship of China with the 
United States, and China’s “history of conducting espionage against the United States 
puts a heavy burden of proof on Applicant” to demonstrate that his relationships with 
family members living in China do not pose a security risk. See ISCR Case No. 12-
04780 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013). Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist relatives living in China.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
relatives living in China. Nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in 
the future. Applicant’s relationships with family members living in China create a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist relatives in China by providing sensitive or 
classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts or relationships with family living in China, raising the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established 
and further inquiry is necessary to determine the potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his father and sisters, who are citizens and residents of China. He has visited his father 
and sisters almost every year, and he texts or phones his sisters. His current wife 
communicates with her parents in China every week.   
 
Applicant’s loyalty and connections to family living in China are positive character 
traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same connections negate the 
possibility of full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), and Applicant failed to fully meet 
his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with family living in 
China] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s relationship 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interest created 
by his relationships with family living in China.  
 
There is no evidence that the Chinese government or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family to coerce Applicant 
for classified or sensitive information. However, there would be little reason for U.S. 
competitors or enemies to seek classified information from an applicant before that 
applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in China. 
Applicant’s family living in China could become potential targets of intelligence agents 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s family living in 
China.   
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States and more limited 
connections to China. He has substantial financial assets in the United States. 
Notwithstanding, his connections to his family living in China are significant. Security 
concerns are not analyzed in a piecemeal assessment. Instead, the overall situation 
must be considered. Applicant’s close relationship to his father and sisters, who are 
vulnerable to potential Chinese coercion, outweighs his connections to the United 
States in the security analysis. Moreover, Applicant is personally vulnerable to coercion 
when he visits China, as he does almost annually until recently. However, he plans on 
another trip quite soon. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are not 
mitigated.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in 
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
There are some facts supporting a grant of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. He entered the United States in 1985, and began attending a U.S. 
university. He was awarded a doctorate in the United States. He has minimal financial 
interests in China. Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2009. His company has 
successfully worked for a government contractor for many years. He has two adult 
daughters who are U.S. citizens. His current wife is a permanent resident in the United 
States. He has excellent references from colleagues. He has substantial financial 
interests in the United States.  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents.2 
The danger of coercion from the Chinese government or intelligence agents is more 
likely than in many other countries. China competes with the United States militarily, 
diplomatically, and through trade. China has a history of espionage targeting U.S. 
military and industrial secrets. 
The weight of the evidence supports denial of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s father and sister are citizens and residents of China. Applicant 
has close ties of affection and obligation to his father and sisters.  His current wife has 
frequent contact with her family in China. “It is not to question Applicant’s patriotism to 
acknowledge that the record in [Applicant’s] case raises the reasonable concern that 
[he] could be placed in a position of having to choose between [his] ties to the U.S. and 
[his] obligations to [his] foreign family members.” ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 5 (App. 
Bd. May 9, 2008) (reversing grant of security clearance because of Chinese 
connections). Applicant should not be placed into a position where Chinese government 
or intelligence officials could coerce his father, sisters, or Applicant, to attempt to obtain 
classified information. I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence 
security concern. 
Formal Findings 
 Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
