 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03762 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, or Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On June 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant timely answered the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on September 1, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on October 10, 2017, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a 
two-page response to the FORM on November 24, 2017. The Government’s evidence, 
identified as Items 1 through 11, are admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on March 20, 2018.  
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He graduated from high school in 1987, and took 
college courses for four years but did not obtain a degree. Applicant has been employed 
by a federal contractor since September 2015. He reports no military service and no 
previous security clearance. Applicant was married in 1993 and divorced in 1995; 
married again in 1996 and divorced in 1998; and he has been married a third time since 
1999. Applicant reports periods of unemployment from July 2009 to March 2011; June 
2011 to May 2012; March 2014 to August 2014; and February 2015 to August 2015. 
Applicant was terminated by his employer in June 2009, and he was terminated by 
another employer in February 2015, before his latest period of unemployment. Applicant 
reported a few of his alleged delinquent debts in section 26 of his 2015 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA).2  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR, including the student loans, a few medical debts, and a cell phone debt at 
SOR ¶ 1.c. The delinquencies alleged in the SOR are all supported by credit bureau 
reports.3 He also denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a stating “I did not falsify the answer. 
I was unsure how to answer the DUI question and I took the advice of a colleague when 
completing the SF-86.”4 Applicant did disclose the DUI arrest alleged at SOR ¶ 2.a to 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator who conducted Applicant’s 
clearance interview on December 10, 2015, after he was asked if he had ever been 
arrested for an alcohol related offense. It was later reduced to a misdemeanor. He then 
described it in detail, and stated that he paid the $300 fine the same day at court.5  
 
The specific question in section 22 of the SCA, asked Applicant if “you have 
EVER been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” In his clearance 
interview in September 2016, Applicant was confronted with an outstanding bench 
warrant issued on September 21, 1998, in the amount of $15,000. He claimed to be 
unaware of the warrant and stated he “would look into this.”6 Applicant attached extracts 
from court records to his Answer. The extracts show that the warrant was issued by the 
court following his DUI offense that was reduced to a misdemeanor. It reflects that on 
September 11, 1998, neither Applicant nor his attorney appeared in court to provide the 
court with “proof of a miscellaneous item” as mandated by the court. Although Applicant 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 26, 2015 
security clearance application (SCA) (Item 3) and personal subject interviews (PSI) of December 10, 
2015, and September 16, 2016. (Item 5).  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Items 4, 6, and 12. 
 
4 Item 2, and attachments including extracts from court records, and a letter to the court in California. 
 
5 Item 5. 
 
6  Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
wrote to the court seeking information, the advice he received was to have his attorney 
come into the court, or come in himself and speak to the judge.7 These options were not 
viable to Applicant. The warrant is still outstanding and the matter unresolved.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.e through 1.h, concern delinquent student loans totaling 
$12,918. In his clearance interview in December 2015, Applicant indicated that the 
student loans went into collections in June 2015, and he “is working on a payment 
plan.”8 Yet, he has produced no evidence that he followed through. He attached a 
portion of a recent credit report to his Answer showing that he has no debts in 
collections presently.9 He produced no evidence of a payment plan or continuous 
stream of payments for the student loans. SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were delinquent medical 
debts that Applicant claimed were incurred by his ex-wife(s). SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent 
cell phone debt in collections that Applicant claimed to be unaware of. Again, he 
produced no documentation to show that he  contacted the creditors, disputed, or made 
payments on this debt, or the aforementioned medical debts. Applicant provided no 
evidence of financial counseling or a budget.  
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
                                                          
7 Item 2, see attached letter to Mr. Benoit.  
 
8 Item 5. 
 
9 There is more than one plausible explanation for the absence of debts from a credit report, such as the 
removal of debts due to the passage of time, and the absence of unsatisfied debts from an Applicant’s 
credit report does not extenuate or mitigate and overall history of financial difficulties or constitute 
evidence of financial reform or rehabilitation. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-04425 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 
17, 2002) and ISCR Case No. 03-05197 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2004). 
 
 
4 
 
 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and his clearance interview of December 2015. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10 Applicant has not met that burden. None of the 
delinquent debts have been sufficiently resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control … , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
                                                          
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant endured divorces and periods of unemployment or underemployment. 
Arguably, these conditions were beyond his control. He has produced inadequate 
documentation showing efforts to address his delinquencies, either with his Answer to 
the SOR or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The mitigating conditions 
enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
 
7 
 
 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR 
¶ 2.a, his intent is an issue. Under ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
The question in section 22 of the SCA clearly asked if Applicant was EVER arrested for 
an offense involving alcohol or drugs. It is unambiguous. Applicant discussed his 
answer with a colleague in his company before responding, and answered it negatively. 
Although the arrest occurred 20 years ago, and it was pled down to a misdemeanor, a 
bench warrant is still outstanding from that arrest and subsequent conviction. Applicant 
did not disclose this. He claims to have fully disclosed it to the OPM investigator prior to 
being confronted with it. However, the PSI indicates that he was specifically asked 
about alcohol-related offenses, by the OPM investigator, before discussing it. He was 
not forthcoming. I conclude that he had the specific intent to deceive when he provided 
this wrong answer in section 22, and he deliberately falsified the SCA. SOR ¶ 2.a has 
not been mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E and Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines.   
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He was not forthcoming 
 
8 
 
 
about his DUI arrest, and he still has not resolved the bench warrant issue. He has not 
met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, or Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:             Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:                                   Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
