 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04107 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on June 14, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 26, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 5, 2018, scheduling 
the hearing for March 21, 2018. The hearing was cancelled because of weather. The 
hearing convened on March 29, 2018. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 6, 2018.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. GE 5 and 6 were admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Russia, China, Israel, Turkey, and India. Without objection, I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the requests. The facts are summarized in 
the written requests and will not be repeated in this decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He does consulting work for a defense contractor who 
is sponsoring him for a security clearance. He has held a security clearance for most of 
the last 40 years. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 1979. He is 
married with two adult children.1 
  
 Applicant is the sole owner and only employee of a consulting company. He is 
one of about 350 professionals worldwide who are affiliated with and certified by an 
institute that is associated with a U.S. university. They provide consultations, appraisals, 
and training in the practices and processes adopted by the institute. Applicant and the 
other professionals are listed on the institute’s website. Companies, including foreign 
companies, will contact the institute or the professionals directly to train their companies 
in those practices. Applicant has obtained business though the institute, including with 
foreign-based companies from the United Kingdom, Netherlands, the Republic of Korea, 
Belgium, Russia, China, Israel, Turkey, and India. He traveled to those countries to 
provide consulting work.2 
 
 Applicant’s foreign consultations usually take about six weeks, but some of the 
work is much shorter. He then typically returns several years later to appraise how the 
processes have been implemented. His current clients include a Chinese company. He 
has not worked for a Russian company in about 15 years. His foreign business provides 
less than 5% of his annual income. He has more than $1.6 million in investment and 
retirement accounts. Losing any or all of his foreign business would not adversely affect 
his finances. None of his foreign clients were in the defense sector.3 
 
 Applicant reported his foreign travel and business connections to the security 
officer for the company that is sponsoring his security clearance. He credibly testified 
that he has never been approached to provide classified or sensitive information, and 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-29; GE 1, 4. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-26, 29-34, 40-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-26, 34-42, 48-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A-D, G. 
 
3 
 
that he would immediately report it if it occurred. He expressed his “deep and abiding 
loyalty to the United States.”4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 40, 49; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE E. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7 and mitigate those concerns under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially 
applicable in this case:   
 
7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
7(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest;  
8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
5 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
Applicant has conducted business with foreign-based companies in Russia, 
China, Israel, Turkey, and India. The business was predominantly obtained though his 
affiliation with an institute associated with a U.S. university. None of his foreign clients 
were in the defense sector. The work is by nature limited in time and value. His foreign 
business provides less than 5% of his annual income. He has more than $1.6 million in 
investment and retirement accounts. Losing any or all of his foreign business would not 
adversely affect his finances. He credibly testified that he has never been approached 
to provide classified or sensitive information, and that he would immediately report it if it 
occurred. 
I find that Applicant’s foreign business connections are small in comparison with 
his U.S. business and assets. They are far outweighed by Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. They could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure him. They are unlikely to result in a 
conflict of interest, and Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. It is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the United States and the interests of any foreign 
country. Any security concerns raised by Applicant’s foreign business connections are 
mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
