 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03967 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns 
related to her connections to the United Kingdom. National security eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
History of Case 
 
On February 25, 2016, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 10, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C (foreign 
preference).  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 9, 2017, and requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. On March 29, 
2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant 
 
 
 
 
2 
and received by her on April 13, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant timely submitted additional information in response to the FORM that I 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. In it, she noted minor factual corrections to 
information in Item 5, which is her Enhanced Subject Interview, dated October 4, 2016.1  
She did not object to the admissibility of any other Items. Items 1 through 4 are admitted 
into evidence. Item 5 is admitted, subject to Applicant’s factual corrections, as noted in 
AE A. Department Counsel had no objection to AE A. It is admitted. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals assigned this case to me on October 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR and provided explanations. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. She was born in the United States to British citizens. She 
has held dual citizenship with both countries since her birth. She attended school in the 
United Kingdom (UK) from 1980 to 1983 and earned a degree. In 1983, she married a 
man, who also holds dual citizenship with the United States and the UK. They have one 
child who is a dual citizen. Applicant’s mother, some siblings, and in-laws are resident 
citizens of the UK. (Item 4)  
 
 From 1988 to 1996, Applicant and her husband lived in the United States. They 
then sold their home in the United States and moved to the UK, where they purchased a 
home. That home has an estimated value of $700,000. In 2010, they purchased a home 
in the United States, which they use when residing here. She lives in each country half-
time. She has held a bank account with her husband in the UK since 1983. She estimated 
that she had $3,000 in her UK account at the time she submitted her February 2016 e-
QIP. She stated she needs a bank account there in order to live in the country. She also 
has a U.S. bank account. (Item 4; Item 2; AE A)  
 
 As a citizen and resident of the UK, Applicant has been receiving medical benefits 
from the government since 1996. She is entitled to receive them until her death. She 
estimated they are worth $50,000. She needs the benefits while residing there and has 
no ability to refuse them. (Item 4; Item 2; AE A)  
 
 Applicant owns a small business. Since 1995, she has subcontracted services to 
a U.S. department that has an agreement with a British ministry to development a specific 
project. She said the project is directed by U.S. employees. She is paid in U.S. dollars 
and pays taxes in the UK. She files U.S. tax returns and pays applicable taxes. In May 
2015, she voted in a general election in the UK. (Item 2; AE A) 
  
                                            
1 Applicant’s corrections to Item 5 are listed on AE A, page 2.  
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant has held a current British passport prior to the time she renewed it in 
2007. She uses that passport for convenience purposes when she enters and exits the 
UK and other countries, as alleged in the SOR. She uses her U.S. passport to enter and 
exit the United States. She said she must maintain a UK passport in order to work there 
in a supportive role for the U.S. department. (Item 2; Item 5; AE A)  
 
 Applicant has repeatedly stated in documents that she maintains dual citizenship 
in order to operate her business which benefits the United States. She said there is no 
conflict of interest or pressures to favor the interests of the UK. She emphasized that the 
UK is an ally of the U.S. and does not sponsor terrorism. (Item 2; AE A) 
 
 The Department did not file documents setting forth facts that indicate the UK is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified information or poses a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation or coercion. 
  
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines, which became effective 
within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
 
 
 
4 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants eligibility 
for access to classified information or assignment in sensitive duties. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides, “Any determination under this order adverse to 
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, 
Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant has substantial financial and property interests in the UK, which consist 
of a $700,000 residence and a bank account that has $3,000. However, those financial 
interests do not subject her to a heightened risk of foreign influence or personal conflict 
of interest, given the fact that the UK is one of the U.S.’s closest allies. This guideline is 
found in her favor and a discussion of mitigating conditions is not relevant.    
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 sets out the foreign preference concern: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact 
that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not disqualifying 
without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at concealment. 
The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or privilege of 
foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain recognition of a 
foreign citizenship. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists the conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any 
country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of 
employment, position, or political office in a foreign 
government or military organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in any way that 
conflicts with U.S. national security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of intent 
to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
Based on the fact that the UK is the country in issue in this case and it is a close 
ally of the United States, none of the above disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant did 
not apply for citizenship with the UK. She received it at birth. She fully disclosed her 
possession of a UK passport. There is no evidence that she fails to use her U.S. passport 
when she enters or exits the United States. Her receipt of medical benefits or voting one 
time in the UK’s general election are not activities that conflict with U.S. national security 
interests. There is no evidence that she uses foreign citizenship to protect her financial 
interests in the UK in violation of U.S. law. She has not declared an intent to renounce 
her U.S. citizenship. This guideline is found in her favor. Hence, a discussion of mitigating 
conditions is not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My comments under Guidelines B and C 
are incorporated into this whole-person analysis. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant met her burden to 
mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns raised by the facts 
of this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
 
________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
