KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a
case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful
error.  Because Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error, the decision of the Judge
denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is affirmed.
CASENO: 16-02557.a1
DATE: 04/11/2018
 
DATE: April 11, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 16-02557
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On April 28, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On January 22, 2018, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a narrative statement about the circumstances that caused Applicant’s financial
problems and his efforts to resolve them.  He also contends that he is a trusted employee who would
never do anything to compromise sensitive information.  
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
