 
1 
  
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04089 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has delinquent financial 
obligations and falsified his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP). He has failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 6, 2017, 
the DoD Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. On July 3, 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. On August 25, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). The FORM contained 12 attachments (Items 1-12), which were admitted into 
evidence. On September 8, 2017, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to object to the Government’s evidence and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from 
his receipt of the FORM to submit any additional information in response to the FORM. 
The response was due on October 8, 2017. No additional information was received from 
Applicant. On December 19, 2018, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the 13 delinquent obligations, a 
garnishment, a judgment, failing to file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 
through 2015, falsifying his e-QIP by failing to list his failure to file income tax returns and 
delinquent financial obligations. He also admitted two driving while intoxicated convictions 
and an April 2007 court-martial conviction. He denied falsifying a February 2017 response 
to DOHA interrogatories related to failing to disclose prior illegal drug use. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old master trades person who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 2015, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) From 
May 2005 through August 2007, he was married. He has seven children ages 3 through 
16. He served honorably in the U.S. Navy from July 2000 through July 2008, obtaining 
the grade of E-4. (Item 3, Item 11, Item 12)  
In December 2006, Applicant was court martialed for false official statement in 
violation of Article 107 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) and for larceny in 
violation Article 121. After being stopped for speeding, he gave a false statement as to 
why vehicle tags belonging to another vehicle were on his car. He ultimately admitted to 
the larceny of the tags because he did not have the money to register and get proper 
registration for his vehicle. (Item 4) Applicant was sentenced to 30 days confinement, 
forfeiture of one-half month pay for two months, and reduction to E-3. (Item 11) He did 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
3 
not list the court martial on his November 2015 e-QIP because he was embarrassed about 
it and thought it had occurred outside the scope of the question, which he believed was 
seven years. (Item 11) 
 Since leaving the U.S. Navy in July 2008, Applicant had one period of 
unemployment; February 2015 through July 2015, after relocating to his current state. 
(Item 3, Item 11) 
 In November 2008, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). 
He was intoxicated and, at that time, was drinking to intoxication approximately three 
times a week. (Item 11) His preliminary breathalyzer test resulted in a .21% blood alcohol 
content (BAC). He was found guilty of the charge and ordered to attend Alcohol Safety 
Action Program (ASAP), pay a $500 fine, and pay his attorney fees of $1,000. (Item 11) 
Eight months later, in July 2009, he was arrested for driving under the influence, second 
offense. His BAC was .13%. After being found guilty, he was sentenced to 12 months 5 
days jail time with 11 months and 15 days suspended, unsupervised probation, and to 
attend ASAP and counseling. (Item 11) He did not complete ASAP due to moving out of 
state. In his personal subject interview, he could not recall why he failed to list his second 
arrest, but did acknowledge that he did not want to look bad and was embarrassed by 
listing both arrests. (Item 11) 
 In Applicant’s August 22, 2016 personal subject interview, he asserted, but failed 
to provide supporting documentation that he was paying $100 monthly on his television 
service collection debt (SOR 1.h, $955) He has provided no documentation showing 
payment on a telephone service collection account (SOR 1.f, $2,061) and a credit card 
account (SOR 1.i, $568). (Item 11) He asserted, but failed to document, that he had 
arranged to pay $150 monthly on his student loans (SOR 1.c, $5,954; SOR 1.d, $3,104; 
and SOR 1.l, $3,636). (Item 11) He asserted, but failed to document, that another 
education collection debt (SOR 1.j, $568) had been paid. (Item 11) At the time of the 
personal interview, he intended to contact the creditor of a $2,872 collection account 
(SOR 1.e) and arrange payments. (Item 11) He provided no documentation showing he 
had done so.  
 When Applicant completed his personal subject interview, he estimated he was 
approximately $20,000 delinquent on his child support obligation (SOR 1.a, $19,962). 
(Item 11) He asserted, but failed to provide documentation, that he pays $700 monthly by 
garnishment to two of his children and pays $250 monthly for another child SOR 1.b, 
$7,647). His other four children live with him. (Item 11)  
 In Applicant’s SOR answer, he admitted the past-due account (SOR 1.g, $1,103) 
and delinquent medical debt (SOR 1.k, $417). (Item 2) In October 2008, a judgment (SOR 
1.m, $381) was obtained by an apartment complex against Applicant. (Item 8) against 
Applicant. He provided no documents showing payment of these delinquent obligations.  
 Applicant admitted failing to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for 
tax years 2011 through and including tax year 2015 and that he owed an unknown amount 
of past-due taxes. (Item 2) In his February 2017 response to written financial 
 
4 
interrogatories he asserted, but failed to provide supporting documentation, that he had 
filed all the returns and yet owed an undisclosed amount of tax. (Item 12) The FORM put 
Applicant on specific notice that he had not provided documentary proof concerning his 
tax filings. 
 The FORM also put Applicant on notice that his SOR answer had failed to provide 
documentation that he either paid or successfully refuted the validity of his delinquent 
debts. He was informed he needed to provide documentary evidence supporting his 
assertions of payment. Despite this notice, Applicant did not respond to the FORM. He 
provided no documentation showing what efforts he undertook to pay, contact creditors, 
or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. He did not provide any documentation showing 
the current status of his delinquent debts. 
 Applicant denied he falsified his February 2017 response to interrogatories by 
denying any illegal drug use that prevented him from obtaining employment with the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 2008 due to illegal drug use. (Item 12) A 
November 2015 FBI document states, “October, 2008 Quick Hire Automatic Disqualifier: 
Drug Violation – Not Marijuana, Past 10 Yrs or More than Experimental.” (Item 6) The 
additional FBI documents in the record contain no mention of drug use. (Item 5)  
  
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for the national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
 
6 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
financial considerations security concerns. AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: AG 
¶ 19(a) “inability to satisfy debts,” ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” 
and AG ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required,” apply 
to this case. The SOR alleged more than $49,000 owed on delinquent obligations. 
Additionally, although asserting he had resolved his tax filing issues, he provided no 
documentation showing his 2011 through 2015 Federal and state tax returns were filed 
or that taxes due for those tax years were paid. He provided no documentation refuting 
the delinquent obligations that were listed in his credit reports and which he admitted to 
in his SOR answer. 
 
The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
 Six of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
7 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 In Applicant’s August 2016 personal subject interview, he stated his child support 
obligations were being met by garnishment, that he had worked out a repayment 
agreement on his student loans, and that he was working to resolve his delinquent 
obligations. He provided no information as to payment on his delinquent obligations or 
repayment arrangements with his creditors.  
 
 Applicant’s debts remain unpaid. Accumulating the delinquent obligations did not 
occur under unusual conditions. There is no showing that the failure to timely pay those 
obligations was an unusual condition unlikely to recur. From February 2015 through July 
2015, he was unemployed. He failed to present documentation showing the effect of this 
period of unemployment, more than two years previous, on his current finances. He 
provided no information as to the impact on his current finances caused by the 
unemployment. He provided insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. His delinquencies continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has been employed full-time since October 2015. He provided no 
evidence of what responsible steps, if any, he took to pay or resolve his debts. The second 
prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith 
payments towards his delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing 
a reasonable ongoing plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant indicated he has filed his tax returns. However, AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply because he has not provided documented proof to substantiate the filing of his 
delinquent tax returns or that any delinquent taxes have been paid. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigations 
or adjudicative processes . . .  
 
 When Applicant completed his November 2015 e-QIP he failed to disclose he had 
not filed his Federal and state tax returns for tax years 2011 through, in response to 
 
8 
Section 26 – Financial Record Taxes.  He listed he owed approximately $20,000 in child 
support, but failed to disclose his other delinquent obligations in response to Section 26 
– Financial Record. AG ¶ 16(a), ¶ 16(d) and ¶ 16(e) are implicated to a greater or less 
extent. They provide: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standings. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to disclose his failure to timely file tax returns and pay his 
delinquent financial obligations demonstrates a lack of candor required of persons 
entrusted with a security clearance. The government has an interest in examining all 
relevant and material adverse information about an Applicant before making a security 
clearance determination. The government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that 
adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or 
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself 
provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent violations or other 
concerns in the future, something the government relies on to perform damage 
assessments and limit the compromise of sensitive information. Applicant’s conduct 
suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government interests. 
 
Additional personal conduct concerns involved two DUI convictions that occurred 
more than eight years ago and a ten-year-old court-martial conviction. These events are 
not recent and are sufficiently remote as to have little impact on Applicant’s current 
personal conduct security concerns. Applicant denied failing to list he failed to get a job 
with the FBI in 2008 due to illegal drug use. He denied using illegal drugs on his February 
2017 response to interrogatories. The FBI document is so cryptic as to fail to prove he 
used illegal drugs. Even if true, the use of illegal drugs and failing to obtain a job ten years 
ago offers little insight as to his current personal conduct security concerns. I find for 
Applicant as to SOR 2.c, 2.d, 2.e, and 2.f. However, the personal conduct security 
 
9 
concerns raised by his failure to list his unfiled Federal and state tax returns and failing to 
list his delinquent obligations on his e-QIP are not mitigated and remain a concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s honorable active duty service in the U.S. Navy. His 
DUI convictions, his court-martial conviction, and failure to get a job with the FBI due to 
alleged illegal drug use are sufficiently remote in time as to be of little security concern. 
However, his failure to reveal his unfiled and unpaid Federal and state tax returns and his 
delinquent financial obligations on his November 2015 e-QIP remain a concern. 
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about his 
delinquent debts since his August 2016 personal subject interview, the June 2017 SOR, 
and the August 2017 FORM put him on notice of the Government’s concern about his 
delinquent accounts. There is no evidence he has contacted his creditors. He provided 
no documentation regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debts and has failed 
to show documentation he has established repayment agreements to address the 
delinquent debts. 
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt and tax issues. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on only the very limited response in his SOR Answer, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. Failing to explain his false e-QIP answers remains a personal 
conduct security concern. He did not provide information to explain or mitigate his 
 
10 
falsifications on his November 2015 e-QIP and they remain a security concern under 
personal conduct.  
 
 It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). At the 
same time, security clearance decisions are not intended as punishment for past 
wrongdoing, but rather involve an assessment of future risk that one may not properly 
handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether an applicant’s financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold 
a security clearance. (See AG & 2(e)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his financial considerations and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - n:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - b:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.c- f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
