KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Although the Judge erred in some of her findings of fact, those errors were harmless
because they likely had no affect on the outcome of the case. We note that Applicant’s student
loans represent the main security concerns upon which the Judge based her unfavorable decision. 
He has not challenged any of the Judge’s findings regarding his student loans. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 16-01329.a1
DATE: 04/11/2018
DATE: April 11, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-01329
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Phoenix S. Ayotte, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 29, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  At the hearing, the Government withdrew the sole
Guideline E allegation.  On December 12, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is a 34-year-old  employee of a defense contractor.  The SOR alleged that he had
17 delinquent debts totaling about $48,000.  The Judge found against Applicant on seven student
loans totaling about $41,000 and two consumer collection accounts.1  She found in favor of him on
the remaining allegations.  
Applicant experienced some short unemployment in 2011.  He also attributed his financial
problems to poor money management.  He stated that his student loans were in deferment, but did
not submit any documentation confirming that status.  He provided a default notice for the student
loans from 2015 and a bank statement showing one $75 payment toward them.  He was offered an
opportunity to present further information about the student loans in a post-hearing submission, but
did not submit any information.  He stated that he was in the process of trying to resolve them.  
Applicant had a debt consolidation plan for five accounts totaling about $4,000 and made
payments under that plan in 2015, but it is not clear whether the accounts in that plan are the same
as those in the SOR.  He also obtained the services of a law firm that represents consumers.  He
made payments to the firm, but it is not clear which accounts the firm was trying to resolve.  He did
not present a budget or state he received financial counseling.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which are ongoing.  “He reported some
unemployment, but was not proactive with resolving debts or student loans.  He did not provide
documentation about his student [loan] deferments after the hearing.  He has not provided sufficient
evidence that he has acted responsibly in rectifying his financial situation.”  Decision at 6.
Discussion
1 The two consumer collection accounts totaled less than $900.
2
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  When a Judge’s finding are
challenged, we examine them to see if they are supported by substantial evidence, i.e., “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
04226 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) and ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in making the following findings of fact:
a.  That Applicant paid $1,071 to resolve a charged-off account for a repossessed vehicle.2 
In challenging this finding, Applicant cites to Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) B that shows he made three
payments of over $1,000 to resolve the debt.  While the Judge found in favor of Applicant on the
allegation pertaining to this debt, Applicant is essentially arguing the Judge’s erroneous finding
understates his efforts to resolve his debts.  
b.  That Applicant did not present evidence of financial counseling.  In challenging this
finding, Applicant cites to his testimony regarding the financial “guidance” he  received from the
law firm that represents consumers.  Tr. at 64-65.
c.  That Applicant was not proactive about debt resolution and had only recently addressed
that issue.  This assignment of error involves two separate challenges.  The first challenge involves
a sentence, fully quoted above, that also states Applicant was not proactive in resolving his student
loans.  We note this sentence is not a finding of fact, but is a conclusion based upon the Judge’s
analysis of the evidence.  The second challenge pertains to two sentences in the decision, which
state: “Applicant has recently paid smaller debts and settled some accounts.  He appears to have
done so after the issuance of the SOR.”  Decision at 6.  In these sentences, the Judge is referring to
Applicant’s actions taken on certain debts and not to his overall mitigative efforts as he implies in
the appeal brief.  In this regard, we note that the Judge found that Applicant made payments on his
debts as far back as 2015, which was well before the issuance of the SOR. 
d.  That the Judge erroneously found against Applicant on the two consumer collection
accounts.  Applicant contends that he provided documents in his post-hearing submission that these
debts were resolved.  A letter from a creditor in his post-hearing submission reflects that one of
those accounts was settled for less than the full balance in April 2017.  AX E.  As for the other
account, Applicant claims he settled that debt with a $355 payment to a third party reflected on his
bank statement, but there is no documentation linking that payment to the alleged debt.  
Although the Judge erred in some of her findings of fact, those errors were harmless because
they likely had no affect on the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-15184 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 25, 2013).   We note that Applicant’s student loans represent the main security concerns
2  The Judge in the decision and Applicant’s Counsel in the appeal brief refer to an incorrect amount.  AX B
shows Applicant made three payments of $1,017.80.     
3
upon which the Judge based her unfavorable decision.  He has not challenged any of the Judge’s
findings regarding his student loans.     
Applicant also contends the Judge erred in her formal findings when she found against him
on Paragraph 1 of the SOR, which quotes the “The Concern” paragraph in Guideline F.3  He argues
that paragraph addresses matters – such as gambling, mental health conditions, substance abuse, and
illegal activity – that do not apply in his case.  We note, however, that it is longstanding agency
practice for a Judge to find against an applicant either on The Concern paragraph or the guideline
as a whole whenever he or she makes an unfavorable formal finding to any of that guideline’s
subparagraphs listing specific security concerns.  In this case, the Judge did not err in finding against
Applicant on Paragraph 1 of the SOR because it also states in part that “failure to . . . satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”  
    
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to either a claim that the Judge did not
consider record evidence or a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  These
arguments, however, are not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record, nor are they sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in an
manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to the law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01284
at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2015). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
3 See, Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 18.
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale               
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
