 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03988 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Anthony J. Kuhn, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines M (Use of 
Information Technology) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 17, 2016. On 
May 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines M and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 6, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 20, 2017, 
and the case was assigned to me on December 13, 2017. On January 3, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for January 24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A through I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on January 31, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.d, 
and 2.g. He admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.c, 2.e, and 2.f in part. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 67-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He worked for other 
federal contractors from 1982 to 1985, 2000 to 2002, and 2003 to 2016, and he held a 
security clearance during each of those employments. (GX 3.)  
 
Applicant served as a U.S. Army officer on active duty from May 1972 to March 
1976. He successfully completed several rigorous military training courses. (AX G.) His 
efficiency report for his performance as a platoon leader, holding the rank of second 
lieutenant, placed him in the “excellent” category and recommended promotion along 
with his contemporaries. (AX I at 2-3.) His efficiency report rating him as section leader, 
holding the rank of first lieutenant, rated him in the “excellent” category and 
recommended promotion along with his contemporaries. (AX I at 5-6.) His efficiency 
report rating him as a company executive officer, holding the rank of first lieutenant, 
rated him as “superior” (the second highest rating) and recommended promotion ahead 
of his contemporaries. (AX I at 8-9.) 
 
In June 1975, Applicant was arrested for shoplifting a magazine containing 
photographs of nude adult women from the Post Exchange. He resigned in lieu of trial 
by court-martial and received a general discharge under honorable conditions. His 
arrest and resignation are alleged in SOR ¶ 2.g. 
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he took the magazine and tried to leave 
the Post Exchange without paying for it. He testified that he was embarrassed and did 
not want to peruse it in the presence of women and children, and he intended to take it 
outside, look at it in his car, and return it. As he left with the magazine under his coat, he 
was apprehended. (Tr. 26-27.) He testified that he did not pay for the magazine 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
3 
 
because he would have been embarrassed to be seen holding the magazine as he paid 
for it. (Tr. 53-54.) 
 
When Applicant submitted his SCA, he listed his discharge from the Army as 
“general,” and he listed the reason for his discharge as “obligation completed.” (GX 1 at 
11.) When he was interviewed by a security investigator in July 2016, he admitted that 
he resigned his commission after being charged with shoplifting. He said that he did not 
know why he listed the reason for his discharge as “obligation completed.” (GX 2 at 15-
16.) In response to DOHA interrogatories in February 2017, he disclosed that he 
resigned in lieu of court-martial, but he stated that he believed that “obligation 
completed” was the correct reason for the termination of his military service. (GX 2 at 6, 
10.) At the hearing, he admitted that he did not complete his five-year service obligation, 
and it would not have been completed until May 1977. (Tr. 29.) 
 
 From February 2003 to September 2015, Applicant worked for a federal 
contractor supporting another government agency (AGA).3 From June 2015 to 
September 2015, Applicant used the AGA’s computer to view nude photographs of 
adult women. He testified that he looked for websites containing images of nude women 
about ten times in three months. (Tr. 56.) While he was at his desk, investigators from 
the AGA entered his office and asked if he was viewing inappropriate images. He told 
them he was, and they took the hard drive from his computer. A few minutes later, his 
supervisor took his security badge and told him to go home. (Tr. 15-16.) His access to 
the computer network was terminated by the AGA in September 2015, and the AGA told 
Applicant’s employer that his services were no longer needed. (GX 6.) His employer told 
him by email that he was on unpaid administrative leave until further notice. (Tr. 18.)  
 
Applicant testified that, after several months, he orally told his employer’s vice-
president that he was resigning. He testified that he believed that this conversation 
terminated his employment. He was unsure of the date of his conversation with the vice-
president. He testified that he thought it was in April but it could have been earlier in 
February 2016. (Tr. 19.) 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, two follow-up interviews by security 
investigators in July and August 2016, responses to interrogatories, and at the hearing, 
he denied that he was fired. Documentation from the AGA reflects that it terminated 
Applicant’s position as a contract employee supporting the AGA in September 2015. 
(GX 6.) Applicant has consistently stated that he was awaiting another assignment from 
his employer when he resigned. (GX 2 at 9, 14, 20.) His employer’s internal records 
reflect that he was terminated in January 2016, but there is no evidence in the record 
reflecting that he was notified of his termination. Applicant’s termination is alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a and cross-alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.f. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA on January 17, 2016, he stated that he had 
been employed from February 2003 to “present,” and he did not disclose that he left this 
                                                          
3 By mutual agreement, the Directive applies to at least 20 other federal government agencies. 
 
4 
 
job four days earlier, on January 13, 2016. His answer to this question is alleged to be 
false in SOR ¶ 2.b. At the hearing, he testified that he believed he was still employed by 
his former employer when he submitted his SCA, and that he intended to tell his former 
employer if he found a new job. (Tr. 48-49.) 
 
In the same SCA, Applicant answered “No” to questions whether, in the last 
seven years preceding his SCA, he (1) was fired; (2) quit after being told he would be 
fired; (3) left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct; 
(4) left a job by mutual agreement after notice of unsatisfactory performance; or (5) 
received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for 
misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of security policy. His failure to 
disclose his termination for misuse of the AGA’s computer is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c.  
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in July 2016, he stated 
that he resigned from his employment because his employer could not find work for him. 
He also stated that he did not receive any written warnings, official reprimands, 
suspensions, or disciplinary actions from his employer as a result of his misuse of the 
AGA’s computer. (GX 2 at 14-15.)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not believe he was fired or left his 
employment by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct. (Tr. 
57.) When asked if he believed he was disciplined or reprimanded when the AGA 
terminated his services and his employer suspended him without pay, he responded:  
 
It certainly can be perceived to be and now that I look back on it, I’d say 
yeah, that’s --- I probably should have responded to that particular 
interrogatory that [it] was punishment. . . . At the time, I didn’t really think 
that [it] was punishment and I really didn’t give it a lot of thought.  
 
He denied attempting to mislead anyone by answering “No” to the employment 
questions. (Tr. 23.) His failures to disclose his suspension in his SCA and during the 
July 2016 security interview are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 In the same SCA, Applicant answered “No” to a question asking whether, in the 
last seven years, he had introduced, removed, or used hardware, software, or media in 
connection with any information technology system without authorization, when 
specifically prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or attempted any 
of the above. When questioned by a security investigator in August 2016, Applicant told 
the investigator that he had misread the question and should have answered “Yes.” (GX 
2 at 20.) SOR ¶ 2.d alleges his failure to disclose his misuse of the AGA’s computer in 
response to this question.  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 2.d in his answer to the SOR. However, at the hearing, 
he testified that he thought the question about misusing technology systems involved 
“misusing the hardware and software, introducing hardware, introducing software that 
would damage their equipment.” He admitted that he misused the AGA’s information 
 
5 
 
technology system in the sense that “there were regulations [and] they told us that you 
should not be viewing anything inappropriate on your computer.” (Tr. 25.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance review from his former employer for 2015 rated him as 
meeting expectations in six performance categories, exceeding expectations for 
teamwork, and exceeding expectations for productivity. (AX H at 1.) His performance 
reviews for 2013 and 2014 rated him as often exceeding expectations (the second 
highest rating) in all categories except productivity, for which he was rated as 
consistently exceeding expectations (the highest rating) and adherence to company 
policies and procedures, for which he was rated as meeting expectations (the middle 
rating). (AX H at 2-6.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife has known him for 47 years and they have been married for 44 
years. She is well educated and has extensive experience working as a management 
consultant for federal contractors. She has held a security clearance while working on 
several federal contracts. She and Applicant worked together on a two-year federal 
contract. She considers Applicant honest, trustworthy, and kind. She testified that 
Applicant is “totally incapable of lying.” She corroborated Applicant’s testimony about his 
uncertainty about his employment status after he was caught viewing inappropriate 
material on his work computer. She corroborated his testimony about his uncertainty 
regarding his answers to questions in the SCA. She was hurt by his viewing of nude 
women, but she has forgiven him and considers that conduct totally out of character for 
him. (Tr. 70-101.) 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous testimonials to his good character, truthfulness, 
honesty, and suitability for a security clearance. The testimonials were submitted by a 
neighbor, who worked for the Army for 30 years and has known Applicant and his wife 
since 2003 (AX A), former co-workers (AX B; AX E; AX F), and former supervisors (AX 
C; AX D). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
6 
 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology (IT) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant used the AGA’s computer to view 
“pornography”4 and the AGA removed him from the work site and terminated his 
“security access.” 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish the following potentially disqualifying condition: AG ¶ 40(e) (“unauthorized use 
of any information technology system”). However, the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 
40(f) (“introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to 
or from any information technology system when prohibited by rules, procedures, 
guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not authorized”) is not established. This 
language of this disqualifying condition is almost identical to the question in Applicant’s 
SCA, to which he answered “No.” His answer to the question was correct, because the 
evidence reflects that Applicant did not introduce, remove, or duplicate any hardware, 
firmware, software, or media into his computer. He simply used the existing system to 
open and view websites containing inappropriate material.  
 
The relevant mitigating condition is AG ¶ 41(a) (“so much time has elapsed since 
the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment”). Applicant’s misuse of his workplace computer happened about two 
and a half years ago, but it did not happen under unusual circumstances. There are no 
Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is mitigated by passage of time. The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
                                                          
4 It is not clear from the record whether the images of adult nude women viewed by Applicant constituted 
“pornography.” However, the record reflects that the images were inappropriate material that was 
prohibited on the AGA’s work computers. 
 
8 
 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
Applicant did not voluntarily stop his unauthorized viewing of inappropriate 
material. His gained access to and viewed inappropriate material about ten times in a 
three-month period. He stopped because he was caught. He has been under pressure 
to regain his security clearance from September 2015, when he was caught, until the 
present. Finally, as discussed below under Guideline E and in my whole-person 
analysis, he has not been completely candid during the security clearance process, and 
his lack of candor diminishes the weight of the evidence of rehabilitation. Under these 
circumstances, I am not satisfied that sufficient time has passed to mitigate his misuse 
of information technology. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his termination 
from employment in January 2016 during interviews with a security investigator in July 
and August 2016 (SOR ¶ 2.a). It also alleges that he falsified his SCA regarding his 
employment record (SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c) by misrepresenting when his employment with 
a former employer ended and failing to disclose that he was terminated for misuse of IT 
systems. (SOR ¶ 2.d). It alleges that he was terminated for misuse of the AGA’s 
computer (SOR ¶ 2.e). It cross-alleges the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a (SOR ¶ 2.f). 
Finally, it alleges that he was arrested and charged with shoplifting a pornographic 
magazine in June 1975, resigned his commission, and received a general discharge 
under honorable conditions (SOR ¶ 2.g). The SOR does not allege Applicant’s 
mischaracterization of the reason for the termination of his military service in his SCA or 
his responses to DOHA interrogatories, nor does it allege Applicant’s failure to disclose 
in his SCA and in the July 2016 and August 2016 interviews that he was suspended and 
disciplined for misconduct.5 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
                                                          
5 Conduct not alleged in the SOR may not be an independent basis for denying or revoking a security 
clearance, but it may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular 
adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of 
a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered 
Applicant’s misstatement of the reason for the termination of his military service and his failure to disclose 
his suspension for misusing the AGA’s computer for these limited purposes. 
 
 
9 
 
 The potentially following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are 
relevant: 
 
AG ¶16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
AG ¶16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . (3) a 
pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and (4) evidence of significant 
misuse of Government or other employer's time or resources;  
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing; . . . and 
 
AG ¶ 16(f): violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
 In this case, the applicability of the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) to SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c (alleging failure to disclose that he was fired) is dependent 
 
10 
 
on whether Applicant knew he had been terminated on January 13, 2016, when he 
submitted his SCA four days later and when he was interviewed by a security 
investigator in July and August 2016. He knew that his relationship with the AGA was 
terminated, but he was told by his employer that he would be on unpaid administrative 
leave until further notice. While the internal communications among his former 
supervisors reflect that he was terminated on January 13, 2016, there is no evidence 
that he was informed of his termination until after he submitted his SCA and was 
interviewed by security investigators. He has consistently stated that he believed that he 
was still employed, albeit in an unpaid status, until he orally told a company official that 
he was resigning. Applicant’s testimony on this issue was plausible and credible. I 
conclude that Applicant has refuted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c, alleging 
intentional failure to disclose that he was terminated on January 13, 2016, for misuse of 
the AGA’s computer. 
 
  Applicant admitted that the combination of being terminated by the AGA and 
suspended by his employer should have caused him to answer “Yes” to the question in 
Section 13C of his SCA regarding suspension or disciplinary action. However, the SOR 
does not allege this omission.  
 
 With respect to Applicant’s failure to disclose his misuse of the AGA’s computer 
in response to the question in his SCA asking if he had introduced, removed, or used 
hardware, software, or media in connection with any information technology system 
without authorization or when specifically prohibited, the evidence summarized in the 
above discussion of Guideline M indicates that Applicant had not “introduced, removed, 
or used hardware, software, or media.” He simply used the existing system to access 
website containing images of nude adult women. His “No” answer to this question was 
correct. Thus, I conclude Applicant has refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.d.  
 
 Applicant’s arrest for shoplifting in 1975 and his misuse of the AGA’s computer 
establish the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e). However, AG ¶ 
16(f) is not established. Applicant admitted that he had been told not to access 
inappropriate material, but the record contains no evidence of a “written or recorded 
commitment” by Applicant to comply with the policy. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
11 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not applicable, because Applicant has refuted all the allegations of 
falsification alleged in the SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.d. AG ¶ 17(c) is established for the 1975 
shoplifting incident, which is mitigated by the passage of time. However, Applicant’s 
recent false statement in his SCA about the consequences of the shoplifting incident 
raises concern about his credibility and diminishes the weight of the mitigating evidence 
regarding his misuse of the AGA’s computer. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).6  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines M and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant’s arrest for shoplifting in 1975 is mitigated by the passage of time, but his 
misrepresentation of the consequences of his conduct are a concern. He falsely 
represented that he completed his service obligation, when in fact he left the Army in 
disgrace and did not complete his service obligation. He did not admit that he failed to 
complete his service obligation until the hearing.  
 
 Similarly, Applicant answered “No” to all the questions in his SCA about the 
consequences of his misuse of the AGA’s computer. He did not disclose his suspension 
in his SCA, and he did not admit it until he was questioned about it at the hearing.  
 
 Applicant’s efforts to parse the truth narrowly in his SCA fall short of full, frank, 
and candid answers to the questions in the SCA that are essential to the integrity of the 
industrial security program. See ISCR Case No. 01-03132 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
His lack of candor during the security-clearance process undercuts the evidence of 
rehabilitation after his repeated misuse of the AGA’s computer.  
 
Applicant’s repeated misuse of the AGA’s computer raised serious security 
concerns. “Once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
                                                          
6 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
12 
 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines M and E, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant refuted the allegations 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.d that he falsified his SCA, but he has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his misuse of an IT system.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M (Use of IT):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.d:   For Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 2.e-2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
