1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01504 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence or personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 31, 2014. 
On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2016, and originally requested a 
decision based on the administrative record. At Applicant’s request, the case was converted 
to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 
2017.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
October 11, 2017, and the hearing was convened on November 16, 2017. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E were admitted in 
evidence. Applicant testified. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 1, 
2017. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about 
Iraq. (HE 1) The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of Fact, 
below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in Iraq in 
1965. He received an associate’s degree in 1987. He married in 1994 and has three children. 
He served in the Iraqi Army in 1987 under a mandatory enlistment for one year. He escaped 
Iraq with his spouse and a child, and entered the United States as a Kurdish refugee in 
1996. He naturalized as a U.S. citizen in September 2008. He stated his spouse became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008 or 2009. His children are also U.S. citizens. Applicant does 
not own property in Iraq, nor does he vote in Iraqi elections. He asserted his loyalty and 
appreciation for the benefits offered by the United States to him and his family. He previously 
held a security clearance in 2010. 
 
Applicant is a linguist/interpreter for a U.S. government contractor. He has served 
with U.S. forces in the United States and Iraq. The SOR alleges Applicant’s mother, three 
brothers, two sisters, and two brothers-in-law are citizens and residents of Iraq. It also 
alleges he sent in excess of $50,000 to family members in Iraq between 2000 and 2013. 
Finally, the SOR alleges under Guideline E, that Applicant falsified his 2014 SCA by not 
reporting his financial support for foreign nationals. Applicant admitted that his family 
members are citizens and residents of Iraq (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-d), but denied that he sent in excess 
of $50,000 to foreign nationals (SOR ¶ 1.e) and that he falsified his SCA (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
 
Applicant completed counter-intelligence security screenings in 2009 and 2014. In 
the 2009 report, the interviewer noted that Applicant: 
 
sent $50,000 to his family in Iraq so they could purchase a home in 2008. He 
sent the money through a cousin that was going to travel to Iraq. He does not 
maintain regular contact with this cousin, but sought him out to get the money 
to Iraq. 
  
Applicant also completed a list of relatives and associates, and noted his frequent contact 
with his mother, sisters, and brothers in Iraq.2  
 
 In a second counter-intelligence security screening conducted in 2014, Applicant 
reported that:  
                                                          
2 GE 3, p. 12 and 19. 
3 
 
. . . from 2000 to 2013, he gave “no more than $200 at one time to friends or 
family who were travelling to Iraq to take to his family. He stated that he did 
this approximately three times for a total of less than $600. He would send this 
money to help his family with daily life. 
 
He also reported frequent contact with his mother, sisters, brothers, and brothers-in-law in 
Iraq.3  
 
Applicant noted in his 2014 SCA, that he had never provided financial support for any 
foreign national. He also noted that he had no close and/or continuing contact with a foreign 
national within the last seven years with whom he or his spouse are bound by affection. With 
reference to contacts with his relatives, he noted weekly contact with his mother, and 
monthly contact with his brothers and sisters in Iraq. 
 
 In testimony, Applicant stated that the last time he saw or spoke to his mother, 
brothers, and brothers-in-law, was in 2010 after his mother visited him in Iraq where he 
worked as a contract linguist. Likewise, he stated that he has not had contact with his sisters 
in seven years. He stated that his SCA entries showing regular contact with his family are 
incorrect. He noted in testimony that he visited with his sister-in-law in Iraq in 2013. He 
acknowledged that the contact with family members he reported in his counter-intelligence 
interviews were false. He noted in his testimony that he gave answers during the counter-
intelligence interviews that seemed appropriate at the time as he was concerned with how 
he would be viewed if he stated that he had no contact. Applicant also claimed to have never 
given a large sum of money to his mother to buy a home, and noted that he did give small 
amounts of Iraqi dinars, not dollars, over a period of years, to assist his mother. He noted 
that he did not consider his mother to be a foreign person. 
 
 Applicant testified to the dangerous work he has done in Iraq as an interpreter, 
including for U.S. military personnel, and work as a U.S. military recruiter of Farsi, Arabic 
and Kurdish speaking soldiers in the U.S. He also discussed life as a Kurdish refugee from 
Iraq and his escape and immigration to the United States. He submitted a statement of intent 
to have minimal or no contact with foreign personnel outside of his official duties, and 
conversations will remain casual and infrequent. He also stated his intent to refrain from 
sending money to foreign family members in the future. 
 
 Applicant lives in the United States with his spouse and three children. He owns a 
home valued at about $300,000, and has about $80,000 in saving. His spouse is a stay-at-
home mother and his children live at home. Applicant is a loyal American citizen and 
appreciates the opportunities that the United States has given to him and his family. 
 
Republic of Iraq 
 
 Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic that has inconsistent control over 
security forces operating in the country. Violence continued to divide the country, largely 
fueled by Da’esh’s (ISIS) actions. Violence continues to cause civilian hardships. In 2017, 
there were over three million internally displaced persons, and the government has been 
                                                          
3 GE 2, p. 12, 26-31. 
4 
 
unable to adequately support the rising humanitarian demands of refugees and displaced 
populations. Human rights problems are widespread. Terrorist groups continue to mount a 
large number of attacks throughout the country, and many of Iraq’s armed Shia groups are 
backed by Iran. These groups continue to operate throughout Iraq and exacerbate sectarian 
tensions and human rights abuses. 
 
 The U.S. Government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. 
Government personnel and employees in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live 
and work under strict security guidelines. U.S. citizens, Iraqi security forces, and civilians in 
Iraq are at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective for all decisions issued after June 8, 
2017. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to “control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access 
to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, discretion, 
character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not 
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
5 
 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help 
a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent 
with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should 
consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is known to 
target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create 
a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
6 
 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology. 
 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen who maintains regular, frequent contact with his mother, 
siblings, and brothers-in-law, who are residents and citizens of Iraq. In addition, he has 
visited with his mother in 2010, and sister-in-law in 2013, while he was working in Iraq. 
Sending money to a family member in a foreign country does not necessarily raise a security 
concern, but may be evidence of a close relationship with the recipient. SOR ¶ 1.e is 
resolved in Applicant’s favor as the allegations under Guideline B are fully and properly 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – d. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living in 
Iraq is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03- 02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). There is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family 
members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil liberties, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the government is 
engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property 
damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the 
United States. The relationship of Iraq with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with 
his family members living in Iraq do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and 
a desire to assist a family member living in Iraq. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his relatives who are foreign citizens living in Iraq creates 
a potential conflict of interest because of the potential for pressure to be placed on his family 
living in Iraq in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified information. These 
relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with family who are 
citizens and residents of Iraq has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are 
approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, 
or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to fully apply any of the mitigating conditions. Applicant 
has previously reported frequent contact with his mother, siblings, and in-laws, who are 
citizens and residents of Iraq. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States.” Applicant immigrated to the 
United States in 1996, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2008. His spouse lives in the United 
States and she is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
 
Applicant’s years of support to DOD in Iraq and the United States as a 
linguist/translator, including the dangers that service may entail, weigh heavily towards 
mitigating security concerns. Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be 
weighed against the potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives 
who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Applicant’s extended family currently lives in Iraq. 
Like every other resident of Iraq, they are at risk from ongoing kidnappings, violence and 
terrorism. 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with his family in Iraq, and he has regularly sent money 
to help them. Applicant’s relationships and loyalties in the United States do not outweigh his 
8 
 
familial interests in Iraq, especially given his professional work there. Applicant and his 
relatives in Iraq are potential targets, and Applicant’s potential access to classified 
information could add risk to his relatives from lawless elements. In addition, his previous 
admissions that are contrary to his current testimony leave me with lingering questions and 
concerns. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are not mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.4 An applicant’s level of 
education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose 
relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.5 
 
  Appellant did not report financial support for his mother in Iraq on his SCA. 
Regardless of the amount or denomination, he reported that he never provided financial 
support for a foreign national, when the evidence shows he has a history of providing 
financial support. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SCAs by denying that he sent 
in excess of $50,000, and argued that any money he sent was in Iraq dinars, not dollars, 
which could account for the difference in monetary amounts. That may be true, but he 
admitted in testimony and in counter-intelligence interviews to sending money to his mother 
over a period of years. That information should have been reported in his SCA. I find 
Applicant’s failure to report the support he provided to foreign nationals on his SCA was an 
intentional falsification. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
9 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided under 
AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated 
fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 I find no mitigating condition applicable to Applicant’s failure to report his financial 
support for his family in Iraq on his SCA, given the inconsistencies between previous reports 
and his testimony. Applicant’s inconsistent testimony and claimed falsification of his counter-
intelligence interviews makes application of mitigating conditions impractical. His knowing 
and intentional lack of candor raises questions about his trustworthiness and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. No mitigating condition fully applies to alleviate the 
personal conduct concerns raised by the allegation that he failed to report financial support 
for a foreign national on his SCA. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take into consideration the geopolitical 
situation and dangers there. Iraq qualifies as a dangerous place because of the violence 
and terrorism taking place there. Terrorists continue to threaten the Iraqi Government, the 
interests of the United States, Iraqi citizens, U.S. military personnel, and those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. The Iraqi Government does not fully control the 
country and does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties of its citizens. 
 
Applicant’s frequent contact with family in Iraq and history of financial support for his 
family in Iraq are a manifestation of his care and concern for them, and are admirable 
qualities. However, in the context of security law, those relationships raise important foreign 
influence security concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections to the 
United States. Given his inconsistent past statements to government investigators, his 
recent testimony does not overcome the Guidelines B or E concerns raised in the SOR. 
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence or personal conduct security 
concerns raised in the SOR. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
