 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 17-00817 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., and Andrea Corrales, Esq.,  
Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was arrested for alcohol-related driving offenses in November 2006 and 
March 2015. He completed alcohol counseling, and he credibly stated that he ended his 
alcohol consumption in March 2015. Security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption) are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On September 6, 2012, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1. On April 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992. The SOR set forth security 
concerns arising under Guideline G. Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
On May 19, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. On June 9, 2017, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing. Tr. 12. On June 28, 2017, Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed. On December 5, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On 
December 28, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
 
2 
                                         
 
of hearing, setting the hearing for February 21, 2018. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held 
as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered seven exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Transcript (Tr.) 15-17; GE 1-7; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE B. On February 28, 
2018, DOHA received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs, and I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.d. HE 3. He also provided mitigating information. HE 3.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a DOD contractor who has worked as an 
engineering technician since 2012. Tr. 6, 8; GE 1. In 1998, he graduated from high school. 
Tr. 6. He plans to attend college in the near future. Tr. 7. From 2000 to 2012, he served 
in the Navy, and his specialty was aviation technician. Tr. 7. The Navy honorably 
discharged him as a petty officer first class (E-6). Tr. 7. Applicant was involuntarily 
separated from the Navy, and he received separation pay of $48,834. HE 3, Encl. 1. In 
2001, he married, and he has a 16-year-old child and a 27-year-old stepchild. Tr. 8, 19.  
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
In November 2006, the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with 
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol (OVI). Tr. 19. At that time, 
Applicant was a petty officer second class in the Navy. Tr. 20. Applicant consumed some 
rum; hit a mailbox with his truck; drank some more rum; and then he drove to a parking 
lot. Tr. 21-22. It was raining and snowing, and he was “do[ing] donuts” in the parking lot. 
Tr. 22. His truck got stuck in the grass, and Applicant was arrested for OVI. Tr. 23. His 
breathalyzer result was .11. GE 7. In December 2006, Applicant received nonjudicial 
punishment (NJP) for drunk driving, which included reduction from E-5 to E-4, forfeiture 
of half of one month’s pay for two months, and 45 days of extra duty and restriction. Tr. 
25; GE 7. For one year, his command revoked his driving privileges on post. Tr. 25-26. 
He completed three days’ attendance at an alcohol-awareness class. Tr. 26. He was not 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
diagnosed with an alcohol-abuse disorder, and he was not directed to end his alcohol 
consumption. Tr. 26. In February 2007, he pleaded guilty in civilian court to OVI. He was 
ordered to pay a $500 fine, and his license was revoked for 90 days. Tr. 27.  He believed 
he received an Enlisted Review Board because of the drunk-driving NJP, and he was 
separated from active duty service in the Navy. Tr. 41-43.    
 
Between the 2006 and 2015 alcohol-related driving incidents, Applicant had a drink 
or two of alcohol and then he drove; however, he was never arrested for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI). Tr. 43, 45. He frequently drank alcohol, sometimes on a daily 
basis, and he consumed it to help him relax. Tr. 43, 45. 
 
In March 2015, Applicant was on temporary duty. Tr. 27. He drank three 20-ounce 
beers, waited for some time, and started driving towards his hotel. Tr. 29; GE 6. He agreed 
he drank too much alcohol to safely drive. Tr. 29. Applicant was unfamiliar with the area 
where he was driving, and he became lost. Tr. 29. He was on a flat straight part of the 
highway, and he drove his rental car at a speed of about 120 miles per hour (MPH). Tr. 
30, 51-52. A police vehicle was following Applicant; however, Applicant did not see any 
police lights or hear any sirens. Tr. 31. The police arrested Applicant and took him to jail. 
Tr. 32. Applicant refused a test to determine his blood-alcohol content (BAC) because he 
knew he would fail it. Tr. 32, 52. He was charged with resisting an officer with violence, 
reckless driving, and DUI. Tr. 33. In August 2015, he pleaded guilty to DUI; no action was 
taken on the reckless driving charge; and he received deferred adjudication with three 
years of probation on the resisting an officer with violence charge. Tr. 33-35; GE 4. He 
received a fine and court costs of $515 and a $40 monthly charge for supervision. Tr. 34. 
The court terminated his probation in November 2017. Tr. 34; AE B. His driver’s license 
was revoked for one year in one state and for six months in another state. Tr. 35-39. He 
paid all of his fines. Tr. 35. His driver’s license in one state was reinstated, and he has 
not paid to have his driver’s license reinstated in the other state. 
 
Applicant completed alcohol counseling and a victim-impact class. Tr. 36. On 
August 7, 2015, he completed a 21-hour course of instruction related to the “adverse 
effects of chemical use on driving ability.” HE 3, Encl. 6. He attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) classes for six months and then sporadically attended thereafter; 
however, he has not attended any AA meetings for six or eight months. Tr. 37. AA gave 
him coins for periods of sobriety. Tr. 52. He decided to stop attending AA meetings 
because he believes he is beyond having cravings for alcohol, and he did not have any 
intention of consuming alcohol in the future. Tr. 37.  He attended support-group meetings, 
mostly on a weekly basis, from September 2015 to April 2016. HE 3, Encl. 4-5. He was 
not diagnosed with an alcohol-use disorder. Tr. 39. 
 
Applicant has not consumed any alcohol since March 9, 2015. Tr. 40, 46. He 
intends to remain sober going forward. Tr. 40. He acknowledged that he leaned on alcohol 
and showed impaired judgment for his 2006 and 2015 alcohol-related incidents. Tr. 41, 
45. He promised that he would not consume alcohol in the future, and he will report any 
future alcohol consumption to his security manager. Tr. 54. He understands that his 
security clearance might be revoked if he resumes his alcohol consumption. Tr. 54.   
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Character Evidence 
 
On February 3, 2017, the Navy promoted Applicant to Engineering Technician IV, 
and his annual salary was increased to $74,000. AE A. He received multiple medals and 
ribbons during his Navy service including two Navy and Marine Corps Achievement 
Medals and three Navy Good Conduct Medals. HE 3, Encl. 1. He completed several Navy 
training courses. HE 3, Encl. 1. He had excellent Navy Evaluation Report and Counseling 
Records. HE, Encl. 8-12. 
  
Applicant’s team manager described Applicant as very diligent, intelligent, and an 
“irreplaceable member” of the contractor’s team. HE 3, Encl. 2. Another supervisor lauded 
his integrity, knowledge, and value to the contractor. HE 3, Encl. 3. He received two 
awards from his current employer. HE 3, Encl. 14, 15.  
    
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
                                         
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
applicant’s personal or professional history that may disqualify the applicant for eligibility 
for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶ 22 lists seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence.  
 
  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant’s two alcohol-related incidents involving 
the police and the courts occurred in 2006 and 2015. His BAC for the 2006 OVI or drunk- 
driving offense was .11. He refused a breathalyzer for his 2015 DWI. His BAC level of .11 
establishes that he engaged in binge alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired 
judgment.3 His level of alcohol consumption in March 2015 constitutes another episode 
of binge alcohol consumption.   
   
  AG ¶ 23 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
   
                                            
3 “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United States.” See 
the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 
0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and when 
women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. There are other definitions of “binge alcohol consumption” that involve different alcohol-
consumption amounts and patterns. 
 
7 
                                         
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a fairly 
lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 
3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). See also ISCR Case No. 08-
04232 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2009) (affirming denial of security clearance for Applicant with 
alcohol-related criminal offenses for six years prior to hearing). For example, in ISCR 
Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board reversed the 
administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol-related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 2000, 
six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his alcohol 
consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol 
consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and 
capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (reversing 
grant of a clearance for applicant with four alcohol-related incidents, most recent alcohol-
related incident was three years before hearing, and substantially reduced alcohol 
consumption for three years before hearing, but not abstinence). 
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption and poor judgment involving 
the two alcohol-relating driving offenses in November 2006 (OVI or drunk driving) and 
March 2015 (DUI, reckless driving, excessive speed, and eluding the police). However, 
six factors weigh towards mitigation of alcohol consumption security concerns: (1) 
Applicant attended alcohol counseling, including numerous AA meetings; (2) he received 
counseling and classroom instruction about the risks entailed in driving after consumption 
of alcohol; (3) he received early release from probation imposed for his March 2015 DUI; 
(4) he ended his alcohol consumption in March 2015; (5) if he consumes alcohol in the 
future, he promised to inform his security manager;  and (6) he understands his security 
clearance might be revoked if he resumes alcohol consumption. Applicant has 
established his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Alcohol 
consumption security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
8 
                                         
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. “In evaluating an applicant’s case, a 
Judge must carefully consider the record as a whole. This includes not only considering the 
extent to which an applicant’s circumstances raise concerns about his or her reliability but 
also giving fair consideration of the applicant’s mitigating evidence.” ISCR Case No. 12-
09900 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00424 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 
20, 2016)). My comments under Guideline G are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a government contractor who has worked 
as an engineering technician since 2012. From 2000 to 2012, he served in the Navy, and 
his Navy specialty was aviation technician. He was honorably discharged from the Navy. 
He presented important good-character evidence. The general sense of the statements 
of Applicant’s coworkers is that he is competent, diligent, honest, and reliable. He made 
significant contributions to the Navy when he was on active duty, to his current employer, 
and to the nation’s defense.  
 
Some evidence weighs against grant of access to classified information: (1) 
Applicant’s two alcohol-related driving offenses involving the police and courts occurred 
in November 2006 and March 2015; and (2) his most recent DUI was particularly 
dangerous as it involved reckless driving, excessive speed, and eluding the police.  
However, the six factors supporting mitigation of alcohol consumption security concerns 
listed in the mitigation section in Guideline G are more substantial. Applicant credibly 
described his misconduct and his rehabilitative efforts. Applicant has established his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Alcohol consumption security 
concerns are mitigated.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that Guideline G security concerns are mitigated, and it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
