 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
.  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01728 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 2, 2016. 
(Item 3.) On August 9, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 15, 2017 (Answer), and requested a 
decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on September 13, 2017. On September 18, 2017, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. She was given an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. She received the FORM and responded. The case was assigned to me on 
January 17, 2018. 
 
On June 8,2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied the 
June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the date 
the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. Having 
considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have been the 
same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, age 41, divorced in 2012, and remarried in 2014. She has one adult 
child. She obtained her undergraduate degree in 1999 and her master’s degree in 2006. 
She has worked in the field of engineering for various contractors for about 17 years. 
Applicant has held a security clearance since 2006. She has worked for her current 
employer since 2015. (Item 3)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted on a real estate mortgage account in 
a past-due amount of $34,229, with an approximate total loan balance of $386,534. 
(1.a) The SOR was amended on September 12, 2017, to reflect that Applicant is 
indebted on another real estate mortgage that has been charged off in the approximate 
amount of $92,484. (1.b) Applicant denied the allegations. The SOR further alleged that 
Applicant deliberately falsified her SCA, when she responded “No” to Section 26-
Financial Record. (2.a) Applicant denied the allegation.  
 
Applicant and her second husband purchased a home in 2007 where Applicant 
lived until 2015. The purchase price for the home was $495,000. They divorced in 2012, 
and as part of the property settlement agreement, Applicant and her husband 
acknowledged that the debt against the property may be greater than the value of the 
property given the economic conditions at the time. In addition, the agreement provided 
that each party would be liable in equal shares for the mortgage payments on the 
property. However Applicant agreed that she would attempt to refinance the marital 
home debt in her name alone. But if she could not, they would share the cost of the 
refinancing. If at the end of three years (2014), the husband was still on the mortgage, 
Applicant and her husband would confer about selling the residence. (Attachments to 
FORM) 
 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant purchased her husband’s share of the home and maintained the first 
and second mortgage payments for three years.  However, Applicant was unable to 
refinance the home mortgage loan as the property value had dropped. (Item 5)  She 
tried several times to refinance the loan, but was not successful. The property was 
valued at about $440,000 in 2015. Applicant maintained the mortgage payments, but 
decided the house had to be sold. She had the house on the market from June 2015 
through September 2015. She moved out and rented the home.  In December 2015, 
Applicant obtained a real estate broker and told her that she would consider a short 
sale. Upon the advice of the broker, Applicant stopped making the mortgage payments. 
 
A short sale was approved in June 2016, stating the sale price was $435,000. 
Both mortgagees approved the short sale in August 2016, but the property was 
foreclosed by the first lienholder on August 26, 2016. (Documents submitted in 
response to FORM). Both Applicant’s lawyer and broker tried to stop the foreclosure 
proceeding, but they were not successful. The second mortgagee or lienholder 
cancelled the short sale on September 21, 2016, and charged off the remaining debt 
owed to them. The 2017 credit bureau report shows balance due is “zero”. (Item 6) 
 
During the short sale process, Applicant had no idea that the first lienholder 
would suddenly foreclose on the home. She submitted documentation from the firm 
handling her short sale that confirms she diligently followed everything that was asked 
of her in good faith with her lenders. (Attachments to Answer)  
 
Applicant’s overall credit is excellent. Her credit reports show that she has always 
paid her accounts as agreed. The only derogatory information on the 2017 credit report 
is the past-due amount of $34,229 for the first lienholder. Interestingly enough, that 
same credit report, dated April 2017 does not indicate any “foreclosure” under the public 
records section. (Item 6) 
 
As to the allegation in SOR 2.a that Applicant falsified material facts on her 
January 2, 2016 SCA, when she answered “No” to Section 26-Financial Record, 
Applicant denied the allegation. When she completed the SCA, Applicant was following 
her broker’s advice with regard to her mortgage loans. She had no foreclosure and no 
idea that the short sale process would fail. In fact, she did not receive a Notice of 
Default until May 2016. Applicant’s credit reports reflect that she had no delinquent 
accounts. She did not falsify her SCA. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
4 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s two home mortgage loans were past-due at a point in time. This 
establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to 
satisfy debts”), and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s home loan accounts were the result of the 
inability to continue with the short sale process that she was advised about and the 
inability to refinance her home loans after her divorce. She has shown financial 
diligence and responsibility with all other accounts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s divorce created the situation with 
the marital home loans. She was able to maintain the loans for three years and then she 
sought advice and acted responsibly in every manner. The surprise foreclosure after 
 
6 
 
she had approval for the short sale was a total surprise. She followed all requirements 
that were asked of her. She acted in good-faith.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are established. Applicant responded to the FORM and the 
record demonstrate her efforts to resolve her mortgage accounts. She sought advice 
regarding the issues of the home loans, tried to refinance several times, and took the 
advice of her broker to stop making payments on her mortgages. She rented the house, 
followed through on a short sale, but was upended by the bank’s sudden foreclosure. 
She has always resolved her accounts in a timely fashion.  
 
Applicant met her burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the SOR. 
For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. for Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Applicant completed her security clearance application in October 2015, and 
updated it in January 2016.  Her responses to Section 26 were consistent and factual. 
She had no foreclosure or defaults when she submitted her January 2016 SCA. 
Applicant provided frank answers on her SCA. 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
 
7 
 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying her SCA. When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing 
alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.3 An applicant’s level of education and experience are relevant to determining 
whether a failure to disclose relevant information was deliberate.4  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s comments that she was in the process 
of following her broker and the bank concerning the home mortgage loans. She was 
doing everything that she was supposed to do. She was trying to sell the property, 
rented it, and then asked for a short sale. She received approval for the short sale. She 
had no default or foreclosure at the time of the SCA. Given these facts, I find substantial 
evidence of no intent by Applicant to omit, conceal, or falsify facts from and on her SCA. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. 
 
 The personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by 
any of the following potentially applicable factors in AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, all of them would 
apply. However, Applicant did not intentionally falsify her SCA. She hid nothing and had 
no lapse in judgement. Further, she took responsibility for her actions. She has provided 
sufficient information in this record to demonstrate that she has met her burden of proof 
for her personal conduct. 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole 
person. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, including Applicant’s many years of service and history 
of financial stability and responsibility. I conclude that Applicant did not deliberately 
falsify her SCA, and has mitigated the security concern. Accordingly, Applicant has 
carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
