 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00506 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Barbara T. Hanna, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline G, alcohol involvement, and Guideline J, criminal conduct, 
arising from his history of alcohol-related offenses. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 3, 
2015. On April 11, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
involvement, cross-alleged under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (Exec. Ord.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date, including this one.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of 
the new AGs did not affect my decision in this case.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was initially assigned to another administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) and scheduled for hearing on September 12, 2017. That 
hearing was cancelled following entry of appearance by counsel.  
 
The case was reassigned to me on September 7, 2017. The hearing was initially 
rescheduled for November 15, 2017, but was then set for November 16, 2017 by mutual 
consent due to a scheduling issue for Applicant’s counsel. The hearing convened on 
that date. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered documents that were marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3 and admitted without objection. Applicant 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. He and his 
wife also testified. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 30, 2017.  
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel amended SOR ¶ 1.d to add the words “in jail” to 
the second sentence of the allegation. The SOR was so amended without objection. 
That sentence, in pertinent part, now reads, “You were found guilty, sentenced to six 
months in jail (suspended) . . . .” (Tr. 19-20) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.d, and denied SOR ¶ 1.c, with a brief 
explanation. He did not answer SOR ¶ 2.a, but since it is a cross-allegation, I consider 
that he admitted it in part and denied it in part, incorporating his answers to ¶ 1. His 
admissions and other comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He and his wife have been married since January 
2004. They have two children, a daughter, age 15, and a son, age 5. Applicant also has 
a son, age 17, from a prior relationship. Applicant has worked at a naval shipyard since 
2001. He has worked for his current employer in the defense industry since 2003. He 
has held a security clearance since 2005. Applicant completed a four-year certification 
program at work. He also has an associate’s degree. (Tr. 12, 22-30, 68; GE 1; GE 2)  
 
 One evening in May 2007, Applicant was drinking at a bar with friends. He had 
four shots of vodka and two beers. At the end of the evening, he got into a friend’s car 
to go home. He was in the passenger seat. The friend, who was driving, backed the car 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s counsel confirmed that she received a copy of SEAD 4 with the Notice of Hearing. (Tr. 7-8)   
 
 
3 
 
into another vehicle in the bar’s parking lot. By the time the police came to investigate, 
Applicant had fallen asleep. The police officer tapped on the window and asked 
Applicant who had been driving. Applicant “talked back” to the police, and said “I was 
driving” (or words to that effect). In fact, Applicant’s friend was the driver. Applicant said 
he was being sarcastic and “was just trying to be funny” when he made this comment. 
(Tr. 35-37, 53, 68-70; GE 2 at 6)   
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with obstructing justice and public swearing 
or intoxication. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The charges were later reduced to disorderly conduct and 
being drunk in public. Applicant paid a $50 fine for each offense. (Tr. 35-37, 53, 68-70; 
GE 2 at 6) Applicant did not list this arrest on his SCA as an alcohol-related offense. 
(GE 1) 
 
 In March 2011, Applicant went to a comedy club with his wife. He had a few 
drinks with dinner during the show (two shots and a beer). While driving home, he was 
pulled over for speeding. He stated that he was driving about 35 miles an hour in a 25-
mile-an-hour zone that he said came up suddenly. Applicant was given a roadside 
sobriety test. He was arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI). He was later found guilty of a reduced charge of misdemeanor reckless driving. 
He was sentenced to 30 days in jail (suspended), his driver’s license was restricted for 
six months, and he was placed on two years’ unsupervised probation, which he 
completed. (SOR ¶ 1.b)(Tr. 38-41, 55-57, 70-71, 93-97; GE 2 at 4) Applicant reported 
this offense to his facility security officer (FSO). (Tr. 58) On his SCA, Applicant listed 
this offense as a reckless driving charge, and not as a DUI. (GE 1 at 28-29)   
 
 In May 2014, Applicant was hanging out with friends outside a fast food 
restaurant after they had been out at a bar. He was in a friend’s car which was idling in 
the “drive through” line. His friend asked him to get behind the wheel so the friend could 
go talk to friends outside, in case the line moved. Applicant fell asleep behind the wheel. 
He had been drinking before then, “maybe a shot or two” over a two-hour period (Tr. 58-
59, 71-73). Applicant was cited with being drunk in public, and fined. (SOR ¶ 1.c) (Tr. 
41-42; GE 2 at 4-5) Applicant did not report the citation to his FSO, but did disclose it on 
his SCA. (Tr. 60; GE 1 at 29-30) 
 
 Applicant’s most recent arrest (SOR ¶ 1.d) occurred in September 2014. He was 
leaving work in the middle of the night after a long double shift of about 16 hours or 
more. Applicant testified that he pulled off the road before entering a tunnel because his 
car was overheating. He dozed off. The police came to investigate. The police officer 
wanted Applicant to submit to a sobriety test. Applicant refused “because I felt I was 
being interrogated” and “targeted.” He felt the officer should have first inquired as to his 
well-being. (Tr. 63-64, 78) Applicant did a “heel to toe” sobriety test, which he failed. 
Applicant testified that he could not perform the test, because of medical issues. 
Applicant was arrested and spent several hours in jail. He was charged with driving 
while intoxicated (DWI), refusing a breathalyzer test, and another unspecified traffic 
offense. (Tr. 43-48; 61-63; 76-78; GE 2 at 5-6) 
 
 
4 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.c and admitted SOR ¶ 1.d. At hearing, 
he testified that he intended to admit SOR ¶ 1.c and deny SOR ¶ 1.d. The basis of his 
denial of ¶ 1.d at hearing was because he had not been drinking before his September 
2014 arrest. (Tr. 74-76) 
 
 In May 2016, Applicant pleaded guilty to DWI. the other two charges were 
dismissed. He testified that his lawyer advised him to plead guilty to DWI because of his 
drunk in public charge a few months before this arrest. Applicant was sentenced to six 
months in jail (suspended), his driver’s license was suspended for one year and 
restricted until May 2017, and he had an interlock device placed on his car for six 
months. He also had to participate in a 10-week alcohol safety awareness program 
(ASAP), and he was fined about $500. (SOR ¶ 1.d) He testified that he has completed 
probation. (Tr. 43-51, 65; 83; GE 2 at 5)  
 
 Applicant did not disclose his September 2014 arrest on his September 2015 
SCA. He testified he did not list the arrest because his case was pending. His SCA, 
however, contained a question asking, “Are you currently on trial or awaiting a trial on 
criminal charges?” (GE 1 at 28, 30) Applicant disclosed the offense during his August 
2016 personal subject interview (PSI), though the interviewing agent also already knew 
about it. (Tr. 81-82, 104-105; GE 2 at 5-6)  
 
 The record does not contain the police reports or court documents regarding any 
of the SOR offenses. The record also does not contain any medical records (concerning 
Applicant’s claim that his medical issue was what caused him to fail the roadside “heel-
toe” test in September 2014). The record contains no documentation about Applicant’s 
completion of the ASAP program, completion of probation, or participation in any 
alcohol counseling.  
 
 Applicant testified that he modified his drinking after the 2007 charge. (Tr. 55) He 
stated that after the 2011 offense, he spent more time at home. He also said he had 
less time to drink and socialize because of work constraints. (Tr. 57-58)  
 
 Applicant testified that after the May 2014 charge, he stopped drinking for about 
two months. (Tr. 59-60, 65, 75) He also said he had not resumed drinking at the time of 
his September 2014 DUI. (Tr. 75) Since then, he has had no further alcohol incidents. 
Applicant did not consume alcohol while he was on probation between May 2016 and 
May 2017, and said he was not allowed to consume alcohol during the ASAP program 
(October to December 2016). (Tr. 50, 84-85) He testified that he has not consumed 
alcohol in almost a year. (Tr. 85-86) He later said he had not consumed any alcohol 
since before his September 2014 arrest. (Tr. 88-89)   
 
 Applicant testified that he now spends more time with his family. He has not 
participated in Alcoholics Anonymous or similar programs. His chief source of support in 
this regard is his wife. Applicant is also concerned about the impact on his job. (Tr. 52, 
64, 85-87) 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s wife works as a counselor in the local high school system. She 
testified that she used to witness her husband drinking. She became concerned that her 
husband was focusing too much on work, and they had a long discussion about their 
relationship. She told her husband that his actions were affecting not only Applicant and 
his job, but also his children and family. Applicant used to go out more to socialize with 
friends, but he has become more family-oriented and responsible. (Tr. 90-102) 
 
 Applicant is regarded as “one of the top supervisors” in his area of responsibility. 
He supervises 12 other workers. In his most recent annual review, he is rated as 
“exceeding standards” or “far exceeding standards” in most categories. He is also 
regarded as having “high ethics, values, integrity and honesty” (Tr. 30-35; AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.2 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
2 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”).  
 
3 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following disqualifying condition is applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with an alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Applicant incurred four alcohol-related offenses between 2007 and September 
2014. Applicant ultimately admitted each of them, either in his answer to the SOR or at 
hearing. His offenses include two charges of public intoxication or being drunk in public. 
He was arrested for DUI in 2011 (reduced to reckless driving). He was arrested for DWI 
and refusing a breathalyzer in 2014. He pleaded guilty to the DWI in May 2016. AG ¶ 
22(a) applies.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant incurred four alcohol-related offenses between 2007 and 2014. 
Notwithstanding his claim that he had not been drinking prior to his arrest in September 
2014, he was arrested for DWI and refusing a breathalyzer test. In May 2016, he 
 
7 
 
pleaded guilty to DWI. He was on probation until May 2017, six months before the 
hearing. Applicant has a good work record, and a supportive, stable family life. He 
provided no documentation regarding his participation in the ASAP program. Applicant’s 
alcohol issues are recent and not isolated. He has not pursued any alcohol-related 
counseling such as AA or a similar program.  
 
 Applicant also failed to disclose either his May 2007 public intoxication charge or 
his September 2014 DWI arrest, on his January 2015 SCA, as required. This last 
omission is especially troubling, since the charge was pending at the time he completed 
his SCA, and Applicant therefore had a duty to report it. He also under-reported his 
earlier DUI arrest, disclosing only the reduced charge of reckless driving.  
  
 I cannot consider this evidence as disqualifying conduct, since it was not alleged 
in the SOR. However, I can consider this evidence in weighing mitigation or changed 
circumstances, whether Applicant has demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation, under the 
whole person concept, and in weighing Applicant’s credibility.4 Applicant’s lack of 
candor undercuts his claims that he has modified his behavior. In addition, the fact that 
Applicant pleaded guilty to DWI in May 2016 significantly undercuts the credibility of his 
statements, both before and during the hearing, that he had not been drinking at the 
time he was arrested in September 2014.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) do not apply. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the alcohol involvement security concerns.  
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
8 
 
 Applicant committed four alcohol-related criminal offenses between 2007 and 
2014. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(b) apply. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions for criminal conduct are potentially applicable, 
under AG ¶ 32:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply for the same reasons that AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 
23(b) do not apply under Guideline G, above. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(c):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G and Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns arising due to his alcohol-related arrests and citations. He 
 
9 
 
did not mitigate the alcohol involvement and criminal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
