 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01042 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns, 
but not the personal conduct security concerns. National security eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 28, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on 
August 16, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 12, 2017, setting the 
hearing for January 10, 2018. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B 
into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. Applicant’s wife testified. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2018.  
 
 
 
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b regarding his history of 
illegally using marijuana. He also admitted the falsification allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
through 2.d, and admitted, in part, the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.e. His admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and married since 2015. He and his wife have a one-
year-old child. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2008 and a master’s degree in 2013. 
While in undergraduate college, he obtained an internship position with a defense 
contractor and completed his first security clearance application (SCA) in March 2007 
(2007 SCA). He subsequently received an interim security clearance that he held until 
October 2007. (Tr. 16-21; GE 3, GE 5) 
 
 During the summer of 2008, Applicant experimented with marijuana two to five 
times while working for a defense contractor in another internship program. After returning 
to college in the fall of 2008, he continued to use marijuana two to five times until he 
graduated in December 2008. Between December 2008 and January 2009, Applicant 
used marijuana multiple times. In February 2009, he started a full-time position with the 
defense contractor with whom he had his first internship. In June 2010, he submitted his 
second SCA (2010 SCA). He did not disclose his past marijuana use in the 2010 SCA or 
during a subsequent interview with a government investigator in 2010. In November 2010, 
he obtained a security clearance. He worked for that contractor until January 2014, when 
he started employment with his current employer. Between February 2009 and January 
2014, he used marijuana twice. After starting employment with his current employer, 
Applicant used marijuana once in August 2014. He has not used it since then. (Tr. 22-29; 
GE 2, GE 4) 
 
 In September 2015, Applicant submitted his third SCA (2015 SCA) for purposes of 
upgrading his security clearance. He did not disclose his past marijuana use in it. (Tr. 30; 
GE 1) In March 2016, a government investigator interviewed Applicant. During the 
interview, Applicant confirmed that he had not used illegal drugs. Applicant subsequently 
requested another interview to discuss information about his master’s thesis and he 
intended to disclose his past marijuana use. At the second interview on April 5, 2016, he 
became anxious and did not disclose his marijuana use. Because his past deceptions 
regarding his use of marijuana continued to upset him, he decided he would disclose the 
information during his upcoming polygraph. (Tr. 30-33, 42-44) 
 
 On April 8, 2016, Applicant was scheduled to participate in a polygraph. Based on 
his nervous demeanor, the polygraph examiner asked Applicant why he was worried. 
Applicant then voluntarily told the examiner about his history of marijuana use. After 
completing the polygraph, Applicant contacted the government investigator and asked for 
a third interview. On April 11, 2016, Applicant fully disclosed the extent of his illegal 
marijuana use to the government investigator. (Tr. 33-34; GE 4)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 After the above interview, Applicant also disclosed his past marijuana use in a 
required quarterly security report that was sent to his facility security officer (FSO) in May 
2016. He had not disclosed it in any previous security updates. Applicant’s supervisor is 
now aware of this investigation, but Applicant is not certain that he knows that Applicant 
used marijuana while holding a security clearance. (Tr. 36-38) 
 
 Applicant stated that he initially justified using marijuana while holding a security 
clearance because he did not think it was important or necessary to disclose. (Tr. 28) 
After failing to disclose that adverse information, Applicant said that he “was stuck in a 
chain reaction and did not understand how or have the drive to get out of it.” (Tr. 42) He 
rationalized his actions by telling himself that his non-disclosure was not significant, 
though he knew that to be false. (Tr. 46)  
 
 Applicant no longer associates with friends who use marijuana. (AE A) The last 
time he was in a situation in which marijuana was being used was in August 2015. (Tr. 
39-40) He understands the gravity of his errors and the “detrimental effects” it has had on 
his life. (Tr. 47) He signed a letter of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future and agreed 
to an automatic revocation of his clearance if he was found to have ingested illegal 
substances. (Answer) 
 
 Applicant repeatedly expressed remorse and shame over his dishonesty, 
beginning in April 2016, when he decided to disclose his falsifications. Since then, he 
participated in a drug assessment that determined he did not have a substance abuse 
problem or was in need of treatment. He has counseled with his priest and members of 
his church. His family and friends are aware of the falsifications. His wife is supportive of 
Applicant and his commitment to honesty. Applicant has diligently focused on changing 
his life for the better through his work with the church and community. (Tr. 43-44, 54-58) 
He admitted that he failed to disclose his marijuana use for six years because he was 
afraid to lose his employment. He now relies on his wife and other people to help him 
remain accountable for his decisions. (Tr. 61, 66)  
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters of recommendations from colleagues and 
members of the public. The authors attest to his accomplishments, strong character, and 
dedication to his job and family. He provided many certificates of college and work-related 
awards and accomplishments. (Answer; AE B) 
  
Policies 
 
 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became effective 
within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
 
 
 
 
4 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the security concern involving drug involvement and substance 
misuse as follows: 
 
 
 
 
5 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern. Two may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
Applicant admitted that he illegally used marijuana many times between June 2008 
and August 2014. He used it after obtaining a security clearance in November 2010. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns are provided in AG ¶ 26. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
The evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b)(1), (2), and (3). 
The last time Applicant illegally used marijuana was in August 2014, more than three 
 
 
 
 
6 
years ago. His priorities have changed since then, and he now focuses on work, family 
and community. Applicant’s wife is supportive and has helped him resolve the issues that 
contributed to his lapse in judgment. He no longer associates with friends or people who 
use marijuana. He provided a statement that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future, and acknowledged that additional use would be a basis for an automatic 
revocation of his security clearance. He repeatedly admitted that he made a serious 
mistake in using marijuana. The likelihood that he will engage in similar conduct is 
minimal. He continues to perform well at his job, as confirmed by colleagues and his 
employer. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. They following two disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose past marijuana use on two e-QIPs, to 
government investigators during three interviews, and in annual security updates from 
2010 to 2016. He falsified material facts during those three interviews with government 
investigators. The evidence established the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16(b).  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two may 
potentially apply: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur.  
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 17(c) or 17(d). Over the 
course of six years, Applicant’s repeatedly and deliberately failed to disclose requested 
information to the Government about his past illegal use of marijuana. That pattern of 
behavior is not a minor offense. His disclosure of the negative information occurred about 
two years ago, and happened on the day he was scheduled to give a polygraph. Although 
he has expressed deep remorse and has been candid about his past conduct, insufficient 
time has passed to determine whether similar conduct will recur or to find that he has a 
gained a deep understanding of the reasons underlying his conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated, intelligent 
and accomplished employee. Co-workers, friends, and family attest to his character, 
successes, and hardworking nature. After listening to his testimony and observing his 
demeanor, I found him to be candid and honest. He displayed remorse over his past 
deceptions and the ramifications they have had in his life. Since disclosing the past drug 
use in April 2016, he has matured and demonstrated a change in his character. While 
many of those factors sufficiently mitigated the drug involvement security concerns, they 
are insufficient to mitigate the falsification allegations that spanned six years. Overall, the 
 
 
 
 
8 
evidence raises doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:       For Applicant 
        
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.e:         Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
