 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02025 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on July 11, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 14, 2018, 
and reassigned to me on April 16, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 14, 2018, scheduling the hearing for April 
16, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but she did 
not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 24, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She was hired by a defense contractor in September 
2015. She was laid off in May 2017 after her interim security clearance was withdrawn. 
She will return to work if she receives a security clearance through this process. She 
attended college for a period without earning a degree. She has never married, and she 
has no children.1 
 
 Applicant lived with her parents, and her finances were unremarkable for most of 
her adult life. In 2008, she completely paid off student loans totaling about $12,500 and 
an auto loan of about $19,600. She also paid other bills and debts. Then a series of 
events adversely affected her family and their finances.2 
 
 Applicant’s mother was in her mid-70s when she was laid off her job in 2009. She 
was unable to find another job. Applicant’s father passed away in 2010. Applicant’s 
mother received her late husband’s Social Security benefits, which were more than she 
was receiving, but she lost the benefits she was receiving in her own right.3  
 
 Applicant and her mother were able to make ends meet with her father’s life 
insurance of about $70,000 and withdrawals from her mother’s Individual Retirement 
Account (IRA) and 401(k) retirement account. In late 2010, Applicant became sick and 
was out of work for about ten days. She had no more vacation or sick time and was not 
paid. She sent her aunt $1,000 for roof repairs, and she also had to pay for repairs to 
their home. There were costly vehicle repairs. Applicant made the minimum payments 
on her credit cards for as long as she could, and then she made less than the minimum 
payments of about $10 to $25 in order to show that she always intended to pay her 
debts.4   
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $17,400. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts. All of the debts are also listed on at least one of 
the two credit reports in evidence.5 
 
Applicant has not made any payments on any of the debts since the SOR was 
issued in June 2017, which coincided with the loss of her interim security clearance and 
her job. A review of the credit reports shows that between September 2015 and May 
2017, she made payments on six of the debts alleged in the SOR.6 The balances on 
those debts declined in the following amounts between those two periods: 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15-16, 18-19; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 11-13; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 12-13, 20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
5 GE 2, 3. 
 
6 Tr. at 14-15; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: $3,775 to $3,666; 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: $2,554 to $2,365; 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: $2,520 to $2,320; 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: $2,352 to $2,163; 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: $726 to $410; and 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: $251 to $71. 
 
Applicant had a pay increase to about $84,000 when she obtained her job in 
September 2015. She explained that she wanted to pay more towards her debts while 
she was working, but unexpected events prevented her from doing so. She had 
additional car repairs; a $900 dental bill; a $300 podiatrist bill; a $600 veterinarian bill to 
diagnose her sick dog and then euthanize it; and her refrigerator broke and had to be 
replaced. Applicant decided not to pursue bankruptcy. She consulted with a financial 
advisor, but the fees were too expensive. She credibly testified that if she receives a 
security clearance and returns to her job, she will continue her efforts and eventually 
pay all her delinquent debts.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 13-17, 19; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including unpaid debts. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were unremarkable until her mother lost her job in 2009 and 
her father passed away in 2010. Of note is that in 2008, Applicant completely paid off 
student loans totaling about $12,500 and an auto loan of about $19,600. Additional 
unexpected events made it difficult to keep up with her credit card payments. She made 
the minimum payments for as long as she could, and then she made less than the 
minimum payments of about $10 to $25 to show that she always intended to pay her 
debts. She hoped that her new job in September 2015 would solve her financial 
problems, and she would pay her debts. She made payments on six of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. She wanted to pay more towards her debts while she was working, 
but events beyond her control prevented her from doing so. She credibly testified that if 
she receives a security clearance and returns to her job, she will continue her efforts 
and eventually pay all her delinquent debts. 
 
  Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. Her financial decisions do 
not reflect questionable reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. It may take time, but I 
am convinced that when she returns to work, she will eventually resolve her financial 
problems.8 The above mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009) and ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 4 (App. Bd. 
May. 31, 2011): “Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact that an applicant’s debts will not be paid 
off for a long time, in and of itself, may be of limited security concern.” 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
