 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-01472 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was arrested for assault and battery of his wife in 2006. He was 
arrested for assault and battery and other offenses against his wife in February 2016. 
While the other offenses from 2016 were nolle prossed, he pleaded “no contest” to the 
domestic assault and battery charge, and adjudication was deferred until June 2018. 
Given the recency of the 2016 charges, I conclude that Applicant provided insufficient 
evidence to mitigate the criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns.  
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 25, 2015, 
in connection with his employment in the defense industry. (GE 1) On June 28, 2017, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline J, 
criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was assigned to me on September 22, 2017. On October 25, 2017, DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing scheduling the case for November 13, 2017. The hearing convened 
as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
GE 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. I left the record open to enable Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. He subsequently submitted documents that were marked as AE B 
through AE E and admitted without objection. The record closed on January 3, 2018. 
DOHA received the transcript on November 22, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, though with an explanation that I construe as a 
denial. He largely denied SOR ¶ 1.b, while admitting certain conduct. He did not answer 
SOR ¶ 2.a, but since it is a cross-allegation, I consider it admitted in part, and denied in 
part, incorporating his answers to SOR ¶ 1. Applicant’s admissions and other 
statements are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, the exhibits submitted, and the hearing testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He has worked in the information technology field for 
35 years. He has worked in the defense industry since at least 1997, and has worked 
for his current employer since October 2015. He currently holds a security clearance, 
most recently granted in 2010. (Tr. 14, 28, 57, 59; GE 1, GE 2)  
 
Applicant married his second wife in 1994.1 They have lived separately since 
February 2016. When the record closed, their divorce proceeding was pending final 
resolution. They have three sons, ages 19, 21, and 22. (Tr. 28-29, 43; GE 1; AE E) 
 
In February 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault and battery 
of a family member after the police were called to his home. (SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant 
explained in his Answer that he and his wife had been experiencing marital difficulties. 
They had an argument one morning before he left for work, when he said he wanted a 
divorce. When he came out to the driveway, his wife followed and attacked him. “I 
pushed her off of me and called the police,” he said. The police came and arrested both 
Applicant and his wife for misdemeanor assault and battery. (Tr. 31-33; Answer) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant stated, “I admit that I acted in defense of myself and in 
doing so we both had scratches on our face.” The responding officer noted in court that 
both Applicant and his wife had injuries. (GE 2) Appellant pleaded not guilty to the 
                                                          
1 Applicant was previously married from 1985-1990. (GE 1) 
 
3 
 
 
charge. Both parties declined to testify and the case was dismissed. (GE 2)2 Applicant 
and his wife went to counseling for a period thereafter. Applicant disclosed the 2006 
arrest on his April 2010 SCA. (Answer; GE 3 at 36) 
 
Applicant testified that the 2006 assault charge led him to realize that it could 
potentially impact his clearance. He testified that “I vowed never to put my hands on her 
again, in any way, shape or form in any violent manner. And so, if she got belligerent 
with me, or the boys, from that point forward, I would leave, and the boys would leave, 
too.” (Tr. 38-39) 
 
Applicant explained that his marriage had “ups and downs”, but at some point 
began to deteriorate. Beginning in about 2008, his wife began drinking heavily and 
abusing prescription drugs. She told him she had been diagnosed as being bipolar, and 
would often stop taking her medication “cold turkey.” When he was away on business 
trips, his wife often called the police, allegedly because of issues with their sons. He 
called the police for a welfare check on Mother’s Day 2014, because of his wife’s 
behavior. (Tr. 34-39) Applicant did not offer corroborating evidence about either his 
wife’s behavior or her medical condition. 
 
Applicant told his wife in early January 2016 that he wanted a divorce. He said 
the timing of his decision was due to the fact that their youngest son would be 
graduating from high school that spring. In late January 2016, Applicant received a call 
at work from one of his sons because his mother would not give him the car keys, which 
his son needed to go to work. When Applicant arrived home, his wife and son were in 
an argument. Applicant and his son then departed. (Tr. 39-40; Answer) 
 
Applicant spent the weekend at a hotel, because he had a time-sensitive work 
project and needed to be away from home to concentrate on it. His sons were to spend 
the night with friends. One of his sons came home to get clothes for the night, but his 
wife had locked him out of his room. Applicant said that his wife called the police, and 
that the police escorted his son inside to get his clothes. (Tr. 39-40; Answer) 
 
Applicant stated in his answer that his wife called and left him numerous “ugly 
voicemails.” He received a phone call from the police, informing him that his wife had 
taken out a restraining order against him and was claiming that he had assaulted her 
that morning. Applicant moved in with his sister when he learned that the restraining 
order had been extended. (Tr. 39-40; Answer) 
 
In the aftermath of this incident, Applicant’s wife filed several criminal complaints 
against him, supported by statements from her detailing the allegations. She was the 
alleged victim for each offense. (GE 4) 
 
                                                          
2 The same court document also has a box checked indicating that Appellant was “tried and found not 
guilty.” However, a signed court order reflects that the case was dismissed because the parties declined 
to testify. (GE 2; Tr. 33-34) 
 
 
4 
 
 
On February 17, 2016, Applicant was arrested on the following charges: (1) 
felony rape by sexual intercourse through use of the victim’s mental incapacity or 
physical helplessness, on or about January 1, 2014; (2) assault and battery of a family 
member, between May 1 and July 1, 2015; (3) assault and battery of a family member, 
on or about January 28, 2016; and (4) violation of a protective order, on or about 
February 4-5, 2016. (SOR ¶ 1.b) (GE 4; GE 5)  Applicant was subject to electronic 
monitoring, and ordered to stay away from the marital home. (GE 4)  
 
 As to the rape charge, Applicant’s wife alleged in a statement to police that he  
showed her a videotape of him having sex with her while she was “medicated and 
barely conscious and which I had no memory of.” (GE 4) As to the 2015 assault charge, 
Applicant’s wife alleged in a statement to police that she woke up in bed to find 
Applicant relieving himself on her. (GE 4)  
 
 As to the January 2016 assault and battery charge, Applicant’s wife alleged in a 
statement to police that Applicant pulled an electrical cord out of the wall behind the 
television and whipped her with it. His wife said when she tried to plug the cord back in, 
“he grabbed the back of my hair and pulled me to the ground. I got up and started to 
leave [the] room when he threw [the] cord at me.” (GE 4) 
 
Applicant denied the allegation of felony rape and the two allegations of 
misdemeanor assault. He also denied engaging in the underlying conduct, and testified 
that his wife fabricated the allegations. And, he believed, “ultimately they were not 
pursued because there was no evidence, because it didn’t happen.” (Tr. 65-66; Answer) 
 
As to the protection order, Applicant stated in his answer that he learned from his 
bank around February 5, 2016, that his wife had taken $93,000 out of an equity line of 
credit in their home. He admitted that he texted his sons and “suggested someone talk 
to her and get her to put it back,” because the money was to be used for their sons’ 
college education. (AE B; Answer) He later “realized this might be a violation (I was not 
sure) so I texted them back and said not to do anything, delete texts, and leave it 
alone.” He was charged with violating the protective order by attempting to contact his 
wife through a third party. (Tr. 42-43; GE 4 at 3-5; Answer)  
 
The rape charge and the 2015 assault and battery charge, were nolle prossed on 
June 8, 2016. Applicant testified that “those were the charges that I completely denied, 
those never happened.” (Tr. 41) The charge of violating the protection order was also 
nolle prossed.  
 
As to the 2016 assault charge, which Applicant also denied, he testified: 
 
[T]here was one charge that they would not nolle prossed [sic], and my 
lawyer said we can either – it was a misdemeanor assault charge. He said 
we can either fight it or if you plead no contest, they will dismiss it in June 
of next year, on June 6th of next year [2018]. So, ultimately, the incident 
that occurred in 2016, the charged were not processed [sic], and the one 
 
5 
 
 
that was, that they agreed to dismiss, they said that if I went to a spousal  . 
. . domestic intervention class, they would dismiss the charge.3 
 
Applicant pled no contest (nolo contendre) to the January 2016 assault charge. 
Adjudication of that charge was deferred until June 2018. (Tr. 41-42; GE 4) There is no 
record evidence of the court’s order deferring adjudication of that charge. The most 
recent entry in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) Incident Report is 
based on a letter from Applicant’s attorney detailing the status of the case as of 
December 2016. (GE 5) 
 
Applicant was ordered to attend a 24-week domestic violence course, which he 
completed in December 2016. He underwent group counseling and said he learned 
about resolving conflict and removing himself from violent situations. (Tr. 54, 62-63; AE 
C) Applicant reported the 2016 charges to his employer’s facility security office, and 
kept them informed as his criminal case progressed. (Tr. 56; GE 5) Applicant testified 
that he has had no subsequent arrests. (Tr. 67) 
 
Applicant’s wife filed for divorce against him the same day she brought charges 
against him, in February 2016. (GE 4; GE 5) Applicant moved out of the home that 
month. He and his wife have not lived together since then. He and his two oldest sons 
moved in with his sister. Applicant’s youngest son moved in with them during summer 
2016, after a dispute with his mother. In April 2017, Applicant moved into an apartment. 
He now lives there with his three sons. (Tr. 43-45) They provided a joint letter 
supporting their father, and stated that Applicant “would never have committed the acts 
our mother has accused him of.” They regard him as a “good, honest man” and said he 
has always been supportive. (AE D) 
 
Applicant testified that his wife continued to reside in their marital home, and that 
he pays $1,500 a month in spousal support, which includes the mortgage payment. (Tr. 
52) In December 2017, his divorce attorney provided a letter stating that Applicant and 
his wife had signed a property settlement agreement in late November 2017. The only 
issues left to be resolved in the divorce case were spousal support and attorney’s fees. 
Applicant and his wife have lived apart for more than one year, as required under state 
law. His divorce attorney expects that a “no fault” divorce will be granted. (AE E) 
 
 Applicant submitted several recommendation letters from personal and 
professional references. They praised him as being a hardworking, knowledgeable and 
competent professional. They regard him has having a calm and thoughtful demeanor. 
He is regarded as considerate, attentive, trustworthy and honest. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
                                                          
3 Tr. 41-42.  
 
6 
 
 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”4 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. (AG) In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) [the] individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant was charged with criminal offenses against his wife in 2006 and 
February 2016. Applicant admitted the 2006 assault and battery charge, though it was 
dismissed after they both declined to testify.  
 
The 2016 charges that were nolle prossed include an allegation of felony rape in 
January 2014 and a misdemeanor assault and battery charge from mid-2015. Those 
allegations are based solely on his wife’s statements to the police. Nevertheless, the 
police regarded her allegations as sufficiently credible to warrant criminal charges. 
Applicant also admitted violating a protection order in February 2016 by attempting to 
contact his wife by texting his sons. That charge was also nolle prossed. 
 
Applicant pleaded no contest (nolo contendre) to the 2016 assault and battery 
charge. Under the law of his home state,  
 
Whenever, in any civil action, it is contended that any party thereto pled 
guilty or nolo contendre or suffered a forfeiture in a prosecution for a 
criminal offense or traffic infraction which arose out of the same 
occurrence upon which the civil action is based, evidence of said plea as 
shown by the records of the criminal court shall be admissible. Where the 
records of the court in which the prosecution was had are silent or 
ambiguous as to whether or not such plea was made or forfeiture occurred 
 
8 
 
 
the court hearing the civil case shall admit such evidence on the question 
of such plea or forfeiture as may be relevant, and the question of whether 
such plea was made or forfeiture suffered shall be a question for the court 
to determine.5 
 
The record evidence does not include documentation from the state criminal 
court to verify Applicant’s no contest plea. Nor does the JPAS entry reference a “no 
contest” plea. Applicant testified that the prosecution declined to dismiss the 2016 
assault and battery charge. His testimony referenced “the incident that occurred in 
2016,” and he testified that he was advised to plead no contest and to attend a spousal 
intervention program, which he did. 
 
As the DOHA Appeal Board has noted,  
 
DOHA administrative proceedings, which are inherently executive 
determinations by the U.S. government as to whether an individual should 
have access to classified information, are not really analogous to collateral 
civil court lawsuits for monetary damages or injunctive relief growing out of 
criminal incidents. Moreover, the Board has previously noted that 
compliance with state law is not required because security clearance 
adjudications are conducted by the Department of Defense pursuant to 
federal law. See U.S. Constitution, Art. VI, Cl. 2 (Supremacy Clause). See, 
e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0423 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2001).6 
 
Nevertheless, under applicable state law, a no contest (nolo contendre) plea is 
the same as a guilty plea, and such a plea may be used against the defendant as an 
admission in a civil suit based upon or growing out of the act upon which the 
prosecution was based.7 That is, a nolo contendre plea constitutes an admission to 
every element of the offense.8 Notwithstanding Applicant’s denials, he also pleaded no 
contest to the 2016 assault and battery charge. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(b) apply to that 
offense, and to the other allegations.  
 
As a result of his no contest plea, Applicant remains within the jurisdiction of the 
criminal justice system until June 2018. However, there is no evidence indicating that he 
is on parole or probation. Thus, AG ¶ 31(c) does not apply.  
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Va. Code Ann. § 8.01-418. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 03-11708 at 3, fn. 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2006) (concerning the consideration of nolo 
contendre pleas in DOHA cases). 
 
7 See id.  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 03-17708 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2006). 
 
 
9 
 
 
  The following mitigating conditions for criminal conduct are potentially applicable, 
under AG ¶ 32:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence that the individual committed the offense; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant has been arrested twice, in 2006 and in February 2016, for criminal 
offenses against his wife. She did not testify, so I cannot weigh her credibility. The only 
statements in the record from her are the statements she made to the police in GE 4. 
However, Applicant presented no evidence, documentary or otherwise, to corroborate 
his claims about his wife’s condition or her behavior -- evidence that might have 
undercut the veracity of her statements in the record. Such evidence was Applicant’s 
burden to present.  
 
 This is not to say I find that Applicant engaged in all of the conduct his wife 
alleged. He denied the allegation of felony rape in January 2014 and the allegation of 
assault and battery in 2015. These allegations are supported only by his wife’s 
statements, and the charges were nolle prossed. AG ¶ 32(c) applies to them.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged texting his sons, which led to the charge of violating the 
protection order. AG ¶ 32(c) does not apply to that charge. However, that allegation is 
mitigated because Applicant did not appear to realize that his actions were in violation 
of the protection order. That charge was an isolated incident that is unlikely to recur. AG 
¶ 32(a) applies to it.  
 
 However, while Applicant also denied the 2016 assault and battery allegation, he 
also pleaded no contest to the charge in court. This makes this offense difficult to 
mitigate, particularly since he did not acknowledge his conduct in this proceeding. At the 
close of the record, that charge was still in deferred adjudication status, and will remain 
so until June 2018. Thus, even though Applicant is not technically on parole or 
probation, he remains under the criminal court’s jurisdiction. Even if that were not the 
case, this charge is quite recent, as it is less than two years old. The 2016 assault and 
battery charge is also not isolated, as Applicant was also arrested for assault and 
battery against his wife in 2006.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant has lived apart from his wife since the time of his most recent arrest, 
and finalization of their divorce is expected soon. He completed the required domestic 
violence program, and remains in compliance with the requirements of deferred 
adjudication. Applicant also has an excellent employment record, and remains closely 
involved with his sons’ lives. Nevertheless, insufficient time has passed since the 
offense for me to conclude that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) should apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other single guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes but is not limited to, consideration of: . . (2) 
any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a is a cross-allegation of the criminal conduct allegations in SOR ¶ 1. 
The security concerns associated with that conduct are largely addressed under 
Guideline J above. Nevertheless, AG ¶ 16(d)(2) also applies. Applicant’s arrests might 
affect his personal, professional, or community standing. AG ¶ 16(e)(1) therefore 
applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E: 
   
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 
11 
 
 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant disclosed his 2006 arrest on his 2010 SCA. He informed his employer’s 
security office about his arrests and about the status of his 2016 case. This reduces or 
eliminates any ongoing vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress stemming 
from his circumstances. AG ¶ 17(e) applies.  
 
 However, AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do not apply for the same reasons as AG ¶¶ 
32(a) and 32(d) do not apply under Guideline J, above. Similarly, AG ¶ 17(f) does not 
apply for the same reasons that AG ¶ 32(c) does not apply under Guideline J.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. The record evidence 
 
12 
 
 
established criminal charges against Applicant 10 years apart, and as recently as 2016. 
On balance, and in consideration of the evidence as a whole, I conclude that Applicant 
provided insufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s continued eligibility for 
access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant    
   
 Paragraph 2: Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
