 
1 
                                         
 
aa 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
        )  ISCR Case No. 17-03454 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not file federal and state tax returns for tax years 2013, 2014, 2015, 
and 2016 as required by law. Financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 1, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Position or security clearance application (SCA). Item 2. On November 29, 2017, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), June 8, 2017. Item 1. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Item 1. 
 
On December 22, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. Item 1. On 
January 23, 2018, Department Counsel completed a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
including five exhibits. Items 1-5. On February 9, 2018, Applicant acknowledged receipt 
of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the evidence in the FORM, and Items 1-5 are 
admitted into evidence.  On March 5, 2018, Applicant responded to the FORM.  On April 
9, 2018, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. Item 1. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old principal engineer, and a DOD contractor has employed 
him as a consultant since 2002.2 In 1983, he received a bachelor’s degree. In 1985, he 
received a master’s degree, and in 1987, he was awarded a Ph.D. He has never served 
in the military. In 1993, he married, and his children were born in 2000 and 2002. There 
is no evidence of criminal arrests or convictions, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal drugs, or 
violations of employer’s rules. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant said that he was unable to file his tax returns because his mother was 
dying of cancer. Item 3. His spouse is an independent contractor, and her tax return is 
more complicated because of her employment. Item 3.  
 
On November 17, 2017, he responded to Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) interrogatories and admitted he had not filed his federal and state tax returns for 
tax years 2013 through 2016. Item 3. He said, he was withholding funds from his salary 
for his state and federal taxes; he usually receives a refund; and he is trying to get his tax 
returns filed. Item 3.  
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel noted the absence of corroborating or 
supporting documentation of resolution of the SOR issues. FORM at 2. Aside from 
Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant 
filed his federal or state taxes for tax years 2013 through 2016. The FORM informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 The sources for the information in this paragraph and the next paragraph are Applicant’s June 1, 
2014 Questionnaire for National Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) and his 
July 18, 2017 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview. Items 2, 3.   
 
3 
                                         
 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination 
based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. FORM at 2.  
 
In his FORM response, Applicant explained it was necessary to complete a 
Schedule C for his spouse who has a consulting business. Based on a history of receiving 
tax refunds, he does not believe he owes additional taxes. He said, “For personal reasons, 
we had fallen behind with getting our taxes completed, returned, and filed starting with 
the 2014 taxes.” He indicated his mother had passed away, and he was providing care 
for his father. He said he would get “caught up on his taxes” before April 17, 2018.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and Director of National Intelligence have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
4 
                                         
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes one disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case, “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, 
 
5 
                                         
 
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.” The record establishes the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(f) requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 Seven financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;   
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue;  
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
 
6 
                                         
 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
A willful failure to timely make (means complete and file with the IRS) a federal 
income tax return is a misdemeanor-level federal criminal offense.3 For purposes of this 
decision, I am not weighing Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal income tax returns 
against him as a federal crime. The failure to timely file income tax returns has security 
implications because: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we 
have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not directed at collecting 
debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By 
the same token, neither is it directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax 
returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her 
legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See 
Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 
183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis in original). See ISCR 
Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 
(App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). The 
Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has purportedly 
corrected [his or her] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is now motivated 
to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful consideration of 
[a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [his or her] longstanding prior behavior 
evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax returns. See 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no 
harm, no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and employing an “all’s well 
                                            
3 Title 26 U.S.C, § 7203, willful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax, reads:  
 
Any person . . . required by this title or by regulations made under authority thereof to make 
a return, keep any records, or supply any information, who willfully fails to . . .  make such 
return, keep such records, or supply such information, at the time or times required by law 
or regulations, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a 
misdemeanor . . . .  
 
A willful failure to make tax return, keep records, or supply information when required, is a misdemeanor 
without regard to existence of any tax liability. Spies v. United States, 317 U.S. 492 (1943); United States 
v. Walker, 479 F.2d 407 (9th Cir. 1973); United States v. McCabe, 416 F.2d 957 (7th Cir. 1969); O’Brien v. 
United States, 51 F.2d 193 (7th Cir. 1931). 
 
7 
                                         
 
that ends well” analysis as inadequate to support approval of access to classified 
information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns after receipt of the SOR).   
 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his federal and state tax issues. There is insufficient 
assurance that his financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish mitigation of financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old principal engineer, and a DOD contractor has employed 
him as a consultant since 2002. In 1987, he was awarded a Ph.D. There is no evidence 
of criminal arrests or convictions, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal drugs, or violations of 
employer’s rules. 
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant 
failed to file his federal and state tax returns for tax years 2013 through 2016. He has 
known that this issue raises a security concern since his receipt of the SOR. His actions 
raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations security 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 
 
8 
                                         
 
10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the 
whole person. Financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
