 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ADP Case No. 17-00953 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate concerns raised by his 
financial situation. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline. Specifically, the SOR lists 22 delinquent debts, totaling over $45,000, which 
includes: about $8,000 in back child support (1.a), $18,000 in collections for student loans 
and unpaid tuition for the associate’s degree Applicant earned from an online college in 
2014 (1.b – 1. e; 1.h; and 1.i); $2,600 for tax liens entered against him in 2012 and 2014 
(1.o and 1.p); and $3,000 in unpaid court fines for his drug-related convictions (1.w). The 
SOR also alleges that Applicant failed to file his 2014 and 2015 federal and state income 
tax returns (1.v).1  
 
On August 25, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all the SOR 
allegations. He requested a decision on the administrative (written) record without a 
hearing. The following month, on or about September 21, 2017, Department Counsel sent 
Applicant a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel 
forwarded to Applicant six exhibits, pre-marked as Items 1 – 6, which the Government 
offers for admission into the record. Applicant received the FORM on October 16, 2017. 
                                                          
1 See Item 2 (Answer); Item 3 (application for position of trust); Item 6 (November 2016 interview). 
 
2 
(Appellate Exhibit I) He was given 30 days to raise an objection to the material offered by 
Department Counsel and submit his own evidence. He did not file an objection or submit 
a response. Accordingly, without objection, Items 1 – 6 are admitted into the record. 
 
 On March 16, 2018, I was assigned the case and then received confirmation that 
Applicant remains sponsored for a position of trust. (Appellate Exhibit II) Accordingly, I 
have jurisdiction to issue a decision. ISCR Case No. 14-03753 (App. Bd. Sep. 23, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 41, has been working full-time for his current employer since October 
2011. In April 2016, Applicant submitted an application for a position of trust to support a 
federal contract. He reported the delinquent student loans and back child support listed 
on the SOR. He also reported his failure to complete probation for his late 1990’s drug-
related convictions, which led to the debt listed in SOR 1.w. He sat down for an interview 
with a government investigator in connection with his application in November 2016. He 
discussed many of the SOR debts with the investigator, as well as his failure to file his 
federal and state tax returns. Applicant explained that his financial problems began about 
10 years earlier when he and his wife lost their jobs. He has been struggling financially 
ever since, having lost a home to foreclosure in 2010 when he was unemployed for about 
eight months. He has been working a part-time job as a fast-food delivery driver since 
2013, but is unable to make enough money to pay his delinquent debts. He has 
considered bankruptcy, but many of his debts are not dischargeable through bankruptcy.  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided by applying the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG 
or guidelines), which became effective on June 8, 2017, through Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4 (SEAD 4), and the due process procedures set forth in DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive).2  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.3  
 
                                                          
2 SEAD 4, ¶ E.1 (the current guidelines “shall be used by all authorized adjudicative agencies when 
rendering a determination for initial or continued eligibility . . . to hold a sensitive position.”); Memorandum 
from the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security, dated 
November 19, 2004 (the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to utilize the 
provisions of the Directive, to include the current version of the adjudicative guidelines, to resolve contractor 
cases forwarded to it for a trustworthiness determination). 
 
3 SEAD 4, ¶ E.4; Directive, § 3.2. ADP Case No. 14-00590 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014) (“The standard 
applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988) regarding security clearances: such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent 
with the interests of the national security’.”) 
 
3 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a federal 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and whole-
person concept. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision. See generally AG ¶ 2. 
 
The Directive sets forth in Enclosure 3 the due process procedures that must be 
followed in all DOHA proceedings. Department Counsel must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts (i.e., SOR allegations denied by the applicant). While an 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
relevant conduct or circumstances that he or she admits or is otherwise established. 
Directive, ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.25. An applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
establish their eligibility for a position of trust. Any doubt raised by the evidence, must be 
resolved in favor of the national security. See AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt and failure to file his income tax returns raise concerns 
about his ability to hold a sensitive position. The financial considerations concern is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 The concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise sensitive information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information.4 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or . . . failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required; 
 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
4 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Persons applying for a position of trust are not required to be debt free, or have 
unblemished financial records, or a certain credit score. However, they are expected to 
present evidence mitigating concerns raised by delinquent debt. They are also required 
to show that they manage their personal financial obligations in a manner consistent with 
the expectations for those granted access to sensitive information.5 
 
Here, Applicant did not meet his burden of proof and persuasion. Part of his 
financial problems may be attributable to unemployment and underemployment. 
However, his failure to file his income tax returns and a large amount of the delinquent 
debt at issue are neither related to, nor caused by, these outside matters. Applicant 
presented no evidence showing he has obtained financial counseling or that he has taken 
action to address his past-due debts and overdue tax returns. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 
19(f) apply. None of the mitigating conditions apply.6 
 
  
                                                          
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (“[A]n applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is 
required is that an applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his [or her] 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”) (internal citations omitted). See 
also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is reasonable for Judges to expect 
applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of individual debts.”)  
 
6 In reaching this adverse conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept, including the honesty 
Applicant showed in reporting his financial issues on his application and candor he exhibited during the 
interview. See generally AG ¶ 2. However, this and the other favorable record evidence are insufficient to 
mitigate concerns raised by his financial circumstances. I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, 
Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case. 
 
5 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
