 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01110 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 23, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 3, 2016, Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H, Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse; and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2017. He requested an administrative 
determination. However, on August 14, 2017, Department Counsel timely requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge in this matter. The case was assigned to me on 
August 16, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Hearing on September 12, 2017. I convened the hearing via video teleconference as 
scheduled on October 4, 2017. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 
 
2 
 
 
3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 12, 2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations concerning 
his drug involvement in subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of the SOR. Subparagraphs 1.a and 
1.b described his marijuana use from 1993 to present; and the fact that he used 
marijuana after receiving a security clearance in June 2006. He denied the allegations 
in subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b of the SOR, which alleged that he showed questionable 
judgment as identified in subparagraph 1.b, and the falsification of his March 3, 2016 e-
QIP by denying his drug abuse.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He works as a mechanic for a government contractor, 
where he has been employed since approximately February 2004. He received a 
security clearance in connection with his employment in June 2006. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 
20-25.) 
 
 Marijuana use is prevalent in Applicant’s family. Applicant first used it when he 
graduated from high school. He smoked it with his father. It is used at family reunions. 
His father grows and smokes it. Applicant likens its illegality to “jaywalking.” (Tr. 15.-19, 
22.) He does not recall specifically the last time he used marijuana, but estimated that 
he used it five to ten times per year prior to accepting employment with his current 
employer. Since then, he only uses marijuana when he visits his father. He estimated 
that he was last home in 2015, and thought he last used marijuana over the course of 
one week during that trip.  (Tr. 22, 27-30.)  
 
 Applicant did not disclose his marijuana use on section 23 of his 2016 e-QIP, 
which asks: “In the last seven (7) years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled 
substances?” and, “”Have you ever illegally used or otherwise been involved with a drug 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 
or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance other than previously 
listed?” Applicant answered “No” to both of these questions. He also denied drug use on 
his 2005 e-QIP. (GE 2.) When asked why he answered these questions “No”, he 
testified, “I kind of view my situation with it as more along the lines of something like 
jaywalking, I guess. I don’t - - I take it too - - I take it lightly in my case because I feel 
very responsible about the choices that I make.” (Tr. 30.) He was aware that marijuana 
use was in violation of Federal law. (Tr. 31.) He later admitted his marijuana use during 
his subject interview on November 9, 2016. (GE 3.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
4 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
guideline is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions are established: 
 
(a) Any substance misuse; 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Appellant used marijuana from 1993 to present. He has held a security clearance 
since 2006. Therefore, security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a), and 25(f) are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate drug-related 
security concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant failed to present any evidence to support the above mitigating 
conditions. There is no evidence that his drug involvement is unlikely to continue 
or that he has taken actions to overcome this problem.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG 
¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
  Applicant’s long-term recurring use of marijuana was criminal conduct that could 
affect his personal, professional, or community standing. Further, he falsified his e-QIP 
concerning his drug use and drug use while holding a security clearance. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise concerns under these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 None of the above conditions have been shown to apply. While Applicant 
admitted his marijuana use in his November 2016 subject interview, this disclosure was 
 
7 
 
 
neither not prompt nor in good faith. Applicant has not presented evidence to support 
any of the above conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a 25-year history of 
illegal substance abuse. He also falsified his e-QIP. Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment remain questionable under the alleged security 
concerns. My comments regarding each guideline are incorporated here also.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and substance abuse; and his personal conduct.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
