 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02391 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse concerns, but he 
did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H and 
Guideline E. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 15, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 11, 2017, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 16, 2018. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1-5. I sustained objections to GE 4 and 5 and 
 
2 
 
they were not admitted. GE 1-3 were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
Government’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, 
called two witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A-J, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s exhibit list was marked as HE II. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations in his answer. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
his current position since August 2016. He is pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He is 
married, but has no children. He served in the Army from 2009 until 2013, after which 
he was honorably discharged. He deployed to Afghanistan on one occasion. He has 
held a security clearance since 2010.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana in 2008 and in October 2013, while 
holding a security clearance. It also alleged he falsified information on his May 2009 and 
November 2009 security clearance applications (SCA) when he failed to disclose his 
2008 marijuana use.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana in October 2008 before he joined the Army. He ate a 
marijuana-laced cookie provided by a friend. He knew the cookie contained marijuana 
at the time he used it. He felt ill after eating the cookie. He claimed he would not 
consume a marijuana-laced cookie in the future. In June 2013, Applicant had recently 
been discharged from the Army and as a celebration, a friend offered him a marijuana 
cigarette. He smoked the marijuana on that occasion. He claimed, again, that using 
marijuana made him ill. He believed he held a security clearance in October 2013. He 
claimed that was his last use of marijuana. He submitted three drugs tests from 
December 2017 and one from January 2018, showing negative results for all drugs 
tested. He provided a signed, sworn statement of intent not to use any illegal drugs in 
the future and consenting to an automatic revocation of his clearance should he fail to 
comply.2  
 
 When Applicant enlisted in the Army in 2009, he was required to complete a 
SCA. He did so in May 2009. He was specifically asked whether since age 16, or in the 
last 7 years, he ever used marijuana. He falsely answered, “No.” He certified that his 
answers were “true, complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief….” In 
November 2009, Applicant was again directed to complete a SCA. He did not recall why 
he needed to complete a second SCA after such a short time period. He was asked a 
similar question on the SCA about his past drug use and he again provided a false 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 38-41; GE 1; AE B, H. 
 
2 Tr. at 41-42, 44, 50-51, 81-82; SOR Answer; GE 3; AE C-D. 
 
 
3 
 
answer claiming he did not use marijuana during the time specified. He served his entire 
four-year enlistment without disclosing his previous drug use. In February 2015, he 
completed another SCA is conjunction with seeking a security clearance for a civilian 
position. This time he disclosed both of his prior drug uses. In his SOR answer, 
Applicant referenced his May and November 2009 SCAs and stated, “I admit to 
consciously and willingly, attempting to hide the fact that I had consumed a marijuana-
laced cookie in approximately October of 2008.” He went on to state that he knew if he 
answered yes he would not be allowed to enlist. He knew lying on the forms carried 
penalties, but he risked exposure to those penalties in order to enlist in the Army. His 
hearing testimony was consistent with his SOR answers on these points.3  
 
 Applicant now realizes it was wrong to lie on the 2009 SCAs. He claims he is a 
different man now than when he falsely completed the forms in 2009. He is older and 
more mature. He has a family, owns his own home, and has a positive credit record. His 
testifying coworkers described him as an outstanding performer who is honest and 
trustworthy. They were aware of his past actions that led him to this hearing. They 
support a continuation of his security clearance. He also provided letters of support from 
coworkers and certifications he has earned.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 43-44; SOR Answer; GE 1-3. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-23, 26-32, 43-45; SOR Answer; AE A, D, G, I-J. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement and 
substance abuse:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable in this case include: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant used marijuana in October 2008 and in June 2013, the later date while 
holding a security clearance. I find that both above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
potentially applies in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana was infrequent and his last use occurred 
approximately five years ago. There is no evidence of more recent use. AG ¶ 26(a) 
applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
 
 Applicant admitted that he intentionally lied about his past marijuana when he 
completed two SCAs in 2009. He did so because he was afraid he would not be allowed 
to enlist in the Army if he disclosed his drug use. I conclude that he intentionally 
withheld this information when he completed his SCAs. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
6 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
 Honestly completing an SCA is the initial crucial step in gaining access to 
classified information. Applicant admitted lying on the two SCAs to gain a personal 
benefit, i.e., enlisting in the Army. He went on to serve his entire enlistment without 
notifying anyone of his falsification. The Government expects, and must rely on, the 
honesty of applicants during this process. Therefore, providing false information at this 
stage is not a minor offense. Such deliberate action casts doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. His 
acknowledgment of his behavior came some six years after his falsifications. There is 
no evidence that he sought counseling for his behavior, and his other steps taken 
(changed attitude, family, and maturity) do not mitigate his untrustworthy behavior. AG ¶ 
17(c) partially applies. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
 
7 
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, including his deployment, his federal 
contractor service, the recommendations of his coworkers, his current level of maturity 
and family life, and his acknowledgement of his past falsifications. However, I also 
considered that he provided false information on two separate occasions and his lies 
were solely motivated by personal gain. He had numerous opportunities to come 
forward with the truthful information during his enlistment, but he failed to do so.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the drug involvement concerns, but he did not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
