 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02666 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). As the Facility Security Officer (FSO), he failed to report key management 
personnel’s criminal behavior and provided misleading statements to a Government 
investigator. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 1, 2016. 
On August 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), for all decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 21, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On September 26, 2017, a complete copy of the File of 
 
2 
 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was mailed to Applicant and 
received by him on October 4, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
Items. Hence, Items 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence without objection. He did 
not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant admitted all three allegations in the SOR with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 65-year-old director of contracts at a closely-held-family business. 
He has worked for this defense contractor since July 1976, and requires a security 
clearance for his employment. Applicant served as his employer’s FSO for 
approximately 20 years until February 2015 (Item 7). He has held a security clearance 
since approximately 1989 (Item 3 at 25). He graduated from high school in 1970 and 
served in the State A’s National Guard from October 1970 until December 1976, when 
he was honorably discharged. Applicant has been married to his second wife since 
1976 and has one child from each of his marriages (Item 3).  
 
In August 2014, the president and majority shareholder (Individual A) of 
Applicant’s employer (Company A), a family-owned business, pled guilty to illegally 
diverting corporate funds for himself. The Department of Justice found Individual A’s 
illegal behavior occurred between 2008 and 2011. Individual A fraudulently converted 
over $900,000 from his company to himself. He also failed to pay almost $285,000 in 
federal taxes on this fraudulently obtained money. Company A manufactures parts for 
the defense and aerospace industries (Item 6). 
 
On December 11, 2014, an industrial security specialist (ISR) conducted a 
security vulnerability assessment (SVA) on Company A. During the investigation, it was 
discovered that multiple significant adverse information reports were not reported by 
Applicant through the joint personnel adjudicative system (JPAS). One of these reports 
included significant adverse information regarding Individual A. As the FSO, Applicant 
was responsible for filing a report in JPAS regarding Individual A when he became 
aware of this information.1 The Defense Security Service (DSS) was not informed of this 
issue involving Individual A until the ISR conducted the SVA. DSS determined this 
information is especially significant because “it directly affects [Company A’s] ability to 
maintain a Facility Clearance (FCL)” (Item 7).  
 
                                                          
1 The National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) states “Contractors are required 
to report certain events that: impact the status of the facility clearance (FCL); impact the status of an 
employee’s personnel security clearance (PCL); may indicate the employee poses an insider threat; 
affect proper safeguarding of classified information, or that indicate classified information has been lost or 
compromised” (Item 5). 
 
 
3 
 
On December 17, 2014, the DSS sent a culpability report to the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility (DODCAF) for Applicant based upon the 
information addressed above (Item 7 at 1). On February 4, 2015, DDS suspended 
Applicant’s security clearance (Item 7 at 2). This report notes Applicant’s failure to 
report multiple significant adverse information reports was gross negligence (Item 7).2   
 
In May 2017, Applicant told the Government investigator he was unaware of 
Individual A’s criminal behavior until it became public knowledge in August 2014 (Item 4 
at 2). He initially told the investigator that his failure to report Individual A’s criminal 
behavior and subsequent conviction in JPAS was due to a computer issue, which 
prevented him from accessing JPAS. He also asserted he tried to call the facility 
inspector, but was unable to reach him. Upon further questioning by the Government 
investigator, Applicant admitted he did not report this information in a timely manner 
because Individual A’s father (Individual B), the owner of Company A, asked Applicant 
not to make an adverse information report (AIR), to protect Company A and his son. 
Applicant did not file the AIR due to a sense of loyalty to Company A and Individual B 
(Item 4 at 2). 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided emails between himself and the 
ISR regarding JPAS. Applicant’s first email to the ISR was sent on December 22, 2014, 
after DSS initiated an investigation regarding his behavior (Item 2). 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”3 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”4 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”5 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
                                                          
2 DSS found Applicant should have be familiar with proper reporting requirements as he had been an 
FSO in the NISP for over 20 years (Item 7).  
 
3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
4 Egan at 527. 
 
5 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”6 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”8 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.9 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.11 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”12 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
an personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
6 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to report Individual A’s criminal behavior in JPAS and his 
failure to be honest and forthright with the Government investigator establishes the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 
17 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Applicant failed to report significant adverse information regarding Individual A. 
When he was confronted regarding his failure, he provided misleading and false 
information to a Government investigator. He ultimately admitted the truth behind his 
failure to report the adverse information, but only after he was confronted. AG ¶ 23(a) 
does not apply. Applicant held a security clearance for approximately 26 years and 
served as Company A’s FSO for 20 years. His behavior was not minor as DSS 
described it as “gross negligence.” Applicant violated the responsibility entrusted in him 
by the DOD when he put his loyalty to Company A and Individual B above his loyalty to 
the U.S. Government. AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the personal 
conduct concerns raised by his behavior. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
