 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-02464 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
23, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 21, 2018. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and they were admitted into evidence without 
 
2 
objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. I specifically asked Applicant if he wanted me to leave the record 
open so he could provide additional and amplifying documents to substantiate his 
testimony. He specifically declined my offer.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript on 
March 29, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.h through 1.j, and 
2.a. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f. The Government withdrew the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 1982, a bachelor’s 
degree in 1990, and a master’s degree in 2004. He has been married four times. His 
last marriage ended in 2013. He has a 14-year-old son who lives with his mother.2  
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since June 
2016. He disclosed in his September 2016 electronic Questionnaire for Investigation 
Processing (e-QIP) that he was unemployed or “not engaged in a project” during 
different periods. He worked on contracts for specific projects then would be 
unemployed. He disclosed his unemployment from November 2015 to January 2016; 
March 2015 to August 2015; April 2014 to July 2014; October 2013 to December 2013; 
November 2011 to February 2012; and February 2009 to March 2010.3  
 
 Applicant is required to pay $754 a month for child support. He testified that due 
to a period of unemployment six years ago he owes about $20,000 in arrearages. The 
arrearages are being paid through his paycheck $70 a month, in addition to his required 
monthly payment.4  
 
 When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he disclosed that he was paying delinquent 
taxes through a payment plan because he was unable to pay the taxes when they were 
due. The taxes were from an inheritance he received when his father passed away. He 
was unaware that he was required to pay income tax on the amount. He did not 
disclose any other financial liabilities in this e-QIP.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 108-109. 
 
2 Tr. 25-29. 
 
3Tr. 33-34; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 28-33. I have not considered any unalleged derogatory information for disqualifying purposes. I may 
consider this information when making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in a whole-person analysis.  
 
5 GE 1. 
 
3 
 A government investigator interviewed Applicant in December 2016. During the 
interview, Applicant disclosed the tax payment plan regarding the inheritance he 
received. He did not disclose any other delinquent debts until he was confronted by the 
investigator with them. He was confronted with the delinquent student loan alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($26,339). He told the investigator he was aware he had obtained student 
loans when he was earning his master’s degree. He said he was aware the payments 
on this account were late. He said he set up an automatic payment towards the loan, 
but did not know when he did it or the amount he was paying. He told the investigator 
that he believed the account was current and no payments were due. He said he failed 
to disclose this on the e-QIP due to oversight.6  
 
 Applicant was confronted with the delinquent student loan in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,936). 
He told the investigator that he believed it was a student loan, but had no further 
comment on it. He could not confirm that the account was in collection status. He was 
also confronted with the delinquent student loan in SOR ¶ 1.d ($664). He acknowledged 
having obtained a student loan with this creditor, but could not recall the details of the 
loan and could not recall it was late being paid. He could not recall any details about the 
loans.7  
 
 At Applicant’s hearing, he testified that he obtained student loans so he could 
pursue his master’s degree that he completed in 2004. He said that he made some 
intermittent payments. He acknowledged his student loans were in default. He was 
uncertain how long they were in default. In June 2017, he obtained a copy of his credit 
report to determine the current owner of the loans and to pursue a rehabilitation 
program. He said there was a program that would permit him to remove the loans from 
default status if he paid $50 a month on each loan. He stated that he is participating in 
this program and has two separate agreements for two of his defaulted loans. He has 
not completed the rehabilitation program. He could not recall how many payments he 
had made or how many remained to complete the program. He anticipated that at some 
point his payments would be income-based. He testified that he has no explanation for 
why he did not consistently address his student loans during the past 14 years. It is 
unknown if the student loan in SOR ¶ 1.d is included in the rehabilitation program. No 
documents were provided to substantiate Applicant’s participation in a loan 
rehabilitation program or any payments made.8 
 
 Applicant testified that he has worked to resolve his delinquent debts. He said 
that the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($914) was incurred around 2013. He explained he 
was not good at managing his debts and occasionally he made a payment toward this 
debt. He testified that he completed the final payment in early February 2018. The debt 
is paid.9 
                                                          
6 GE 2. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. 50-59. 
 
9 Tr. 40-47; Answer to SOR; AE A.  
 
 
4 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e is a tax lien ($3,713). Applicant testified that he and his 
wife lived in State A in 2012 for six months. They filed their joint state income tax return. 
He told the investigator in December 2016 that he did not report this tax lien on his e-
QIP due to oversight. He also said his wife was responsible for paying this debt 
because she handled the finances. He was aware of the debt and intended to contact 
the state as soon as possible to arrange a payment plan. He provided to the investigator 
a receipt from the state for a payment of $100 made by credit card on December 2, 
2016, the same date as his interview. At his hearing, he testified that he and his wife 
were supposed to split the amount to be paid on the tax bill. When asked if he paid his 
half, he said “no.” Applicant paid the tax lien in January 2018, after he received the 
SOR. His brother gave him the money to pay it.10  
 
 The Government conceded that the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($359) was sold to 
a collection agency and then resold, but the name of the new creditor was unknown. 
Applicant testified that he attempted to find the creditor and was unable. The 
Government concurs that it is unable to determine who owns the account. The debt is 
resolved.11 
 
 Applicant testified that the collection account in SOR ¶ 1.h ($315) was for 
insurance he had approximately three years ago. He received notices from the insurer 
about the debt, but Applicant did not do anything until his public trust position became 
an issue. In his answer to the SOR, he provided a letter from September 2017 indicating 
the account was paid in full. The debt is resolved.12 
 
 Applicant testified the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i was a medical bill from many years ago 
that was paid in May 2017. He was waiting for a confirmation letter. His November 2016 
credit report shows the debt owed, but his July 2017 credit report does not report this 
debt. It is resolved.13 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($190) is for accounting services Applicant used to prepare 
his 2013 tax returns. He provided a confirmation letter from the creditor that he paid the 
bill in April 2017.14  
  
 Applicant estimated his salary in 2017 was $93,000. He estimated that for the 
past seven or eight years his annual salary was approximately $86,000. In October 
2016, he purchased a $4,000 engagement ring on credit and completed the monthly 
payments. In January 2015, he traded in his older motorcycle and purchased a new 
one. In addition to the trade-in value, he made a $1,000 cash payment and financed 
$7,000 of the purchase price. He testified he never missed a loan payment and the loan 
                                                          
10Tr. 59-64; AE B. 
 
11 Tr. 39-40, 43-44. 
 
12 Tr. 65-68; Answer to the SOR.  
 
13 Tr. 68-75. 
 
14 Tr. 75-76; Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
is paid. He traded in a truck and purchased a used car for $12,000 in June 2015. He 
financed the balance of the purchase price. He does not maintain a budget. He has 
three credit cards that he pays monthly. He has approximately $70,000 in a retirement 
account.15  
  
 Applicant testified that he has had heart problems since he was 37 years old. He 
had major surgery in 2013 and was out of work for six weeks. Not all of his medical bills 
were covered by insurance. Since then he has had three additional medical procedures. 
He continues to have health challenges. He stated that his 2013 divorce affected his 
finances. He was not required to pay any spousal support. He stated that he does the 
best he can managing his finances. His brother provides him financial counseling. He 
stated that when he received the SOR, it was a motivating force for him to address his 
finances because obtaining a public trust position was at stake. He acknowledged that 
he earns a significant salary and can pay his delinquent debts. He said he can be 
trusted and has shown he can pay his debts on his own.16  
 
 Applicant’s brother, who is a financial advisor and senior vice president at a 
major brokerage firm, provided a character letter for him. His brother stated that he is 
committed to ensuring Applicant stays on a sound financial path. He attributed 
Applicant’s financial problems to his divorce. He stated that since then Applicant has 
been vigilant in keeping current with his taxes and improving his credit score and noted 
that Applicant had no outstanding tax issues. He considered Applicant a hard-working, 
honest, loyal and caring person.17 Other character letters describe Applicant as reliable, 
dependable, professional, trustworthy, valued, well liked, and a positive example for 
others.18  
 
 Applicant testified that he was aware he had student loans and a tax debt. He did 
not disclose this information on his e-QIP because he was embarrassed. He said he did 
not intentionally try to deceive the government. He explained he was never good with 
finances. He stated he had major life challenges with his health and divorces. I have 
considered all of the evidence and did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. I find 
Applicant was aware of his delinquent student loans, tax liability, and other delinquent 
debts when he completed his e-QIP, and he deliberately failed to disclose this 
information.19  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. 33-38, 48-50, 80-85, 93-97. 
 
16 Tr. 77-85, 89-90, 97-99. 
 
17 AE F. 
 
18 AE D, E.  
 
19 Tr. 86-89. 
 
 
6 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
7 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following is potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had numerous delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2013 that 
he is unwilling or unable to resolve. He had unpaid state income taxes from 2012 and 
student loans he secured in approximately 2004 that were not paid. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
8 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt, which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant recently began to pay some of his delinquent debts after he became 
aware that it would affect his ability to obtain a public trust position. He testified that he 
is participating in a rehabilitation problem for his delinquent student loans. His student 
loans are significant. He was unable to state how long he had participated in the 
rehabilitation program and when it would be completed. He is still resolving his student 
loans. He has not established a reliable financial track record. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude future financial problem are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment, a divorce, and 
medical problems. His divorce was in 2013, five years ago. His unemployment is 
beyond his control. His medical issues were beyond his control. For the full application 
of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant’s student loans date back to 2004. He testified that he made some payments, 
but he conceded he does not know why he failed to address these debts. Applicant did 
not address debts that were delinquent for years until after he completed his e-QIP and 
after receiving the SOR. Although many of the SOR debts are now paid, he did not act 
responsibly when he incurred the debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is evidence that Applicant’s brother helps him with his finances. Applicant 
does not have a budget. His brother gave him the money to pay his 2012 state income 
taxes. Applicant told the government investigator in 2016 that he was taking care of this 
tax debt. It was not paid until January 2018. He neglected his student loans. He testified 
that he is participating in a rehabilitation program, but no additional evidence was 
provided as to how many months he has paid, the terms of the program, and when it 
would be completed. There is insufficient evidence to conclude there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. 
  
 Applicant did not begin to address his delinquent debts until his public trust 
position was an issue. He testified that receiving the SOR motivated him to resolve his 
delinquent debts. Despite telling the government investigator that he would immediately 
 
9 
resolve his tax debt, he failed to do so until January 2018. Applicant paid many of the 
delinquent debts after receiving the SOR. Although they may be resolved, I cannot find 
he acted in good faith. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Those debts that were disputed were 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to them. The tax debt was resolved. 
AG ¶ 20(g) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant was aware he had a tax debt, that his student loans were delinquent, 
and that he had other delinquent debts. He deliberately failed to disclose this 
information on his September 2016 e-QIP because he was embarrassed. He told the 
investigator that the largest student loan was being paid by automatic payments. He 
could not recall how much was being paid, but said it was not late. He was aware of his 
2012 state income tax debt. His explanation for failing to disclose it was due to 
oversight. Applicant’s testimony and explanations were not credible. The above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
10 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omissions before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Deliberately failing to disclose required information on a e-QIP is not a minor offense. 
Applicant’s deliberate omissions cast doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He accumulated delinquent debts due to 
unemployment, divorce, and medical issues. Applicant’s student loans were obtained in 
2004. He made minimal attempts to make payments over the next 14 years. He was 
aware of his tax debt, but did not address it until he realized it affected his ability to 
obtain a public trust position. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his financial issues 
on his e-QIP. The Government relies on those holding clearances to do the right thing 
regardless of the consequences and not just when it is beneficial to them. Although 
Applicant paid some of his delinquent debts, there is insufficient evidence to overcome 
the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F, financial considerations, and 
Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
11 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.e-1.j:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
