 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED COPY )  ISCR Case No. 17-01547 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
In light of the seriousness of Applicant’s criminal behavior and the period after 
Applicant’s release from supervised probation, his evidence is insufficient to 
demonstrate his successful rehabilitation and that his criminal behavior is unlikely to 
recur. Sexual behavior, criminal conduct, and personal conduct security concerns are 
not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
October 9, 2015. He was interviewed by government investigators on January 17, 2013, 
and October 19, 2016. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
on June 29, 2017, alleging security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior), J 
(criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct). Applicant answered the SOR on August 
11, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
 
2 
 
 
 
October 19, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on October 31, 2017. He was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. Lacking any objections, I admitted and 
considered the Government’s proposed evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 2.a, and 3.a). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a large federal contractor. He graduated 
from high school in 1987, and attended college for about two years, but did not earn a 
degree. He enlisted in the Army in 1987, and served honorably until his discharge in 
2000. He married his wife in 1988. They have two sons, ages 27 and 22.  
 
Applicant has been intermittently working for federal contractors since he left the 
service in 2000. He has held a top-secret clearance with access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) since 1995. His clearance was suspended in 
February 2011, after he was charged with the felony offenses alleged in the SOR. His 
clearance was terminated when he was fired from his job after he was convicted of the 
felony offenses in 2013. He seeks reinstatement of his clearance, which is required for 
his employment with a federal contractor. 
 
In June and September 2010, Applicant chatted on the Internet with a person he 
believed was a 13-year-old female. (The person was in fact a police officer recording 
the conversations.) On both occasions, Applicant engaged in sexually explicit 
conversations with the “13-year-old,” and emailed to her web-cam clips and pictures of 
him fondling his penis, showing his erect penis, and of a man and a woman having oral 
sex. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
In January 2013, Applicant pleaded guilty and was convicted of two charges of 
dealing in materials harmful to a minor, a third degree felony. Three other felony 
charges were dismissed pursuant to the guilty plea agreement. He was sentenced to a 
term of 153 days in jail, to pay fines and court fees, to attend sex offenders’ treatment, 
and supervised probation for 36 months. The probation was later extended for another 
year. Applicant completed probation in January 2017. Upon Applicant’s motion, the 
court later amended both charges from a felony to a Class A misdemeanor. (FORM, 
Item 6) 
 
Applicant began sex offenders’ treatment in April 2013, and successfully 
completed it in about June 2016. According to the counselor’s report, Applicant took 
responsibility for his criminal conduct, achieved significant progress in healing, and has 
a working relapse prevention plan in place. His tests scores placed him in a low 
 
3 
 
 
 
category for re-offense. In the counselor’s opinion, it is very unlikely that Applicant will 
have any further issues of a sexually deviant nature. (FORM, Item 2) Applicant believes 
that his counseling was of great benefit to him. He believes he is a better person now 
and understands himself better. (Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
 
4 
 
 
 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
 In June and September 2010, Applicant engaged in sexually explicit 
conversations with a person whom he believed was a 13-year-old girl. He emailed to the 
“girl” web-cam clips and pictures of him fondling his penis, showing his naked erect 
penis, and of a man and a woman having oral sex. Applicant was convicted of two 
felony charges for his sexually deviant criminal conduct in January 2013.  
 
 The SOR cross-alleged the same facts and criminal behavior that raised the 
Guideline D security concerns under Guidelines J and E. For the sake of brevity and to 
avoid repetition of the same facts and analysis, the disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions under Guidelines D, J, and E will be addressed together. 
Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under the sexual behavior, 
criminal conduct, and personal conduct guidelines as follows: 
 
Guideline D: Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 sets forth the security concern as follows: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature . . . ; 
 
(b) pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
5 
 
 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 states the security concern as follows:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 provides a condition that raises a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: “(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.” 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets forth the security concern as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information . . . .  
 
AG ¶ 16 provides a condition that may be disqualifying: “(e) personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing . . . . ” 
 
 The record established the above disqualifying conditions, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of the applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
 Under Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, I considered the following mitigating 
conditions provided by AG ¶ 14: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional  indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, I considered the following mitigating 
conditions outlined by AG ¶ 32: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, I considered the following mitigating 
conditions set forth by AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions were raised by the evidence, but for reasons 
explained further in this decision, they do not mitigate the security concerns: AG ¶ 
17(e), AG ¶ 32(d), and AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e). I specifically considered that the offenses 
occurred in 2010; Applicant pleaded guilty and was sentenced in 2013; and his 
probation ended in January 2017. He successfully completed the sexual offenders’ 
treatment mandated by the court. Applicant also receives credit for his 13 years of 
honorable military service, his long-term work for federal contractors, and for taking his 
first steps towards rehabilitation through his guilty pleas. 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Notwithstanding, in light of the seriousness of Applicant’s criminal behavior – 
acting as a sexual predator against a “13-year-old girl” – his evidence is insufficient to 
demonstrate that he is no longer a sexual predator and that his psychological problems 
are resolved and unlikely to recur. Applicant was under the scrutiny and threat of the 
criminal court system between 2010 and the end of his supervised probation in January 
2017. He had no choice but to behave and comply with the court’s mandates. He has 
been out of the court’s supervision for over one year. More time without supervision is 
needed for Applicant to demonstrate his successful rehabilitation and that reoccurrence 
of his criminal behavior is unlikely. The sexual behavior, criminal conduct, and personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines D, J, 
and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 48, has been employed with federal contractors since 2000, and held 
a clearance between 1995 and 2011. He appears to be on the road to a full 
rehabilitation. Nevertheless, it is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an 
applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against granting a 
security clearance. Unmitigated security concerns lead me to conclude that granting a 
security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline D:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline E:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
