KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant was provided sufficient notice that the burden was on her to submit any
information not contained in the FORM that she wanted the Judge to consider. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02196.a1
DATE: 04/27/2018
DATE: April 27, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02196
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
13, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On January 30, 2018,
after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert Robinson Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  In 2006, she was granted a
security clearance.  In early 2016, she tested positive for marijuana and cocaine during a random
urinalysis test.  She offered no explanation for her decision to use those substances.  Due to her
positive drug test, she was suspended from work for one week, required to attend drug counseling
through the company’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and required to undergo random
urinalysis tests every five or six weeks until early 2018.  She did not furnish any documentation
regarding the EAP provider, its treatment program, or the professional qualifications of the
individuals conducting that program.  No prognosis by a qualified medical professional was
provided.  
In referring to the drug-involvement  incident in her security clearance application, Applicant
stated that she realized she made a huge mistake and promised it would not happen again.  No
evidence was presented that she self-reported the incident to her employer before the drug test.  She
lives in fear that her colleagues or family will become aware of the incident.  Her manager considers
her reliable, dependable, and to have the highest ethical standards.  She has received a number of
work awards. 
Highlighting the paucity of mitigating evidence, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s
alleged conduct continues to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment.  He  found against her on three of the four Guideline H allegations and the cross-alleged
Guideline E allegation.1
Discussion
1 The Judge found in favor of Applicant on an SOR allegation that asserted she attended drug counseling on
certain dates.  
2
In her appeal brief, Applicant states she was under the impression that the name and
qualifications of her drug counselor were provided during her security clearance investigation.  She
also thought that her drug counselor provided a description of her limited drug usage and her
prognosis.  In this regard, Applicant was provided a copy of Department Counsel’s File of Relevant
Material  (FORM), and she was given 30 days from its receipt to make objections and submit
additional matters.  The cover letter forwarding the FORM specifically advised Applicant that,
unless she submitted objections or additional matters, her case would be assigned to a Judge “for
a determination solely upon the enclosed FORM.”2  [Emphasis added.]  Applicant was provided 
sufficient notice that the burden was on her to submit any information not contained in the FORM
that she wanted the Judge to consider.  See also, Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Many of the matters that
Applicant addresses in her appeal brief are not contained in the record and constitute new evidence
that the Appeal Board cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  We also note that, while pro se
applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely, reasonable steps
to protect their rights under the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun.
30, 2014).  Applicant has not established any basis for challenging any of the Judge’s material
findings or conclusions. 
Applicant also argues that she has mitigated the alleged security concerns.  In her arguments,
for example, she cites to her manager’s letter of reference and claims she has a history of being a
model citizen.  These arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue
for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016). 
 
Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.  The
Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.“ 
The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  
2 DOHA letter dated August 25, 2017.  
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
 
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
