KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: In his appeal brief, Applicant also provides a list of contacts concerning his
termination and eligibility to be rehired.  We note, however, that the Appeal Board has no
authority to interview witnesses, conduct investigations, or make findings of fact. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02913.a1
DATE: 04/04/2018
 
DATE: April 4, 2018
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02913
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 7, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On January 18,
2018, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance by finding against him on all of the SOR allegations.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
In his Appeal Brief, Applicant states that he was in agreement with the Judge’s decision until
he read the statement: “ Perhaps the record is not clear as to his current situation[.]” That caused him
doubt the Judge’s entire decision.1  Appeal Brief at 1.  Applicant also states that he has been
unemployed since September 2017 and that he and his company have been waiting for a decision
in this case so he could return to work.   When reviewing a Judge’s decision, the Board does not
review individual sentences in isolation, but rather considers the Judge’s decision in its entirety to
determine what findings and conclusions were made.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-03429 at 2 (App.
Bd. Mar. 15, 2018).   
In the decision, the Judge made findings that Applicant was terminated from his job in
September 2017, was eligible for rehire, and was then dependent on unemployment benefits. 
Decision at 3.  To the extent he may be arguing the Judge mis-weighed the evidence, Applicant has
failed to show the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  He has not otherwise identified how the Judge may have erred in the
challenged statement.  Since we are unable to determine with any degree of certitude exactly what
error Applicant is raising, any argument beyond that addressed above fails for lack of specificity. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. ISCR 14-05920 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 8. 2016).  
In his appeal brief, Applicant also provides a list of contacts concerning his termination and
eligibility to be rehired.  We note, however, that the Appeal Board has no authority to interview
witnesses, conduct investigations, or make findings of fact.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-03072 at
2 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2018).  
Applicant has not identified any harmful error in the Judge’s decision.  The Judge examined
the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A. ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
1 The challenged statement is from the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  Decision at 8.  
2
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
