 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-01390 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). While holding a clearance, Applicant used 
marijuana and was arrested for possession of marijuana. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 15, 2015. On 
September 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 10, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. On December 12, 2017, a complete copy of the File of 
 
 2
Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant and received 
by him on December 24, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 
days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s Items. 
Hence, Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection. He submitted 
additional evidence, which was admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A. 
The case was assigned to me on April 9, 2018.  
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old engineering associate who requires a security clearance 
for his employment as a federal contractor. He has worked for his employer since 1987, 
and has held a clearance since 2009. He has been married since 1986 and has an adult 
son and an adult stepdaughter. Applicant received associate’s degrees in 1985 and 1992. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from November 1977 until January 1978. The 
record does not reflect his discharge. 
 
The SOR contains three allegations under Guideline H for drug involvement (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c). His use of marijuana while holding a security clearance was cross-
alleged under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 1.a.). Applicant admitted to the Guideline H allegations, 
but denied the Guideline E allegation. I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 In May 2015, Applicant completed an SCA and reapplied for a DOD security 
clearance. He disclosed no drug use nor any involvement with drugs in this questionnaire 
(Item 2 at 25). In June 2015, Applicant moved to a new state and started to use marijuana 
with old friends (Item 3 at 1). He smoked marijuana on the weekends with these friends 
at gatherings and while playing golf. Applicant claims he used marijuana as a result of 
curiosity and a midlife crisis (AX A). Initially, he was given marijuana by his friends, but 
ultimately purchased marijuana three times.  
 
In November 2015, Applicant was pulled over by local law enforcement for 
speeding. During the stop, the officer detected an odor of marijuana emanating from 
Applicant’s car. As a result, he was searched and the officer found marijuana on his 
person (Item 3 at 2 and Item 5). Applicant was arrested for possession of a controlled 
substance, issued a notice to appear, and released. He was arraigned, but the charges 
were ultimately dismissed (Item 4).  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to the underlying conduct (Item 1). 
He claims he discontinued his use of marijuana after the November 2015 arrest (Items 1, 
3, and AX A). In his January 2017 interview, Applicant told the Government investigator 
that his arrest embarrassed him and he acknowledged he exercised poor judgment. 
However, he did not believe his drug use impaired his judgment at work, nor would he 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security application (Item 2) unless otherwise 
indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
 3
disclose the names of the individuals with whom he used marijuana (Item 3 at 2 and AX 
A). 
 
Applicant self-reported the arrest to his facility security officer (FSO) in a timely 
manner (Item 5). There is no evidence Applicant disclosed his drug use to the FSO until 
he was arrested. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”2 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”3 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”4 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”5 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
                                                          
2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
3 Egan at 527. 
 
4 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
5 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
 
 4
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”7 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.8 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.9 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.10 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”11 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12 
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, but because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted 
in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
                                                          
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 5
AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal use while granted access to classified information or holding 
a sensitive position.  
 
Applicant admitted he used marijuana between June 2015 and November 2015, 
and all of his use was after he was granted a DOD security clearance in 2009. 
Additionally, he was arrested for possession of marijuana in November 2015. The 
evidence raised the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted 
to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 26 
provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs used; and 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
Applicant used and purchased marijuana when he was approximately 56 years old 
and had been working for his employer for almost 30 years. He claims he no longer 
associates with individuals who use marijuana, but when asked, he refused to disclose 
their identities. His promises to abstain from illegal drug use are undercut by the record 
evidence. Applicant used marijuana after he was granted a DOD clearance in 2009, and 
after he submitted his SCA in May 2015. His drug use continued until he was arrested for 
 
 6
possession of marijuana. Additionally, he did not disclose his drug use to his FSO until 
he was arrested. AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), and 26(f) do not apply. 
 
Applicant chose to use illegal drugs, and his decision to do so continues to reflect 
negatively on his current security worthiness. Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs, 
especially after being granted a security clearance, cannot be considered a minor lapse 
in judgment, but a pattern of behavior that indicates an unwillingness to follow rules and 
regulations. Security clearance decisions are not limited to conduct during duty hours;13 
off-duty conduct, especially where it reflects poor judgment, provides a rational basis for 
the government to question an applicant’s security worthiness.14 Furthermore, Applicant’s 
eventual self-reporting of his illegal drug use does not change the security significance of 
the underlying conduct. Applicant’s behavior showed a disregard for the law, regulations, 
and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily entered into with the government when he 
was granted access to classified information.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s drug use while holding a clearance as a 
concern under Guideline E. As explained previously, such conduct calls into question 
Applicant’s judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. His conduct 
also establishes disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(c).15 I considered mitigating condition AG 
¶ 17(c)16 under Guideline E and, for similar reasons explained under Guideline H, find 
that it does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0620 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999). 
 
14 See, e.g., Cole v. Young, 351 U.S. 536, 550 n.13 (1956); Croft v. Department of Air Force, 40 M.S.P.R. 
320, 321 n.1 (1989). 
 
15 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that . . . when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
16 The offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
 7
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the drug 
involvement and personal conduct concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
