 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
.  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01853 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 20, 2016, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 18, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective June 8, 2017.   
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR in a timely manner. Applicant 
answered the SOR on August 30, 2017. (Item 2), and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on October 25, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent 
to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 4. He was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on November 2, 2017, and did not 
 
2 
 
 
respond. Items 1 through 4 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me 
on March 15, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR, with no explanations. (Item 2, 4) He did not supplement the record to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried, and has no children. He has a bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering. After graduating from high school in 2008, he worked 
and obtained an undergraduate degree in 2015. (Item 5)  He reported no military 
service. He has worked for a defense contractor since August 2015. (Item 3)  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from  
June 2004 to July 2017 (SOR 1.a); used mushrooms with varying frequency from June 
2007 to August 2014 (SOR 1.b); illegally purchased marijuana from June 2007 to July 
2017 (SOR 1.c); used cocaine in December 2014 (SOR 1.d); used prescription 
medication Adderall, not prescribed to him, from approximately December 2010 to 
March 2015 (SOR 1.e); and illegally purchased Adderall from December 2010 to March 
2015. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he received some counseling for depression while 
in college.  He was prescribed an anti-depressant in 2015. He has not had any other 
counseling in the past few years. (Item 5) 
 
 He admitted using marijuana for relaxation and typically spent $50-$60 for an 
eighth of an ounce. He denied using drugs while he was employed  in a position directly 
affecting public safety. (Item 5) During his subject interview, he stated that his use of 
marijuana was hundreds of times. He stated that he did not intend to use these illegal 
drugs in the future. Applicant stated that he has never been ordered to seek drug 
counseling or treatment. (Item 5) He stated that he used mushrooms as a means of 
experimentation as late as 2014, no more than six times in total. (Item 3) As to Adderral 
and other stimulants, Applicant used them for study aids. He believes that it was two 
dozen times total. He stated that he knows now that it is a felony and would never use 
the drug in the future to jeopardize his job. (Item 3) Applicant stated that he used 
cocaine once against his better judgment. He believes he is more responsible now. 
Applicant told the investigator that he used the illegal drugs to reduce stress and get 
him through difficult times at school. He stated that he has no desire to use other illegal 
drugs in the future, but he does not know when he will stop using marijuana. (Item 5) 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Appellant has a long history of illegal drug use. He smoked and bought marijuana 
until 2017; from 2007 to 2014, he used mushrooms; and he used cocaine once in 2014. 
He continued to use marijuana after being hired by his current employer in 2015, after 
completing his e-QIP in 2016, and after his security clearance interview in 2017. 
Applicant also  purchased and used Adderall without a prescription from 2010 to 2015. 
He continued to use marijuana despite his statement during his investigative interview 
that he had the intention to cease his use.  Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a), (c), and (f) are 
established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
5 
 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant’s long history of illegal drug misuse well into adulthood and after 
accepting his current employment, and throughout the security clearance 
process demonstrates poor judgment and raises questions about his ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, or regulations. None of the mitigating 
conditions apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant made poor decisions to 
continue to use marijuana and other illegal drugs for a long period of time. He has not 
 
6 
 
 
shown a period of abstinence, nor a credible claim that he will stop using drugs in the 
future, especially marijuana. He has presented little or no evidence to show he has the 
requisite reliability and judgment required of security clearance holders. My comments 
regarding each guideline are incorporated here also.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and substance abuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against   Applicant 
 
       
                  Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
