 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01926 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and J (criminal conduct). Applicant responded to the SOR on August 15, 
2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for January 31, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through L, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 7, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2010. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 2001 
until he was honorably discharged in 2009. He attended college for a period without 
earning a degree. He is single with one child.1 
  
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related driving offenses. He was arrested in 
May 2006 and charged with driving under the influence (DUI). He was found guilty and 
sentenced to 180 days in jail (suspended); a $1,750 fine; court costs; and attendance at 
alcohol-related classes. He also completed a substance abuse rehabilitation program 
through the military.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2009 and charged with DUI, reckless driving, 
and hit and run – leaving the scene of a crash involving damage. He pleaded nolo 
contendere to DUI. He was sentenced to 50 hours of community service; a fine and 
court costs; attendance at a DUI school; and his driver’s license was suspended for six 
months. Applicant denies committing the hit and run offense. He stated that he left his 
insurance information on the parked car he hit, and that charge was dismissed.3 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment in the military for the 
above March 2009 DUI. He was reduced one pay grade, ordered to serve 45 days extra 
duty, and he forfeited pay. He completed an outpatient drug and alcohol program 
through the military. He was discharged from the military before the end of his 
enlistment because of his alcohol issues, but with an honorable discharge.4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in January 2016. He 
discussed his two DUI arrests. He stated that he had never been dependent on alcohol. 
He changed his alcohol use after his second arrest. He stated that his alcohol 
consumption was once or twice a month, no more than two to three drinks, and he did 
not drink and drive. He stated that he would not risk his job by getting another alcohol-
related arrest.5 
 
 Applicant was arrested in May 2016 after he hit a truck that had stopped for a 
yellow light. In February 2017, he pleaded nolo contendere to DUI, above the legal limit. 
In March 2017, he was sentenced to 2 days in jail with credit for time served; 30 days in 
jail (suspended); 40 hours of community service; attendance at a victim impact panel 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 47, 59, 74; GE 1.  
2 Tr. at 47-49, 62, 67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3, 5.  
3 Tr. at 48-49, 63-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5.  
4 Tr. at 47, 50-52, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5.  
5 GE 2.  
 
3 
 
and the coroner’s DUI program; and $685 in fines and fees. He completed all the 
requirements of his sentence.6 
 
 Applicant admitted in his testimony that he abused alcohol on a number of 
occasions, but he does not believe he is an alcoholic. He has gone many months 
without alcohol. He stated that he occasionally consumes alcohol but only responsibly, 
and he does not drink and drive.7  
 
 Applicant called witnesses and submitted numerous documents and letters 
attesting to his excellent job performance. He is praised for his professionalism, security 
conscientiousness, work ethic, dependability, responsibility, trustworthiness, reliability, 
dedication, and integrity.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 55-57; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4, 5.  
7 Tr. at 53-54, 57-58, 72.  
8 Tr. at 14-45; AE C-L. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
Applicant was arrested for DUI in 2006, 2009, and 2016. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable. 
 
 
5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant received nonjudicial punishment in the military 
for the March 2009 DUI arrest that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. When the same conduct is 
alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations 
should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 21, 2005). SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant admitted in his testimony that he abused alcohol on a number of 
occasions, but he does not believe he is an alcoholic. He has gone many months 
without alcohol. He stated that he occasionally consumes alcohol but only responsibly. I 
believe he is sincere, but I also believe he was sincere in January 2016 when he told 
the background investigator essentially the same thing. Four months later he hit a truck 
and was arrested for his third DUI. I am unable to conclude at this time that 
irresponsible alcohol use is in his past. None of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to 
overcome concerns about his alcohol use. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s three DUIs were cross-alleged under criminal conduct. The above 
disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a strong work record and favorable character evidence. However, 
he also has three DUIs, two of which involved accidents. I have unmitigated concerns 
under the same rationale discussed in the alcohol consumption analysis. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
7 
 
Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
honorable military service and his favorable character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
