 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-00884 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Anthony J. Mazzeo, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was arrested once in 2003, and three times in 2014. All but one of the 
charges was for assault and battery of a family member, his wife. The other charge was 
for disturbing the peace, in a similar circumstance. Applicant successfully completed 
probation for one of the 2014 offenses. The remaining charges were dismissed or not 
prosecuted. He has had no subsequent offenses. He and his wife are working to 
improve their relationship and are making an effort to limit and control their arguments 
and confrontations. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the criminal 
conduct security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 14 
2015. On April 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
 
2 
 
 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017, for all decisions on or after that date, 
including this one.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did 
not affect my decision in this case.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 1, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was assigned to me on October 23, 2017. On October 26, 2017, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the case for November 16, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through GE 3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant and two other 
witnesses testified. He submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE C, which were 
admitted without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE D and AE 
E, which were marked and admitted without objection. The record closed on January 3, 
2018. DOHA received the transcript on November 30, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, with one explanation. Applicant’s admissions 
and the explanation are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, the exhibits submitted, and the hearing testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He served for 20 years in the United States Navy 
(1994-2014). He was on terminal leave from January 2014 until he retired in April 2014 
as a petty officer first class, E-6. Applicant earned five Navy Achievement Medals and 
six Good Conduct Medals during his Navy career. He had no disciplinary issues. (AE C) 
After his retirement, Applicant was unemployed for about five months. Since August 
2014, he has been employed in the defense industry. He has worked for his current 
employer since February 2015. He has held a security clearance since about 2002. His 
SCA is part of a periodic reinvestigation. (Tr. 62-68, 80-81, 98-99; GE 1; GE 2) 
 
Applicant and his wife have been married since 2000. They have a daughter (age 
16) and a son (age 8). Applicant and his wife met when they were both in the Navy. She 
served from 1997 to 2001. (Tr. 36-39, 79-80; GE 1) 
 
When Applicant was in the Navy, he travelled often, so his wife raised their 
children alone. When he returned, he was often more focused on his job than on his 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s counsel confirmed that he was aware of the new AGs, which had been provided with the 
Notice of Hearing. (Tr. 12-13) 
 
 
3 
 
 
family. She also testified that his retirement from the Navy impacted their marriage, 
since he was not used to being at home so much. (Tr. 44-45, 49-50, 80) Applicant 
testified that he saw a psychiatrist or counselor for several months while on terminal 
leave from the Navy. He was dealing with frustration and mental stress. (Tr. 71) 
 
Applicant’s wife has been diagnosed with multiple mental illnesses, including 
bipolar disorder, borderline personality disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). (AE B) Shortly after reporting to her first command in the Navy, she was 
robbed and gang-raped. She continues to experience flashbacks and PTSD as a result 
of this brutal attack. She also experiences periodic rage and aggression, as well as 
periods where she shuts down and becomes withdrawn. Treatment for her mental 
illnesses is ongoing, though she is allergic to many possible bipolar medications. This 
has created challenges in controlling her condition. She also testified that her condition 
has affected her marriage and relationship with her husband, because her condition is 
easily triggered and difficult to control. (Tr. 39-47) 
 
Applicant testified that he became aware of his wife’s issues with mental illness 
when they met. (Tr. 69) He testified that her conditions have impacted the marriage, but 
that “she is a wonderful wife, a wonderful woman.” He does what he can to help her, but 
“sometimes I don’t know what to do.” (Tr. 69-70, 99) 
 
In 2003,2 Applicant and his wife had an argument. Applicant described it as a 
“fight” but said the physical confrontation concerned only “holding each other” rather 
than coming to blows. Applicant testified that his wife started throwing things at him, 
such as a stuffed toy, and he got a scratch on his face. She called the police. Applicant 
testified that both he and his wife were charged. He was charged with misdemeanor 
assault and battery of a family member. The case was not prosecuted or was 
dismissed. (SOR ¶ 1.a)(Tr. 71-72, 74, 82-83) 
 
In February 2014, Applicant and his wife had another altercation shortly after 
Valentine’s Day. He testified that “my wife started thinking that I’m not too attentive to 
her . . .” He said that “things started escalating  . . . [and] things started getting close to 
physical, face to face fighting. And I called the police because, as I said, she was 
threatening, the thing was heated, it was a precaution.” (Tr. 73) Applicant said he was 
“trying to get [some] space,” and he pushed his wife. He also said it was his wife who 
called the police. He was arrested and charged with misdemeanor assault and battery 
on a family member. The case was nolle prossed in May 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.b) (Tr. 45, 73-
74, 83-84; GE 3) 
 
About three weeks after this arrest, in mid-March 2014, Applicant and his wife 
had an argument. He testified that it involved “yelling and screaming” but was “just 
words” and not a physical altercation. (Tr. 84-86) He was arrested and charged with 
                                                          
2 Applicant testified that this offense occurred in August 2003, rather than in February 2003, as alleged.  
(SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 73) There are no police or court documents in the record to corroborate the specific date 
of this offense.  
 
 
4 
 
 
disturbing the peace. (SOR ¶ 1.c) (GE 1; GE 2) After his arrest, Applicant was held 
without bond because he had a pending charge. He remained in jail for about 24 days. 
He pled guilty to disturbing the peace. In April 2014, Applicant received a 90-day jail 
sentence, of which 45 days was suspended. He was also sentenced to unsupervised 
probation for three years. ((Tr. 45-46, 74-75, 86-87; GE 2)   
 
In August 2014, while on unsupervised probation for the March 2014 offense, 
Applicant and his wife had another fight. They accused each other of infidelity. Applicant 
started looking through his wife’s desk. He also acknowledged that he pushed her. She 
called the police and Applicant was arrested. (Tr. 74-75, 88)  
 
As a result, Applicant was charged with misdemeanor assault and battery on a 
family member. (SOR ¶ 1.d) In November 2014, adjudication of the case was deferred 
for two years. He was placed on one year of supervised probation instead of a longer 
term of unsupervised probation. He was referred to parental counseling. He attended 
the program from December 2014 to June 2015, and completed it. Beginning in August 
2014, Applicant also sought counseling with a licensed clinical social worker. The 
counselor was familiar with Applicant’s family situation and has worked with Applicant’s 
family since 2008. He saw the counselor for eight or nine months. He completed 
supervised probation early, in June 2015. The case was dismissed in November 2016. 
(Tr. 89-97; GE 1; GE 3; AE D; AE E) 
 
All of Applicant’s charges in 2014 occurred either while he was on terminal leave 
awaiting his retirement, or during his period of unemployment shortly thereafter. (Tr. 80-
81; GE 1) Applicant has had no arrests since August 2014. (Tr. 47-48, 94; AE D) He 
understands the significance of his actions, and is committed to ensuring that he has no 
further charges or other domestic incidents. (Tr. 77-79)  
   
Applicant’s wife has seen a change in her husband’s reaction to her medical 
episodes. She said he will attempt to calm down, “leave the space” and go to another 
part of the house. She will leave the house and go for a drive to defuse the situation. 
(Tr. 49) Applicant testifies that he tries to do this as well, “to try to get away from the 
situation. It takes two to fight, so remove one, [and] there is no fight.” (Tr. 71, 76) 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she loves her husband and considers him her best 
friend. She testified that Applicant loves her and will not give up on her, despite what 
she believes are the burdens her background brings. He has become “more engaged 
with our lives as husband and wife.” He is more attentive. They continue to pursue 
marriage counseling, though it is often difficult to find a counselor. Their children are 
also in therapy. (Tr. 48-50)   
 
Applicant and his wife both testified that they have seen marriage counselors for 
several years, though not regularly. They try to see a counselor yearly, but the 
counselors they see are often different people, so actual attendance is sporadic. They 
saw a licensed clinical social worker for 12 sessions of marriage counseling between 
March 2013 and January 2014. (AE E) They saw a marriage counselor some time in 
 
5 
 
 
2016. They saw one several months before the hearing. They had another appointment 
shortly before the hearing, and both expected to continue attending. (Tr. 50-60, 95-97) 
These more recent counseling sessions are undocumented. Counselors have 
recommended that Applicant leave his wife but he refuses to do so. “I cannot divorce 
her because she has a problem, a disease,” he testified. (Tr. 77-78) 
 
The owner of Applicant’s employer testified. He is also the program manager for 
Applicant’s contract. He retired in 2000 as a U.S. Navy limited duty officer, and he 
founded his company two years later. He has held a security clearance since 1979. He 
has worked directly with Applicant since May 2017. He described Applicant as affable, 
as well as a dedicated and competent worker. Applicant is “one of our best.” The 
witness is aware of Applicant’s domestic situation. He believes Applicant understands 
the security significance of his conduct. (Tr. 24-34; AE A) Applicant also testified that he 
loves his job, and the fact that he can continue serving his country out of uniform. (Tr. 
99-100) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. (AG) In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
3 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant was charged with misdemeanor assault and battery against his wife in 
2003 after a physical altercation. Between February and August 2014, he incurred two 
other such arrests, along with a charge of disturbing the peace, after similar arguments 
and altercations with his wife. Applicant admitted each allegation. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
31(b) apply.  
 
  The following mitigating conditions for criminal conduct are potentially applicable, 
under AG ¶ 32:   
 
7 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
Applicant’s offenses are all similar in nature. They all involve instances in which 
arguments between Applicant and his wife got out of hand. All but one of them involved 
physical altercations. This led one or both of them to call the police, and as a result, 
Applicant was arrested on four occasions. With the exception of SOR ¶ 1.a (which 
occurred in 2003), all three of the more recent charges occurred in 2014, during a six-
month period during which Applicant was either on terminal leave from the Navy, or was 
unemployed for a period thereafter. To some extent, then, these offenses are largely 
isolated to a period of particular stress and frustration brought on by his transition from 
military to civilian life. There also has been no evidence of recurrence for over three 
years. 
 
The triggers for these incidents, however, are not entirely in the past. Applicant 
and his wife appear to have a volatile relationship. By his wife’s own admission, this is 
due, at least in part, to her significant and ongoing mental health conditions, including 
PTSD and bipolar disorder. This leads her to have episodes of rage and aggression. 
She has struggled with controlling her conditions, and Applicant has struggled with how 
to react appropriately when issues arise. 
 
This is an ongoing process for both Applicant and his wife. To their credit, they 
have resolved to work on their issues together, and to learn about, and to apply, coping 
mechanisms if issues arise in the future, as they may. They have a history of pursuing 
counseling, both together and separately. They are making a good-faith effort to 
continue that as best they can. This is not a case where I can find that there is “no risk” 
that Applicant and his wife will not find themselves in a similar situation again. But in 
weighing Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, I can consider whether he has 
taken significant steps to alleviate the problem. I find that Applicant has done so.  
 
Applicant and his wife both testified credibly about their dedication to each other 
and to making their marriage succeed. Applicant has participated in counseling, both 
individually and with his wife. He successfully completed the requirements of probation 
for the disturbing the peace charge, and his most recent charge, in August 2014, was 
dismissed in November 2016. There have been no subsequent charges and there is no 
record evidence of similar domestic incidents. Applicant and his wife are working to 
improve their relationship and are making an effort to limit and control their arguments 
and confrontations. I find Applicant’s testimony credible in this regard. While there are 
 
8 
 
 
no guarantees, Applicant’s behavior is therefore unlikely to recur and it does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) therefore 
applies.  
 
Applicant has provided evidence of successful rehabilitation. He has an excellent 
work record. His face “lit up” when he testified about how much he loves his job. He 
recognizes the negative impact future criminal issues would have on his employment, 
and has credibly resolved to continue improving his behavior. AG ¶ 32(d) also applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. The record evidence established 
criminal charges against Applicant once in 2003 and three times in 2014. On balance, 
and in consideration of the evidence as a whole, I conclude that Applicant has provided 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the resulting security concerns. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s continued eligibility 
for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant       
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
