 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01173 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jack Roberts, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the sole drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concern. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security concern under Guideline H (drug 
involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
                                                     
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 4, 2018, scheduling the hearing 
for January 29, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
 The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Government’s Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 5, 2018.                                                                                                                                     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation. He is 44 years old. He obtained his 
high-school diploma in 1992 and a bachelor’s degree in 2007. He served honorably in 
the U.S. military from 1993 to 2000, during which time he was deployed in 1996 and 
1998. He has worked as a software and applications engineer for a defense contractor 
since July 2002. He has held a DOD security clearance since August 2011. He was 
previously married from 1992 to 2003, and he remarried in 2007. He has two adult 
children.2  
 
 Applicant first used marijuana when he was a teenager in high school. He next 
used marijuana in around 2005 when he visited the Caribbean. He again used 
marijuana four to five times, between July 2013 and December 2014. On each of these 
occasions in 2013 and 2014, he and his wife were at a neighbor’s house party when he 
was offered marijuana by his neighbor’s girlfriend. He was having a good time. His 
children were no longer living at home. It was the first time since he was a teenager that 
he was on his own and not responsible for anyone else. His wife did not use marijuana. 
He did not purchase the marijuana. He failed to consider the security implications of his 
actions.3    
 
 Applicant reported his 2005 marijuana use on his 2011 security clearance 
application (SCA). After his 2011 SCA, he was unsure whether he was granted a 
clearance, as he did not recall being told so, he was not read into any classified 
programs, he did not access any classified information, and he did not receive any 
security training. The first time he worked in a classified setting was in 2015, and the 
first time he received any security training was around his 2016 SCA, as discussed 
below.4  
 
 In 2014, when his employer asked him if he was interested in working on a 
classified project and when he was completing another SCA, it occurred to Applicant 
that he might have been granted a clearance after his 2011 SCA. His employer verified 
that he had been. As such, he realized that he made a terrible mistake when he used 
marijuana between 2013 and 2014, and he consequently disclosed it on his 2014 SCA. 
                                                     
2 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 19-50; GE 1; AE A. 
  
3 Tr. at 21-50; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 21-50; AE A. 
 
3 
 
He also simultaneously self-reported it to his then-Facility Security Officer (FSO), who 
entered an incident report on the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) 
database. After he self-reported his marijuana use in 2014, Applicant was, for the first 
time since he began working for his employer, read onto a classified program and 
accessed classified information.5  
 
 When Applicant completed another SCA in March 2016, he continued to report 
his 2013 to 2014 marijuana use. He maintained therein that he was unsure whether he 
held a security clearance during the 2013 to 2014 period in which he used marijuana. 6   
  
 Applicant acknowledged that his employer has had a policy against illegal drug 
use during the duration of his employment. His employer did not have a random drug 
testing policy, and he had not been drug tested since he was in the military. He 
acknowledged that he was aware of his employer’s drug policy during the periods in 
which he used marijuana. He was also aware that marijuana is an illegal drug, and that 
illegal drug use is not permitted while holding a security clearance.7 
 
 Applicant realizes that his decision to use marijuana in 2013 to 2014 was an 
immature one. He regrets it. He is remorseful. He had not used marijuana since 
December 2014 and he had not used any other illicit drugs. He does not intend to use 
any illegal drugs in the future. He disassociated himself from individuals who use illegal 
drugs, to include his neighbor. If he ever finds himself in a situation where illegal drugs 
are being used, he will immediately leave. He signed a statement of intent to abstain 
from all drug involvement and substance misuse in the future, and he acknowledged 
that any future drug involvement or substance misuse would be grounds for revocation 
of his security clearance.8   
 
 Applicant received medals and awards while he served in the U.S. military. He 
takes his job seriously. He stated that he would not jeopardize himself, anyone else, or 
any classified information by participating in illegal activity or impairing his judgment with 
illegal drug use.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                     
5 Tr. at 21-50; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 21-50; GE 1; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 21-50; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 21-50; GE 1; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. at 34; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
 
5 
 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana four to five times between July 2013 and December 
2014, after he had been granted a security clearance in 2011. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(f) are 
applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Since December 2014, Applicant has not used marijuana and he disassociated 
himself from individuals who use illegal drugs. When he used marijuana between 2013 
and 2014, he was unsure whether he had a clearance. Nonetheless, he acknowledged 
that he made a terrible mistake because he knew he completed an SCA in 2011 for a 
clearance, he knew that marijuana was an illegal drug, and he knew that his employer 
had a policy against illegal drug use. He was forthright about his 2013 to 2014 illegal 
drug use on both his 2014 and 2016 SCAs, and he disclosed it to his then-FSO in 2014.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he understood the necessity to refrain from using 
illegal drugs so long as he sought or held a security clearance. He signed a statement 
of intent to not use illegal drugs in the future. Applicant has demonstrated an 
appropriate period of abstinence from illegal drug use and that the use of illegal drugs is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s demeanor during the hearing. He was sincere in 
expressing remorse for his actions and credible in stating that he learned his lesson and 
would abstain from any illegal drug use in the future. I also considered Applicant’s 
honorable military service, to include his deployments in 1996 and 1998 and his receipt 
of medals and awards while he served in the U.S. military. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse security concern.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s continued eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
