 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00230 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). On June 8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 23, 2018. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted 
without objection. The record was held open until April 6, 2018, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents, which he did. They were marked AE B through G, and 
admitted without objection, and the record closed.2 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on March 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He graduated from high school in 2005. He enlisted 
and served in the military from 2005 to 2009 when he was honorably discharged. He is 
not married and has no children. Except for a two-month period after his discharge, he 
has been steadily employed.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to unexpected expenses incurred after 
he was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol in September 2014, and other 
unplanned expenses, such as car repairs. He reported the arrest to his security officer 
and disclosed it on his security clearance application. He pled guilty to the DUI and was 
sentenced in September 2015. He acknowledged the costs of attorney’s fees, fines, and 
court costs negatively impacted his finances, and he fell behind on other financial 
obligations. During his September 2016 interview with a government investigator, he 
stated the incident was out of character for him, and he has not consumed an alcoholic 
beverage since the incident. He took full responsibility for his conduct.4 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from April 2017 and April 2016 
substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant decided to save money so he 
could make lump-sum payments to pay his delinquent debts. In January 2018, he 
contracted with a debt-relief company to help him settled the delinquent debts in SOR. 
He testified that he settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($3,400) for $1,800 and paid the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.d ($292).5 
 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibits I and II are Department Counsel’s email responses. 
 
3 Tr. 15-18. 
 
4 Tr. 18, 20-25; GE 1, 4. Any derogatory information that is not alleged will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when make a credibility determination, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
5 Tr. 19-20, 25-32; GE 2, 3, 4; AE A, C. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant saved about $6,000 over the past two years and continued to save 
money so he could resolve the remaining delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
($10,765) and ¶ 1.b ($5,571). He recently reached settlements with the creditors for the 
two debts, whereby he will pay an initial lump sum and then make monthly payments for 
the next twelve months. He testified that he waited to settle the debts because he 
wanted to make certain he had a financial safety net for unexpected expenses.6  
 
Applicant’s annual income for 2017 was approximately $25,000. He rents an 
efficiency apartment to save money and lives frugally. His vehicle needed repairs, which 
impacted his finances. He intends to pay the remaining delinquent debts.7  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
6 Tr. 25-40; AE D, E, F. 
 
7 Tr. 25-40. 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2016. He 
is unable or unwilling to pay the accounts he admits owing. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant reached a settlement agreement for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
Those delinquent debts are still being resolved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his debts due to unexpected legal and other 
expenses attributed to his arrest for DUI in October 2016. This was within his control. 
Applicant also attributed his financial problems to unexpected car repairs. That was a 
condition beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been saving his money and 
living frugally so he could accumulate enough money to settle his delinquent debts. 
Although impacted by legal fees he had to pay for his DUI arrest, he settled and paid 
two delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He contracted with a debt-relief company to 
help him settle the two remaining debts. He recently reached settlement agreements for 
the remaining two debts, which will be completed in the next 12 months. I find Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
has not ignored his financial obligations to his creditors and is acting responsibly in 
addressing his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. There is evidence 
that Applicant is living within his means, saving his money, has contracted with a debt-
relief company, and has a settlement agreement to resolve his remaining delinquent 
debts. I find there is some evidence that indicates his finances are under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) partially applies. There is evidence Applicant paid two delinquent debts and is 
resolving the remaining two debts through his good-faith efforts. I find AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He served in the military for four years. After 
experiencing financial difficulties, he saved money so he could resolve debts that 
became delinquent. He resolved two and has settlement agreements to resolve the 
remaining two debts. An applicant is not required to have paid all of the debts on the 
SOR, but must show that he is responsibly addressing them. Applicant provided 
sufficient evidence to conclude he is not ignoring his financial responsibilities. Based on 
his testimony, demeanor, and actions to date, I believe he will adhere to his the terms of 
his settlement agreements.. Overall, the record evidence does not leave me with 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
7 
 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude he mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
