 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02237 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew W. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 19, 2017, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on December 12, 2017, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on January 17, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A 
 
2 
 
through E, which were admitted without objection. The record remained open until 
February 16, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit documentary evidence. He submitted 
AE F through I, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, which 
he denied. His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of 
the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
at his present job in 2000. He is an information technology (IT) engineer. He has a 
bachelor’s degree. He married in 1999 and divorced in 2012. He remarried in 2014. He 
has two children from his first marriage, ages 20 and 16. His youngest child resides with 
him.1  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $56,216. The debts 
were listed in credit reports from February 2016, June 2017, August 2017, and January 
2018 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f).2  
 
 Applicant explained that his financial problems started about 2012 when he 
separated from his first wife. As a result of the divorce, he was required to pay $2,500 
monthly to his ex-wife. Additionally, he was required to pay for her psychological 
evaluation, which cost approximately $10,000. He also claimed that his ex-wife 
accumulated credit-card debt before their separation. He stated to an investigator 
conducting his background investigation that during his first marriage he was barely 
living within his means. He testified that they were spending more than they were 
receiving in income. He had his wages garnished beginning in November 2013 because 
of a judgment entered by a consumer creditor. The judgment was satisfied in 2014.3  
 
 The status of the SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 Student Loan Debt (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant’s student loans went into default for 
nonpayment in 2013 or 2014. He rehabilitated those loans by paying $5 monthly for 
approximately 10 months. Once rehabilitated, he was able to enter into a plan to repay 
those loans. He made his first $377 monthly payment in December 2017. He 
documented two payments thus far. The balance owed on the two student loans is 
approximately $43,000. He did not enter into his payment plan until after the SOR was 
issued in July 2017.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 27-28; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 5-8. 
 
3 Tr. at 30, 33, 60; GE 2-3, 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 39-44; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 Repossession (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant had a leased vehicle repossessed for 
nonpayment. He presented documentation showing that he reached a payment 
agreement with the collection company holding the debt in December 2017. The 
agreement shows a balance owed of approximately $3,400. He made two monthly 
payments of $70 in December 2017 and January 2018, after the SOR was issued.5 
 
 Consumer Debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f). Applicant believes his ex-wife should 
pay these two charged-off debts. He is seeking to have these debts allocated to her 
through a modification of his divorce settlement. He failed to provide documentation 
supporting his action in that regard. He acknowledged joint responsibility for the debts. 
During his background investigation he committed to setting up a payment plan for 
these debts by June 2016. He failed to do so.6 
 
 Consumer Debt (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant claims that the creditor for this charged-
off account issued an IRS Form 1099-C (cancellation of debt) in 2016. He failed to 
produce evidence of the 1099, or that he claimed the debt as income on his 2016 
federal tax return.7 
 
 Consumer Debt (SOR ¶ 1.e). Applicant disputes that he owes this collection 
debt because of damage the creditor caused installing equipment. He failed to produce 
documentary evidence supporting his dispute. He also acknowledged not pursuing a 
civil action against the creditor.8 
 
 Applicant did not produce a budget. He claimed yearly income of approximately 
$146,000. His disposable income after all expenses is approximately $500 monthly. He 
has $5 in his savings account and has borrowed to the limit against his $12,000 
retirement account. He provided documentary evidence showing he is current on his 
monthly mortgage payments, but he does owe approximately $350 in past-due fees. He 
has not sought financial counseling. He admitted at the hearing to failing to file his 2014 
and 2015 state tax returns. He failed to file because he was afraid he owed on those 
returns and did not have the money to pay. He presented post-hearing evidence 
showing that he filed both returns (no date indicated), but he presented no evidence of 
payment for those years.9  
   
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 45-46; AE C. 
 
6 Tr. at 47, 51; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 47-48, AE F. 
 
8 Tr. at 50-51, 53. 
 
9 The SOR did not allege non-filing of Applicant’s state tax returns or nonpayment of taxes, 
therefore, evidence of that conduct will not be used for disqualification purposes, but may be used to 
determine credibility, the application of mitigating conditions, and weighing of the whole-person factors. 
Tr. at 61-64, 74; AE H-I. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and   
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple and, although he made two payments 
towards his student loans and the repossessed car debt, he did so only after the SOR 
was issued. He failed to produce evidence showing that recurrence of his financial 
problems is unlikely. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s divorce and resulting additional expenses can be considered 
circumstances beyond his control. However, he failed to act responsibly by establishing 
payment plans for the identified debts in a more timely manner since his divorce 
occurred in 2012. Overall, the record evidence does not support that Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
  
 Applicant did not present evidence of financial counseling. Given the unpaid 
status of four of the debts and the recent establishment of payment plans on two debts, 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control and good-faith efforts to pay or 
resolve the remaining debts are lacking. There is no documentary evidence supporting 
his dispute of SOR ¶ 1.e. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service and the circumstances 
surrounding his indebtedness. However, I also considered that he has made insufficient 
efforts to resolve his debts and that he only recently filed his 2014 and 2015 state tax 
returns. He also failed to provide proof of payment of any taxes owed for those years. 
He has not established a meaningful track record of debt management, which causes 
me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.10   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a - 1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.  
