 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03410 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Nicholas Temple, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
  
 On October 23, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the administrative record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on November 6, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on November 28, 2017. 
Applicant had 30 days to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit a response 
to the FORM. The case was forwarded to the Hearing Office on January 22, 2018, and  
assigned to me on April 10, 2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.    
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a Department of Defense (DoD) 
contractor seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has worked for the DoD 
contractor since October 2016. He previously worked as a DoD civilian employee from 
March 2002 to October 2016. His highest level of education is a master’s degree.  He is 
married and has two children.  (Item 2, Item 3)    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct: 
 
 Under Personal Conduct, it is alleged Applicant resigned from his civil service 
position with Command A in lieu of being fired. (SOR ¶ 1a: Item 11; Item 13) Between 
2005 to 2015, Applicant created and submitted approximately 124 fraudulent travel 
vouchers resulting in a loss to the Government in excess of $70,000. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 
7; Item 9, Item 10; Item 11). In 2015, he was disciplined for traveling internationally 
without notifying his employer. (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 6).  In 2014, Applicant was issued a 
written warning for downloading pornographic material on his government-issued 
computer. (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5).  
  
Applicant was a civilian employee at Command A. His job required for him to be 
on temporary duty at Command B.  He apparently only reported to Command A on 
Monday mornings for meetings. After the meetings, he would travel to Command B and 
work on Monday afternoon and Tuesday through Friday. Applicant was required to file 
travel vouchers within the Defense Travel System (DTS). In order to file 
reimbursements for lodging, Applicant needed to provide receipts.  When he was on 
temporary duty at Command B, Applicant did not stay at a commercial hotel. He stayed 
with Mr. X., his friend who worked at Command B.  Applicant and Mr. X. created a 
receipt for staying at Mr. X’’s house which was referred to as a room rental place. In 
other words, the receipt made it appear to be a place of business rather than Mr. X’s 
private residence. Applicant would claim $120.00 each night for per diem.  He would 
create a manufactured receipt.  Applicant and Mr. X. created a joint PayPal account. 
The reimbursed lodging expenses would be deposited into this account. Applicant 
would take half of the reimbursement ($60 for each night) and Mr.X. was paid $60 a 
night for the nights Applicant was staying at Mr. X’s residence.  
 
Applicant falsified lodging receipts between November 2006 to October 2015. He 
submitted the falsified receipts with his travel voucher for reimbursement. He would 
receive reimbursement for lodging expenses he did not incur. A total amount of 
approximately $70,000. (Item 13)  
 
In 2015, Command A management began to question Applicant’s extensive 
travel. A criminal investigation was initiated. It was discovered that the address listed on 
Applicant’s lodging receipts was not a place of business, but a private residence owned 
by Mr. X.  On November 19, 2015, Mr. X. was interviewed. He stated that he initially let 
Applicant stay at his residence for $60 a night. The payments were arranged to go to 
Mr. X’s PayPal account. Applicant had access to this account and would be reimbursed 
 
3 
 
 
for half of the repayment for lodging. Mr. X. initially helped Applicant create the receipt, 
but he had not seen a receipt in five years. (Item 13)  
 
At the conclusion of the investigation, Applicant’s manager served Applicant with 
a Notice of Proposed Removal on October 3, 2016. Applicant had an opportunity to 
respond to the Notice of Proposed Removal. On October 11, 2016, Applicant resigned 
his position at Command A rather than fight the removal action. (Item 13) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant claims that he did not believe that he was 
doing anything fraudulent. He claims he had permission from his supervisor to stay at a 
furnished place and it is documented in all of his travel orders. He does not believe he 
cost the government a loss in excess of $70,000 because instead of the government 
paying a “Holiday Inn” for his stays, the government paid a friend, who in turn shared 
the profits with him. He admits this was poor judgment.  He equivocated that instead of 
collecting hotel points, he could benefit monetarily.  He admits it was a gross error on 
his part. (Item 2)   
 
During his employment with Command A, Applicant received a written counseling 
for accessing pornography on his government work computer on May 9, 2013; May 29, 
2013; November 1, 2013; and November 21, 2013. Applicant’s actions constituted 
misuse of government property and Command A’s Acceptable Use Policy. Applicant 
acknowledged the written counseling on June 30, 2014. (Item 5) In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admits that he accessed his personal e-mail at work. He claims he 
could check an e-mail, delete it, and the next e-mail would automatically load. Applicant 
claims he did not view the pornographic images at work. He claims the pornographic 
images were downloading to the company’s server. Applicant admits it was a mistake 
on his part. He made it sure it did not reoccur. He stopped checking his personal e-mail 
at work and blocked the pornographic e-mails. (Item 2; Item 5) 
 
Applicant was also alleged to have been counseled about his failure to report 
foreign travel to his security officer. From August 28, 2015 to September 13, 2015, he 
traveled to China, Hong Kong, Bali, and Singapore without reporting the trip. (Item 4; 
Item 6) In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegation, but then claims 
he honestly does not remember taking the trip. He does not recall being disciplined 
about this incident. There is a JPAS entry indicating Applicant took this trip overseas 
without reporting it. There is no evidence showing that he was counseled about the 
incident. (Item 2; Item 6)  
 
Applicant is alleged to have falsified his answers to several questions on his e-
QIP application which was signed by him on February 2, 2017. When asked in Section 
13A Employment Activities, regarding his employment with Command A “For this 
employment, in the last seven (7) years have you received a written warning, been 
officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such 
as a violation of security policy?” Applicant listed that he was “Suspended while under 
investigation for violating travel policies. End result, was not charged for anything.” 
When further asked, “Do you have another instance of discipline or warning to provide?” 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant answered, “No.” He did not list that he was disciplined/warned for traveling 
internationally without notifying his employer (SOR ¶ 1.c) or that in 2014, he was issued 
a written warning for downloading pornographic material on his government-issued 
computer. (SOR ¶ 1.d) (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 3; Item 5; Item 6) 
 
On the same February 2, 2017, e-QIP application, Applicant is alleged to falsified 
Section 20C, Foreign Travel, when answering, “no” to the question “Have you traveled 
outside the U.S. in the last seven (7) years?” It is alleged that Applicant should have 
listed he traveled internationally on multiple occasions since 2010. (SOR ¶1.f: Item 3)  
 
Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his e-QIP (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f). He denies the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e because he did not remember. He claims he openly shared this 
information with the investigator during his interview.  He denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 
1.f. He provided a copy of his e-QIP which he printed for his records. It is dated 
February 24, 2017. (Item 2A).  He listed all of his foreign travel in response to section 
20C on this e-QIP application. Applicant states he has traveled to over 49 countries. He 
is proud of his foreign travel and would never hide it. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations:  
 
The conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b was cross-alleged under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security or adjudicative processes.  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
6 
 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . . 
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) applies with regard to Applicant’s omission of being issued a written 
warning for downloading pornographic material on his government-issued computer in 
2014.  I find Applicant’s omission was deliberate. It does not apply with respect to 
Applicant’s alleged discipline/warning for traveling internationally without notifying his 
employer. While there is convincing evidence the Applicant travelled to China, Hong 
Kong, Bali and Singapore without notifying his chain of command/employer, there is no 
evidence that any action was taken to discipline Applicant for this incident.   
 
 I find for Applicant regarding the falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f.  There are 
two e-QIP applications in the record evidence (Item 2A and Item 3).  Applicant provided 
a copy of Item 2A. He completed this e-QIP on February 24, 2017.  It consisted of 81 
pages. He listed all of his foreign travel on this e-QIP. Item 3 was dated February 27, 
2018. It consisted of 31 pages. It did not list the foreign travel. There is no explanation 
for the missing pages. I find Applicant did not intentionally omit his foreign travel on the 
February 27, 2018 e-QIP application. For some reason, the information was deleted. 
There is no evidence attributing the deletion to Applicant.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  Applicant’s actively conspired with Mr. X to defraud the 
United States government of approximately $70,000 in lodging expenses that were not 
incurred.  He created false receipts each time he submitted a travel voucher for his 
expenses to be reimbursed. He misled the government by claiming the private 
residence where he was staying was a room rental place. This occurred over a nine-
year period. Applicant benefited at least $70,000 for expenses which he was not entitled 
to receive. This conduct as well as Applicant’s failure to notify his employer of 
international travel and his downloading pornography on his government computer raise 
questions about Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, honesty, and his 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. This, in turn, raises questions about 
Applicant’s ability to handle classified information.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(d) applies because Applicant’s is vulnerable to exploitation and coercion 
because if his past behavior were to made available to the general public, his activities 
would affect his personal, professional, and community standing. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under Guideline E, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
   
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s behavior was deliberate and 
serious. The fraudulent scheme occurred over a lengthy period of time. Applicant has 
mentioned on his e-QIP that no charges were brought.  Regardless, there was sufficient 
evidence to conclude Applicant committed the underlying conduct. Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns raised under personal conduct.  
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying condition that is relevant to Applicant’s case is: 
 
AG ¶ 19(d) deceptive of illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
 Over a nine-year period, Applicant submitted fraudulent travel vouchers, claiming 
reimbursement for funds that he was not entitled to receive. He created false receipts 
 
8 
 
 
for a fictional room rental business in order to file false claims for lodging through DTS. 
He conspired with Mr. X to create an account where DTS could send the reimbursement 
of the funds. He was repaid over $70,000 for expenses he did not incur and was not 
entitled to receive. His actions were deceptive and fraudulent.   
   
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because of the length and extent of Applicant’s 
fraudulent conduct. There is no indication he repaid or provided restitution to the 
government. Applicant’s nine year history of filing fraudulent travel vouchers continues 
to raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. Questions remain about Applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
trustworthiness and reliability. Security concerns under personal conduct and financial 
considerations are not mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.b, 1.d, 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.f:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
