 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
      
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )       ADP Case No. 17-02608 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
April 30, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
  
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office (CHCSPO), 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASDC3I) entered into 
a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provided trustworthiness determinations for 
contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions as defined in DoD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January of 1987. 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on February 22, 2016.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  On August 23, 2017, the 
Department of Defense (DoD), issued an SOR detailing the trustworthiness concerns 
 
 
2 
 
 
under Guideline F regarding Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 21992), as amended (Directive); and the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 
2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 21, 2017.  She requested that her 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 
3.)  On October 18, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on October 19, 2017, and received by her on October 26, 2017.  The 
FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant responded to the FORM on November 6, 2017, and the documents are marked 
and admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibit A.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 8, and they are admitted into evidence, hereinafter referenced as Government 
Exhibits 1 through 8.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for a 
public trust position is denied.    
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 51 years old.  She has a nursing degree and is a licensed practical 
nurse.  She is employed with a defense contractor as a licensed practical nurse and is 
seeking to obtain access to sensitive information in connection with this employment. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government opposes Applicant's request for access to sensitive information 
on the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following 
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR: 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a public trust position 
because she is financially overextended and at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  There are thirty-eight delinquent debts, totaling in excess of $32,618, set 
forth in the SOR, a state tax deficiency and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  She also failed to 
timely file her state income tax return in State A for tax year 2010, and her Federal and 
state income tax returns in State B for tax years 2015 and 2016.  Applicant admitted each 
 
 
3 
 
 
of the allegations under this guideline.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  Applicant’s credit reports 
dated April 1, 2016; and March 22, 2017, which include information from all three credit 
reporting agencies, reflects that Applicant remains indebted to each of the creditors listed 
in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 6 and 7.)  Applicant has been working for her current 
employer since May 2016.   
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant states that she was under financial distress 
and did not make payment arrangements to resolve her debts.  It appears that her 
financial difficulties initially started in 2007 and continued until all her financial obligations 
were discharged in her Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2009.  This erased all her prior debts and 
at that point she was debt free.  Then, in 2011 to the present she has been providing 
financial assistance to her teenage daughter who was expecting a child.  There were 
medical bills and a subsequent divorce that was costly.  Applicant filed a Chapter 13 this 
time instead of a Chapter 7 to show her willingness to fulfill her financial obligations.  In 
May 2016, Applicant suffered a heart attack and was hospitalized for one day at one 
facility and three days at another.  She had no medical insurance at the time and missed 
a few days of work, which put her farther behind with her bills.     
 
Applicant states that she has sought out help from a credit repair company that is 
helping her remove negative marks from her credit report.  She was not happy with their 
results and contacted an attorney to discuss other options.  He advised her to file for 
Chapter 13 in September 2017.  She states that with the guidance of her attorney and 
the bankruptcy trustee, she plans to make a diligent effort to resolve her delinquent debts.  
She states that her initial debt of $54,000 was reduced to $31,500.  As of October 2017, 
she states that she has paid an additional $900 toward her delinquent debt which is now 
$30,600.  Applicant has provided a copy of the motion of confirmation of plan and the 
balance sheet from the trustee to show that she is following the plan.  According to the 
plan, Applicant is paying $525 per month for 60 months to resolve the debt.  Applicant 
also submitted documentation which shows that she has resolved two of the debts in the 
SOR, specifically allegations 1.bb and 1.oo, totaling $168.  
 
Although Applicant identified 43 creditors in her Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition as 
having secured and unsecured claims, she specified that 29 of those have a total claim 
of $0.  Therefore, only 14 creditors of the 43 identified claims have the potential to be paid 
through Applicant’s proposed Chapter 13 plan.  In regard to the 14 creditors that would 
potentially be paid, it is not certain if they correspond to debts set forth in the SOR.             
 
The following delinquent debts and/or tax returns are outstanding:  1.a. a state tax 
debt in the amount of $665 for tax year 2009.  1.b.  Applicant failed to file her state A 
income tax returns for tax year 2010.  1.c.  Applicant failed to file her state B income tax 
returns for tax years 2015 and 2016.  1.d.  A debt in the amount of $3,262 remains owing.  
 
 
4 
 
 
1.e.  A debt in the amount of $3,129 remains owing.  1.f.  A debt in the amount of $2,907 
remains owing.  1.g.  A debt in the amount of $2,247 remains owing.   1.h A debt in the 
amount of $1,490 remains owing.  1.i.  A debt in the amount of $930 remains owing.  1.j.  
Another debt in the amount of $930 remains owing.  1.k.  A debt in the amount of $915 
remains owing.  1.l.  A debt in the amount of $879 remains owing.  1.m.  A debt in the 
amount of $754 remains owing.  1.n.  A debt in the amount of $564 remains owing.  1.o.  
A debt in the amount of $284 remains owing.  1.p.  A debt in the amount of $917 remains 
owing.  1.q.  A debt in the amount of $754 remains owing.  1.r.  A debt in the amount of 
$624 remains owing.  1.s.  A debt in the amount of $609 remains owing.  1.t.  A debt in 
the amount of $462 remains owing.  1.u.  A debt in the amount of $400 remains owing.  
1.v.  A debt in the amount of $375 remains owing.  1.w.  A debt in the amount of $293 
remains owing.  1.x.  A debt in the amount of $284 remain owing.  1.y.  A debt in the 
amount of $282 remains owing.  1.z. A debt in the amount of $259 remains owing.  1.aa.  
A debt in the amount of $186 remains owing.  1.bb.  A debt in the amount of $72 has been 
paid.  1.cc.  A debt in the amount of $70 remains owing.  1.dd.  A debt in the amount of 
$45 remains owing.  1.dd. A debt in the amount of $45 remains owing.  1.ee.  A debt in 
the amount of $40 remains owing.  1.ff.  Another debt in the amount of $40 remains owing.  
1.gg.  A debt in the amount of $658 remains owing.  1.hh.  A debt in the amount of $564 
remains owing.  1.ii.  A debt in the amount of $673 remains owing.  1.jj.  A debt in the 
amount of $145 remains owing.  1.kk.  A debt in the amount of $530 remains owing.  1.ll.  
A debt in the amount of $224 remains owing.  1.mm.  A Chapter 7 bankruptcy was filed 
on April 9, 2007, and the debt was discharged in 2007.  1.nn.  A debt in the amount of 
$5,060 remains owing.  1.oo.  A debt in the amount of $95.59 has been paid.  (See 
Applicant’s Response to the FORM.)       
 
 
 Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines.  
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluation an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust.   
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudication process.  The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person-
concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision. 
 
A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information.  Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
(See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).)  
 
Analysis 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
 
6 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also 
be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, 
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive 
gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol 
abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable 
acts to generate funds.    
 AG ¶ 19 describes five conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; and 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
Applicant has a history of financial distress.  For the past ten years, she has 
experienced financial hardship.  In 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and 
her debts were discharged.  Just ten years later in April 2017, she had accumulated so 
much debt that she could not afford to pay it and had to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  
Admittedly, she missed some work due to her heart attack, which in turn affected her 
income.  However, Applicant’s major problem is obviously the fact that she spends more 
money than she has, and does not live within her means.  She has not shown a pattern 
of financial responsibility.  Although she states that she is now paying her debt by 
following the Chapter 13 plan, her debt is excessive, and it will be many years before she 
is even close to resolving the debt.  There is nothing in the record to show that her 
spending habits have changed or that she will not get into this problem again.  These 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the 
burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns.   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline includes several conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
It is recognized that circumstances beyond her control, namely, a heart attack 
could have negatively affected her finances.  However, AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide full 
mitigation here.  Applicant made the choice to provide her daughter with financial 
assistance during the daughter’s pregnancy and through her subsequent divorce to the 
present time.  Applicant has just begun to resolve her Chapter 13 debt.  Applicant has 
provided some documentation to demonstrate that she has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, and that she is receiving financial counseling, but there are no clear 
indications that her financial problems are under control, or that she will be able to comply 
with the bankruptcy courts payment plan.  Most of the delinquent debts set forth in the 
SOR remains delinquent.  From the evidence in the record for many years Applicant did 
 
 
8 
 
 
not act responsibly under the circumstances.  Now she is trying to, but it is too late.  In 
this case, none of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the 
Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The record fails to establish 
sufficient mitigation of financial trustworthiness concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
has failed to demonstrate that she can live within her means, budget her income 
accordingly, and pay her bills in a timely fashion.  At this point, her financial problems 
continue as there is no evidence that they have been resolved.   
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a position of trust.  She has not met her burden to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required 
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are: 
 
  Paragraph 1:   Against the Applicant. 
       Subpara.    1.a.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.b.  Against the Applicant.   
   Subpara.    1.c.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.d.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.e.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.f.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.g.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.h.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.i.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.j.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.k.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.l.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.m.  Against the Applicant.   
   Subpara.    1.n.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.o.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.p.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.q.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.r.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.s.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.t.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.u.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.v.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.w.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.x.  Against the Applicant.   
   Subpara.    1.y.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.z.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.aa.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.bb.  For the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.cc.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.dd.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.ee.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.ff.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.gg.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.hh.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.ii  Against the Applicant.   
 
 
10 
 
 
   Subpara.    1.jj.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.kk.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.ll.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.mm  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.nn.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.oo.   For the Applicant. 
    
 
     Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a public trust position for the 
Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
