 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED COPY )  ISCR Case No. 17-03401 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
financial problems and that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. His 
financial problems are being resolved and are under control. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications (SCA) on October 14, 2013, 
and June 3, 2016. He was interviewed by government investigators on January 9, 2014, 
and April 24 - 25, 2017. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on October 27, 2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2017, and requested a 
decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
December 12, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on December 19, 2017. He was 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM with a four-
 
2 
 
 
page statement (with a seven-page enclosure) on January 11, 2018. The case was 
assigned to me on March 23, 2018. The parties raised no objections, and I admitted and 
considered all the parties’ proffered evidence. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
unauthenticated summaries of his interviews with government background investigators 
from January 9, 2014, and April 24 - 25, 2017. (FORM, Items 5, 6) Applicant was 
informed he could object to the summary of his interviews, and they would not be 
admitted or considered, or that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
update the documents to make them accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to 
respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a waiver and the 
proposed FORM evidence would be considered. Applicant responded to the FORM and 
raised no objections. I admitted the parties’ proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a through 1.c), with 
explanations. His admissions to the SOR are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He received his 
associate’s degree in November 2007, and his bachelor’s degree in July 2010. He has a 
daughter, age 12, for whom he provides support. Applicant moved in with his mother to 
save money to pay his support obligation and his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant was employed full time between June 2001 and August 2005. He was 
unemployed between August 2005 and February 2006. He was employed between 
February 2006 and February 2013, and unemployed between February 2013 and 
October 2013. He has been employed from October 2013 to present. His current 
employer, a federal contractor, hired him for a full-time position in June 2016. Applicant 
has been working for the same employer since. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2013 and 2016 SCAs that he had financial problems. 
Specifically, he disclosed the three delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR: a $15,000 
reconstruction loan he received after hurricane Katrina (SOR ¶ 1.a), and two delinquent 
credit accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c), totaling over $19,000.  
 
Applicant explained that in August 2005, he was living with his then pregnant 
girlfriend. Both of them had jobs and no financial problems. In 2005, hurricane Katrina 
obliterated his state and he and his family lost their homes and jobs. After the passing of 
the hurricane, Applicant took a $15,000 reconstruction loan to repair his family’s home.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant could not find a full-time job until August 2006, when he took a position 
where his employer paid for part of his college education. He used his limited income to 
pay for his living expenses and his support obligation. He used the credit cards alleged 
in the SOR to pay for his living expenses. Applicant lost his job in February 2013. He 
had been repaying his reconstruction loan, but after losing his job he could not afford to 
continue the loan payments. Applicant married in 2008, separated in 2010, and divorced 
in 2012. The expenses associated with his separation and divorce further strained his 
financial situation. 
 
In 2013, Applicant found employment in the construction business, making 
minimum hourly wages. His income was barely sufficient to pay for his living expenses 
and child support. During 2013, Applicant started to apply for government positions, but 
he was not hired because he did not have the eligibility for a clearance. Applicant was 
hired by a government contractor in early 2016.  
 
Applicant explained to the investigators during his interviews, in his SOR answer, 
and FORM response, that his financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond 
his control. He believes he has been financially responsible considering his 
circumstances. He noted that he paid his reconstruction loan until he lost his job in 
2013. He reduced the loan debt from $15,000 to about $9,450. He also noted he has 
continued to pay his living expenses and child support even though he was unemployed 
or underemployed during extended periods. He claimed he has been actively involved 
in his daughter’s care and upbringing. 
 
Applicant highlighted that he has not incurred additional delinquent debt since he 
lost his job in 2013. He believes this shows he knows how to live within his financial 
means and that he has been financially responsible. Applicant repeatedly stated his 
intent to repay his financial obligations. He just did not have the income to do so.  
 
Applicant travelled to Costa Rica in 2010 and to Mexico in 2012. He averred his 
ex-wife paid for the trips because she wanted them to get back together. 
 
In 2014, Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C (Debt Cancellation) for the 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The IRS reassessed Applicant’s 2014 tax liability based 
on the debt cancellation. (Applicant’s FORM Response)  
 
Applicant contacted the collection company of the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c 
to establish a payment plan (date unspecified). The collector informed Applicant that it 
could not find the account information related to him. On January 8, 2018, Applicant 
filed a dispute with the credit bureau asking for the account to be deleted from his credit 
report. (Applicant’s FORM Response) 
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that he made one $110 payment to the 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in January 5, 2018. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant described his current financial situation as stable and noted that he 
pays all of his current bills on time. He believes that his unpaid debts were isolated 
incidents that involved situations beyond his control. He promised to continue to live 
within his financial means and pay his debts.  
 
Applicant’s 2017 credit report shows he had a total of eight trade lines 
(accounts): only the three accounts alleged in the SOR were noted as being in 
collection. The remaining accounts were noted as “paid as agreed or closed.” There are 
no other delinquent or collection accounts. He has not incurred any new delinquent 
debt. (FORM, Items 7 - 9) 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), 
effective 8 June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
 
5 
 
 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are documented in the record. In 2005, he lost his 
job and his home because of hurricane Katrina. Thereafter, he has had difficulty finding 
and maintaining a well-paying job because of reasons beyond his control. He 
accumulated a delinquent reconstruction loan and two credit accounts. AG ¶ 19 
provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and recent. However, his financial 
problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his 
control – the 2005 hurricane, his 2010 separation and 2012 divorce, and his inability to 
find full-time employment. Considering the evidence as a whole, it shows that his 
financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur.  
 
 The analysis of whether Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances is 
not difficult considering the evidence as a whole. Applicant made payments on his 2005 
reconstruction loan until he lost his job in 2013. Although he had difficulty finding full-
time employment or a well-paid job, Applicant took minimum wage position to pay for 
his support obligations and his living expenses. The credit reports in the FORM show 
that only the three accounts alleged in the SOR were delinquent. The remaining 
accounts were noted as “paid as agreed or closed.” Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances by paying those debts he could afford to pay. There is no evidence of 
any financial problems or additional delinquent accounts before or after he filed his 2016 
SCA. 
 
7 
 
 
 In sum, Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish that circumstances beyond 
his control caused the financial hardship and prevented him from paying three debts. He 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. His current financial situation is stable and 
he promised to continue to live within his financial means and to pay all of his debts. He 
received an IRS Form 1099-C (Debt Cancellation) for the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
He has a reasonable basis to dispute the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. And he made a 
recent payment on the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. I find that there are clear 
indications that his financial problem is being resolved and is under control. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. Circumstances 
beyond his control contributed to or aggravated his financial problems. The record 
evidence is sufficient to establish that he was financially responsible under the 
circumstances and that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Applicant is aware that he has to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
clearance. Applicant promised to continue to resolve his financial problems. The 
financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national security 
interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
