 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02347 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). He used drugs until less than a year ago. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 24, 2016. On 
August 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The DOD 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
2016), for all decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2017, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On October 11, 2017, a complete copy of the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was mailed to Applicant and received 
 
2 
 
by him on October 23, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did respond to the FORM. Hence, Items 1 through 
4 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on March 
1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant admitted all six allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated into my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is almost 25 years old. He has worked as an engineer for a defense 
contractor since July 2016. He requires a security clearance for this employment. 
Between August 2013 and September 2015, while he was in college, he worked as an 
intern for his current employer. He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2016. Applicant is 
single and has no children.  
 
In his July 24, 2016 SCA, Applicant admitted to using marijuana1 and other drugs 
between August 2011 and May 2016 (Item 3 at 36-40). Applicant first used marijuana 
while attending college. He continued to use marijuana while working as an intern and 
while employed full-time by his current employer. During an April 2017 interview with a 
Government investigator, Applicant revealed he used marijuana as recently as March 
2017 (Item 4 at 8). His marijuana use continued until August 2017, the same month he 
submitted an Interrogatory Response to DOHA. Since January 2017, he has used 
marijuana approximately once a week by himself, but he still associates with friends 
who use marijuana (Item 4 at 8-9). Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a., which includes an 
allegation that he intends to continue to use marijuana in the future.  
 
Applicant first purchased marijuana in September 2011 and last purchased it in 
December 2016. He told the Government investigator that he no longer intends to 
purchase marijuana, but will use marijuana offered to him. He also told the Government 
investigator that in 2014 he believed he was dependent upon marijuana, but does not 
believe he is currently marijuana dependent (Item 4 at 10 and12).  
     
Between approximately March 2012 and May 2014, Applicant experimented with 
a variety of other illegal drugs. These drugs included: various psychedelic drugs (LSD, 
2C-B, LSA, 4-AcO-DMT, 25I-NBOMe, MDPV, and Ethylphenidate),2 MDMA (ecstasy), 
cocaine, and 6-APB.3 He also illegally used Percocet and Adderall without a 
prescription. He told the Government investigator that he does not intend to use any of 
these drugs again.   
 
                                                          
1 Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. 
 
2 LSD, 2C-B, 25I-NBOMe, and MDPV are Schedule I drugs. LSA is a Schedule III drug. Ethylphenidate 
and 4-AcO-DMT are not currently illegal in the United States. 
 
3 MDMA and 6-APB are Schedule I drugs. Cocaine is a Schedule II drug. 
 
3 
 
In 2013, Applicant was arrested and cited with Possession of Marijuana (Item 3 
at 34). He admitted he was smoking marijuana at the time he was detained and the 
police found marijuana and a pipe on him (Item 4 at 8). As a result of this arrest, he was 
given a citation and ordered to appear in court. The charges were waived after he 
completed an Intervention Program for Substance Abuse (IPSA). He claims he attended 
the IPSA program between April 2013 and July 2013, and completed online course 
work and mandatory drug tests. He claims he discontinued drug use while he was in 
this program.4 He offered no documentation concerning completion of the substance 
abuse program or any other post-SOR evidence in mitigation. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”5 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”6 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”7 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”8 Thus, a 
                                                          
4 The SOR did not allege this derogatory information as an allegation. Hence, it will not be analyzed as a 
potential disqualifying condition, but may be considered under the analysis of mitigating conditions and 
the whole-person concept. 
 
5 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
6 Egan at 527. 
 
7 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
8 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
4 
 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.9 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”10 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.11 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.12 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.13 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”14 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”15 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, but because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled 
substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
12 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
15 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed 
above. 
AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
Applicant admitted he used marijuana between August 2011 and August 2017, 
and he intends to continue to use marijuana. He also used experimented with a variety 
of other illegal substances between March 2012 and May 2014. The evidence raised 
these disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 
26 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs used; and 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
Applicant used and purchased marijuana during and after college. He used 
marijuana after he was arrested in 2013, after he submitted his SCA in 2016, and after 
his background interview in March 2017. He used marijuana as recently as August 
2017, while working for his current employer and while applying for a security clearance. 
 
6 
 
He also used a variety of other illegal drugs. Applicant’s illegal drug use is ongoing, it is 
not isolated, nor did it occur under unusual circumstances. He still associates with 
individuals who use marijuana, and he has indicated an intention to continue to use 
marijuana in the future. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
 
Applicant chose to use illegal drugs, and his decision to do so continues to reflect 
negatively on his current security worthiness. Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs, 
after he applied for a security clearance, cannot be considered a minor lapse in 
judgment, but a pattern of behavior that indicates an unwillingness to follow rules and 
regulations. Security clearance decisions are not limited to conduct during duty hours;16 
off-duty conduct, especially where it reflects poor judgment, provides a rational basis for 
the government to question an applicant’s security worthiness.17 Applicant’s behavior 
showed a disregard for the law, regulations, and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily 
entered into with the Government when he applied for access to classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the drug 
involvement concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
                                                          
16 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0620 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999). 
 
17 See, e.g., Cole v. Young, 351 U.S. 536, 550 n.13 (1956); Croft v. Department of Air Force, 40 M.S.P.R. 
320, 321 n.1 (1989). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.g.:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
