KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00214.a1
DATE: 04/02/2018
DATE: April 2, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00214
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 15, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant  requested a hearing. 
On December 29, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Jennifer Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military during the 1980s, receiving an honorable discharge. 
Married with two children, Applicant has a master’s degree. 
Applicant’s SOR alleged financial problems that he attributed to unemployment, a costly
relocation, lending money to his daughter, stress caused by his mother’s illness, and unanticipated
vehicle repairs.  He has had financial problems in the past, which he addressed by discharging
$10,000 in debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1997.
The SOR includes a charged-off line of credit for over $2,000; a judgment for about $16,000,
resulting from unpaid rent; a collection account for about $250 for unreturned cable equipment; and
failure to file Federal and state income tax returns and pay taxes when due.  Applicant’s Federal tax
delinquencies were for tax years 2008 through 2011.  The IRS filed a substitute tax return for 2008.
He subsequently filed the other returns and owes no money to the IRS for those years.  Applicant
claimed that he filed his delinquent state income tax returns for 2008 through 2011, but he did not
provide corroborating evidence.
Applicant also filed late Federal returns for 2012 through 2016, and he owes back taxes for
2014 through 2016.  He entered into a payment agreement with the IRS, and he also entered into an
agreement with his state to resolve a state tax debt.  Applicant has changed his withholding in order
to avoid future tax debt.  Applicant’s delinquent filings for 2012 through 2016 were not alleged in
the SOR.  The Judge stated that she was considering this non-alleged conduct on the issues on
mitigation and the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a member of an academic honor society.  He has completed a number of training
courses pertaining to his job.  He enjoys support by friends, neighbors, and co-workers, who
characterize him as hard-working, trustworthy, and honest.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge stated that Applicant’s financial problems are long-standing, citing to his 1997 
bankruptcy, his tax problems, and his other delinquent debts.  She concluded that there is little
evidence of responsible action in regard to his debts, nor is there evidence of financial counseling
or other circumstances that would show that Applicant’s problems are under control.  Although
Applicant has resolved the tax delinquencies that were alleged in the SOR, she cited to evidence of
subsequent failures to file and pay taxes.  Though Applicant has made arrangements to pay these tax
debts, he has not shown any actual payments.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s military service and his character
evidence.  However, she concluded that he had not provided enough evidence of financial stability
to permit a conclusion that his security-significant conduct is behind him.  
Discussion
Applicant argues that he has demonstrated resolution of his tax debts and that the remaining
ones are relatively minor.  He cites to evidence of circumstances outside his control that affected his
financial situation, and he notes evidence of his installment plans to resolve his tax liabilities.  He
argues that the Judge did not give sufficient attention to the mitigating conditions, particularly 20(g):
“the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount
owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”1
The Judge noted Applicant’s unemployment and other such things that exerted an impact on
his financial health.  However, her conclusion that he had not shown responsible action in regard
to his debts is sustainable.  Her findings that he had previously experienced financial problems of
such magnitude that he sought bankruptcy protection and that afterward he continued to acquire
delinquent debt supports her overall conclusion that Applicant has not shown that his problems are
behind him.  Moreover, failure to file and pay taxes when due raises a concern that a person may be
lacking in the reliability and judgment necessary for the protection of classified information.    See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-06707 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2017).  Even if an applicant has made
arrangements to file overdue tax returns and pay outstanding debts, a Judge may still consider the
underlying circumstances for what they may reveal about the applicant’s clearance eligibility, in
light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02246 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 8,
2017).  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2017).
Applicant challenges the Judge’s treatment of the non-alleged tax delinquencies, arguing that
his clearance should not be denied based on such evidence.  However, the Judge considered the
additional tax problems only in her examination of Applicant’s case for mitigation, which is
permissible.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-07369 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 16, 2017).  We give due
consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited.  However, Hearing Office cases
1Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(g).  
3
are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
16-03219 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 15, 2017).
 The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
 
 
  
5
