1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]   )  ISCR Case No. 17-03443 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 19, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing  
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was initially taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the 
Department of Defense on June 8, 2017. 
  
 On December 1, 2017, Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 29, 2017. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2017. On January 8, 
2018, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for January 29, 2018. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered two  
exhibits, which were admitted without objection as Government (Gov) Exhibits 1 and 2. 
Applicant offered 17 exhibits, which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – Q,  
without objection. The record was held open until February 12, 2018, to allow Applicant 
to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted one additional document 
which was admitted as AE R. The Government requested administrative notice be taken 
2 
 
of certain facts regarding the country of Iraq. The administrative notice document was 
marked as Item 3. The transcript was received on February 5, 2018. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Administrative Notice  -  Iraq1  
 
 Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. The outcome of the 2014 
parliamentary elections generally met international standards of free and fair elections 
and led to the peaceful transition of power from former prime minister Nuri al-Malikia to 
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.  
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns that travel within Iraq remains very 
dangerous and the ability of the U.S. Embassy to assist U.S. citizens is extremely 
limited. U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. 
Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq, including ISIS. Such groups 
regularly attack Iraqi security forces and civilians. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias may also 
threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. 
  
 Severe human rights problems are widespread in Iraq. Sectarian hostility, 
widespread corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of government and society 
weakened the government’s authority and worsened effective human rights protections. 
Problems include harsh and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities; 
arbitrary arrests and lengthy pretrial detention; arbitrary interference with privacy and 
homes; limits on freedom of expression to include press, social, religious and political 
restrictions in academic and cultural matters; discrimination against and societal abuse 
of women and ethnic, religious, and racial minorities; seizure of property without due 
process and limitations of worker rights.  
 
Findings of Fact 
  
Applicant is a 32-year-old linguist who is an employee of a Department of 
Defense contractor since September 2016. He is currently stationed overseas. He is 
applying for a security clearance. Applicant was born in Iraq. Applicant has a bachelor’s 
degree earned from a university in Iraq. In July 2009, he moved to United States after 
receiving a Special Immigrant Visa for his service supporting U.S. Coalition forces in 
Iraq. (Applicant states that he received refugee status.) He became a U.S. citizen on 
November 19, 2014. He recently married in December 2017. His wife is also a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. They have no children. (Tr. 14-15, 19-20; Gov 1; Gov 2; AE B; 
AE J; AE Q) (Note: The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, 
names of witnesses, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. 
The cited sources contain more specific information.)  
  
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born and raised in Iraq. He is the youngest of four children – all 
boys. When he was 16, Applicant and his family worked at a small U.S. Army base as 
                                                          
1 Item 3 (Administrative Notice filing on Iraq and supporting documents) 
3 
 
contractors. He later worked for a cargo contractor at Bagdhad International Airport 
supporting the coalition forces in Iraq. He left his job to complete his college degree. 
After graduating college, he worked as an interpreter directly supporting the U.S. Army 
in Iraq for 14 months. He then applied for a special immigrant visa and asylum/ refugee 
status. After the visa was approved, Applicant moved to the United States. He worked 
several jobs in the U.S. before becoming a U.S. citizen in 2014. Applicant has a U.S. 
passport, which he uses to travel outside the country. On April 28, 2015, he renounced 
Iraqi citizenship and no longer has an Iraqi passport. (Tr.   22-23, 34 - 36, 53; Gov 1; AE 
B; AE C; AE F; AE G)  
 
Two of Applicant’s brothers are naturalized citizens and reside in the United 
States. One brother is a linguist for a local hospital. His other brother is currently 
deployed as a linguist supporting U.S. forces overseas and holds a security clearance. 
(Tr. 16-17; AE K)  Applicant’s wife was born in Iraq. She has been a U.S. citizen for two 
years.  All of her family reside in the United States. (Tr. 31)   
 
Applicant’s parents and his oldest brother are citizens of and reside in Iraq. His 
father is 72 and his mother is 65. Both are retired. He used to call his parents every two 
weeks. He now has limited contact with them because he works at deployed locations 
with limited communications. He spoke to his brother and parents in Iraq between two to 
three times over the past year. Since moving to the U.S. in 2009, he traveled to Iraq 
only once in 2016 when his mother was hospitalized.  He hopes to sponsor his parents 
and brother so that they can immigrate to the United States.  Currently, the Department 
of Immigration has a huge visa backlog. They are waiting for their visas to be approved.  
(Tr. 17-20, 25 -26, 29-30; AE G; AE H; AE I) Applicant’s oldest brother owns a beauty 
supply shop. He is married with two children, ages 11 and five. If he is allowed to 
immigrate to the United States, he intends to bring his family with him. (Tr. 36-37) 
 
Applicant has no bank accounts in Iraq. All of his bank accounts are located in 
the United States. He does not send money to his family in Iraq. His parents own three 
parcels of land in Iraq. Applicant estimates the value at $750,000. His parents intend to 
sell the properties when they move to the United States. (Tr. 20-21, 31; AE M; AE N)  
 
Applicant’s family, his parents and brothers, have worked directly for coalition 
forces in Iraq since 2003. In 2005, his family was threatened because of their work in 
support of U.S. forces. They received two threats within a few months of each other. 
They relocated to a different area of the country. They received no threats after being 
relocated.  Applicant and his family would never do anything to harm the United States.  
(Tr. 24, 27-28, 33-35)   
 
Applicant is very proud of his current job as a linguist/culture adviser in support of 
U.S. troops during operation Inherent Resolve. Becoming a U.S. citizen was the best 
day of his life. In the future, he plans to study for a master’s degree in cybersecurity. He 
and his wife hope to start a family.  (AE B)  
 
 
 
   
4 
 
Whole-person Factors  
 
 A USAF Lieutenant Colonel wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He worked with 
Applicant from November 2016 to March 2017 in Iraq. He describes Applicant’s 
dedication as an interpreter/translator as admirable. Applicant was critical in relaying 
information between USAF Air Advisors and Iraqi Security Forces. His skill set and work 
ethic is highly desired in any professional capacity. His dedication to his duties garnered 
respect and admiration from the combined US/Iraqi staff. (AE A)  
 
Mr. H., the regional manager of the cargo company Applicant worked for at 
Baghdad International Airport, worked with Applicant between November 2005 and 
November 2007. Applicant served as the head of the Administration Department. He 
describes Applicant as a talented individual who has proven success in the workplace. 
Applicant’s unique skill set of computer skills, leadership, customer service and 
database management made him a highly valued employee in the organization.  
Applicant left the company on good terms to pursue his educational goals. He indicated 
that Applicant and his family were threatened by anti-Coalition and anti-Iraqi 
government individuals because of his work for the pro-western company. (AE A at 2)  
 
Major J.H. served alongside Applicant for over seven months in 2016 in support 
of a military operation in Iraq. He describes Applicant’s dedication and support to the 
mission as exceptional. Applicant played a critical role in the Combined Joint Operations 
Center. He built a strong rapport and became part of the team while serving as an 
interpreter earning the trust of both parties. His efforts greatly enhanced cooperation 
and success on the battlefield. He also educated U.S. forces on Iraqi culture, customs, 
and courtesies. Applicant always put the mission first and did everything possible to 
ensure the team’s success. He was entrusted with an enormous amount of mission 
critical information. His contributions insured operational effectiveness. (AE A at 3) 
 
Captain B. worked with Applicant from December 2016 to April 2017. Applicant 
helped ensure that combat operations were synchronized and enabled a shared 
understanding across a geographically dispersed Brigade Combat Team operating in 
austere conditions. He would not hesitate to work with Applicant again in a combat 
environment in support of U.S. national security objectives. (AE A at 4) Captain D. 
worked with Applicant in 2009. Captain D. states Application has proven himself reliable 
on combat patrols and skillful in translating between U.S. and Iraqi forces. He notes 
Applicant endured many hardships and dangers as a result of his work with the U.S. 
Army. He received numerous letters threatening harm to him and his family due to his 
work with coalition forces. Applicant is one of the most competent and trustworthy 
interpreters currently working with U.S. forces. (AE A at 5) 
 
MSgt A. worked side by side with Applicant from December 2016 to June 2017. 
He also attests to Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AE A at 6) Applicant also 
received several letters of appreciation for his work as an interpreter. (AE K; AE P)  
  
 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE B: Foreign Influence 
 
   AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern under Foreign Influence:   
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are applicable to Applicant’s case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign  country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
In Applicant’s case, AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(b) apply. The mere possession of 
close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country 
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant’s parents and brother are 
citizens and residents of Iraq. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of Iraq’s serious human rights 
problems, and its issues with terrorism. The government of Iraq has made some 
progress, but a heightened risk remains. Applicant’s contacts with his family in Iraq also 
create a potential conflict of interest between his obligation to protect classified 
information and his desire to help his family members by providing that information.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
7 
 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
  
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
  
 I find AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(b) apply to Applicant’s case. It is clear that Applicant 
has ties of affection and obligation to his parents and brother in Iraq. However, it is 
unlikely Applicant will have to choose between the interests of his relatives in Iraq and 
the interests of the United States. Applicant and his family were previously threatened 
because of their work for U.S. forces.  He did not compromise sensitive information at 
that time.  He is unlikely to be motivated to do so at present. His family moved to a safer 
region in Iraq.     
  
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has deep and longstanding ties in the 
United States. Applicant has lived in the United States since 2009. He became a U.S. 
citizen in 2014.  Applicant’s wife and two of his brothers are citizens of and reside in the 
United States. One of his brothers is serving as an interpreter at a deployed location 
and has a security clearance.  Applicant as well as his family have worked in support of 
U.S. forces since 2003. He has worked alongside U.S. forces under austere combat 
conditions. In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal 
Board discussed this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
8 
 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
I considered Applicant’s longstanding commitment to the United States as well as 
his favorable contributions to national security. I find that Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is 
applicable.  
The security concerns under Foreign Influence are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant and his family 
supported U.S. Coalition forces in Iraq since 2003 at risk to their safety. Applicant has 
lived in the United States since July 2009. He became a U.S. citizen in 2014.  He 
currently serves as an interpreter in a deployed location. His wife is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen who lives in the United States. He is sponsoring his parents and his brother’s 
immigration to the United States.     
 
I considered Applicant’s outstanding record as a linguist working on sensitive  
projects that were vital to U.S. national security. He received high praise from several 
U.S. military officers and a non-commissioned officer who attest to his dedication to the 
mission as well as his trustworthiness. The foreign influence security concerns are 
mitigated.     
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the U.S. to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
