 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ADP Case No. 17-03104 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate concerns raised by his 
financial situation. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 12, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. Specifically, the SOR lists 21 delinquent debts, including several 
judgements, totaling over $40,000. On November 4, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, 
admitting all the SOR allegations and stated that he is working with a credit repair firm to 
resolve his financial problems. He provided no supporting documentation showing what 
efforts, if any, he had made to address and resolve the SOR debts. He requested a 
decision on the administrative (written) record without a hearing.  
 
On December 4, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant a file of relevant 
material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant five 
exhibits, pre-marked as Items 1 – 5, which the Government offers for admission into the 
record. Applicant received the FORM on January 3, 2018. (Appellate Exhibit I) He was 
given 30 days to raise an objection to the material offered by Department Counsel and 
submit his own evidence. He did not file an objection or submit a response. Accordingly, 
without objection, Items 1 – 5 are admitted into the record. 
 
 
2 
 On April 17, 2018, I received the case for decision and then received confirmation 
that Applicant remains sponsored for a position of trust. (Appellate Exhibit II) Accordingly, 
I have jurisdiction over this matter. ISCR Case No. 14-03753 (App. Bd. Sep. 23, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 32, lives with his father. He has been working full-time since 2006, 
including as a debt collector for a debt collection company from July 2010 to September 
2016. He has been with his current employer since May 2017 and, at that time, submitted 
an application for a position of trust required for his continued employment as a federal 
contractor.  He reported on his application that he had two delinquent accounts totaling 
less than $10,000. He subsequently reported during his background interview several 
other delinquent accounts. He admits in his response to the SOR that he has 21 
delinquent accounts totaling over $40,000.   
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided by applying the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG 
or guidelines), which became effective on June 8, 2017, through Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4 (SEAD 4), and the due process procedures set forth in DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive).1  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.2  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a federal 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and whole-
person concept. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision. See generally AG ¶ 2. 
 
The Directive sets forth in Enclosure 3 the due process procedures that must be 
followed in all DOHA proceedings. Department Counsel must present evidence to 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4, ¶ E.1 (the current guidelines “shall be used by all authorized adjudicative agencies when 
rendering a determination for initial or continued eligibility . . . to hold a sensitive position.”); Memorandum 
from the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security, dated 
November 19, 2004 (the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to utilize the 
provisions of the Directive, to include the current version of the adjudicative guidelines, to resolve contractor 
cases forwarded to it for a trustworthiness determination). 
 
2 SEAD 4, ¶ E.4; Directive, § 3.2. ADP Case No. 14-00590 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014) (“The standard 
applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988) regarding security clearances: such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent 
with the interests of the national security’.”) 
 
3 
establish controverted facts (i.e., SOR allegations denied by the applicant). While an 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
relevant conduct or circumstances that he or she admits or is otherwise established. 
Directive, ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.25. An applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
establish their eligibility for a position of trust. Any doubt raised by the evidence, must be 
resolved in favor of the national security. See AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s accumulation of a large amount of delinquent debt raises concern 
about his ability to hold a sensitive position. The financial considerations concern is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 The concern here is not limited to a consideration of whether persons with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise sensitive information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information.3 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the applicable disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
4 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Persons applying for a position of trust are not required to be debt free, or have 
unblemished financial records, or a certain credit score. However, they are expected to 
present evidence mitigating concerns raised by delinquent debt. They are also required 
to show that they manage their personal financial obligations in a manner consistent with 
the expectations for those granted access to sensitive information.4 
 
Here, Applicant did not meet his burden of proof and persuasion. Although he may 
have retained a credit repair firm to help him clean up his credit, he supplied no supporting 
documentation showing what steps, if any, he has taken to address his past-due debts 
and take control of his financial situation. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial situation remains a concern. 5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (“[A]n applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is 
required is that an applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his [or her] 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”) (internal citations omitted). See 
also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2016) (“It is reasonable for Judges to expect 
applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of individual debts.”)  
 
5 In reaching this adverse conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept. See generally AG ¶ 2. I also 
considered the exceptions listed in SEAD 4, Appendix C, but none are warranted in this case. 
