 
1                                        
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 17-02738 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence of resolution of his financial issues. 
Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On January 12, 2016, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 3. On August 30, 2017, 
2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in 
Appendix A the new adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective on June 8, 2017. Item 1. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. Item 1. 
 
2                                        
 
On October 2, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. Item 2. On October 17, 2017, Department Counsel completed the File 
of Relevant Material (FORM). On October 25, 2017, Applicant received the FORM, and 
he did not respond to the FORM. On February 14, 2018, the case was assigned to me. 
The case file consists of eight exhibits. Items 1-8. Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.w. Item 1. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information.   
 
Applicant is 33 years old, and a DOD contractor has employed him as a server 
administrator since July 2013.2 Applicant was employed as a senior systems 
administrator from May 2008 to July 2013, and he was employed from November 2002 
to May 2008 as a network engineer. In 2010, he received a bachelor of science degree 
in information technology management, and in 2011, he received a master’s degree in 
executive management and business administration.  
 
Applicant served in the Navy from June 1992 to February 1997. In his SCA, he 
said he received an Other Than Honorable discharge, and he explained that he was 
“[m]edically discharged. Converted to honorable discharge after 6 months of separation 
Discharge Detail Other Than Honorable.” He told the Officer of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator that he received a medical discharge, and the medical discharge 
converted to an honorable discharge. Item 4. When he was in the Navy, he held a top 
secret security clearance, and he served aboard a submarine. His characterization of 
service is unclear.   
 
In 1994, Applicant married, and his children were born in 1995, 1997, 1999, 2005, 
2008, and 2015. He did not disclose any delinquent debts on his January 12, 2016 SCA. 
He said at the time he completed his SCA, he was unsure of the status of his debts 
because he had not obtained a credit report for several years. There is no evidence of 
security violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.u allege a total of 21 student loan debts past due 
for more than 120 days and 2 non-student loan delinquent debts in 1.v utility debt ($760) 
and 1.w insurance ($681). The SOR student loans are as follows: 1.a ($1,144); 1.b 
($1,091); 1.c ($813); 1.d ($707); 1.e ($707); 1.f ($7,988); 1.g ($579); 1.h ($6,781); 1.i 
($5,118); 1.j ($355); 1.k ($3,956); 1.l ($355); 1.m ($296); 1.n ($280); 1.o ($268); 1.p 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph and the next paragraph 
is Applicant’s January 12, 2016 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA) and his March 10, 2016 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview. 
Items 3, 4. 
 
3                                        
 
($194); 1.q ($176); 1.r ($177); 1.s ($2,178); 1.t ($1,387); and 1.u ($1,319). On March 10, 
2016, Applicant told the OPM investigator that he owed a total of about $97,000 in student 
loans, and his student loans were in deferment for the last several years. Item 4. Later in 
his OPM interview, he said his student loans were in default, and he called the creditors 
and asked about a payment plan. Item 4. None of the creditors called Applicant back to 
arrange a payment plan. Item 4. 
 
In his October 2, 2017 SOR response, Applicant said he had submitted 
applications to his student loan creditors to consolidate his student loans to enable him 
to make a single monthly payment.3 One primary student loan creditor wanted a $487 
monthly payment, and he planned to start making those monthly payments in October 
2017. For the other primary student loan creditor, he is seeking a loan consolidation, and 
he plans to negotiate a reasonable settlement and payment plan. He wants to begin 
making $50 monthly payments to the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.v and 1.w beginning in 
October 2017.   
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel noted the absence of corroborating or 
supporting documentation of resolution of the SOR debts. FORM at 2-3. Aside from 
Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. FORM at 3. He did 
not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
                                            
3 All of the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s SOR response. Item 2. 
 
4                                        
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
 
5                                        
 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
6                                        
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 Applicant did not provide documentation relating to his SOR debts such as: (1) 
proof of payments, including checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a 
letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact;6 (3) copies 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
 
7                                        
 
of credible debt disputes sent to the creditor and/or credit reporting companies indicating 
he did not believe he was responsible for the debt and why he held such a belief; (4) 
evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or 
agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve this debt; or (5) other evidence of 
progress or resolution.  
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his 
financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old, and a DOD contractor has employed him as a server 
administrator since July 2013. He was employed as a senior systems administrator from 
May 2008 to July 2013. In 2010, he received a bachelor of science degree in information 
technology management, and in 2011, he received a master’s degree in executive 
management and business administration. He served in the Navy from June 1992 to 
February 1997. When he was in the Navy, he held a top secret security clearance, and 
he served aboard a submarine. He is married and he has six children. There is no 
evidence of security violations, abuse of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
                                            
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
8                                        
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant’s 
SOR lists 23 delinquent debts. He provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating 
documentary evidence of payments and an established payment plan or other mitigating 
information relating to his 23 SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial responsibility 
and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
documented information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations security 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial 
consideration security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.w:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
