 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02677 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 11, 2015. On 
September 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 21, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
 
2 
 
2, 2018, and the case was assigned to me on the same day. On February 6, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for February 27, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of three other witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open 
until March 20, 2018, to enable her to submit additional documentary evidence. She 
timely submitted AX G, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on March 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations. Her 
admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old technical writer employed by a defense contractor. She 
married in March 1990 and divorced in June 1994. She has two children, ages 26 and 
20. 
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from January 1990 to January 
2010 and retired as an electrician’s mate first class (pay grade E-6). (AX A.) She held a 
security clearance in the Navy and later retained it as a contractor employee. Under the 
Navy tenure rules, she was required to retire after 20 years of service because she was 
not selected for promotion to chief petty officer. She knew about her impending 
mandatory retirement for about a year beforehand. (Tr. 61.) She purchased a 
condominium home for about $300,000 in June 2009, about six months before she 
retired. (Tr. 48.)  
 
After retiring, Applicant was unemployed from January to August 2010. She 
testified that she had saved up some money so that she could take time off to be with 
her children. (Tr. 44) She also testified that she was actively looking for employment 
during that period. (Tr. 49.) She began working a defense contractor in August 2010. 
She earned about $38,000 per year, significantly less than she earned while on active 
duty, and she had a monthly financial shortfall of about $2,000 per month. She 
voluntarily left this job in September 2012, because it involved extensive travel away 
from her children. (Tr. 44-45.) She was unemployed until September 2013, but she had 
a friend who helped pay the bills. When the friend left, Applicant began searching for 
another job.  She worked for two months for a temporary employment agency and then 
was hired by a federal contractor in November 2013, earning about $40,000 per year. 
Her son was then in college. He has now graduated from college, and her daughter is in 
college. (Tr. 57-58.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
In September 2016, Applicant was laid off. (Tr. 44-46; AX B; AX C.) She was 
unemployed until mid-November 2016, when she began a new job that required a daily 
two-hour commute, but her annual pay increased to $50,000 per year. (Tr. 46; AX E.) In 
February 2017, she began her current job, at about the same pay but near her home. 
(AX F.)  
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in September 2014. She testified 
that, although she was employed, she was about six months behind on her debt 
payments. (Tr. 45.) Her petition listed secured debts of about $277,895 (the first 
mortgage on her home) and $583 (delinquent condominium fees); an unsecured priority 
debt of $144 for personal property taxes; and $22,625 in unsecured nonpriority debts. 
(GX 4 at 16-23.) She did not make the payments to the bankruptcy trustee, and the 
bankruptcy petition was dismissed without prejudice in February 2017. (GX 4 at 1.)  
 
Applicant refiled her bankruptcy petition in March 2017, and it was pending as of 
the date of the hearing. (GX 3.) This petition lists a balance of $268,219 on the first 
mortgage on her home; a judgment for $3,176 in unpaid condominium fees; six credit-
card accounts totaling $13,374; a personal loan for $1,109; another personal loan for 
$6,127; a student loan for $1,278; and a line of credit for $487. (GX 3 at 16-23.). 
 
 In her most recent bankruptcy petition, Applicant stated that her net monthly 
income was about $4,863 and her expenses were about $4,133, leaving a net monthly 
remainder of about $750. (GX 3 at 27.) As part of her most recent bankruptcy, Applicant 
agreed to continue making the monthly payments of $1,852 on her home and monthly 
payments of $1,406 on the arrearage. (GX 3 at 46.) She made only one payment in 
September 2017. (Tr. 53-54.) At the hearing, she testified that she intended to dismiss 
her most recent bankruptcy so that she can sell her home. (Tr. 56.) As of the date of the 
hearing, she had not filed a motion to dismiss the bankruptcy and had not made any 
payments to the trustee. (Tr. 64.)  
 
Applicant listed her home for sale in March 2018, about two weeks after the 
hearing. She is asking $339,000 for the home. She intends to use any funds after 
paying the balance on her mortgage loan to pay her other delinquent debts. (AX G.) As 
of the date the record closed, she had not presented any evidence of purchase offers 
on the home, contacts with her creditors, payments, or payment plans. 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor for the past year testified that he was aware of her two 
bankruptcies and that she has been honest and forthright about her financial problems. 
He testified that her work ethic, reliability, and trustworthiness have been “exemplary on 
all counts.” (Tr. 19.) 
 
 A master chief petty officer who has known Applicant for 20 years testified that 
he trusts Applicant to take care of his personal property, residence, and financial 
matters when he deploys. He is aware of the second bankruptcy but not the first. (Tr. 
29-31.)  
 
 
4 
 
 The father of Applicant’s daughter is employed by a defense contractor. He 
testified that he has known Applicant for 25 years. He regards Applicant as very strong, 
independent, and trustworthy. He gave her a power of attorney and trusts her to 
manage his personal affairs and take care of his children when he is deployed. (Tr. 35-
40.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s two bankruptcies (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). The 
security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in her answer to the SOR, her testimony, and the 
documentary evidence submitted at the hearing establish three potentially disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) 
(“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant’s mandatory retirement from the 
Navy was a condition beyond her control. However, she did not prepare for it 
responsibly. She knew ahead of time that she would be mandatorily retired, but she 
purchased a home six months before her retirement, and did no job hunting until she 
found herself unemployed. Her testimony was vague about her unemployment from 
January to August 2010. She testified that she had saved up some money so that she 
could spend some time with her children, but she also testified that she was looking for 
a job during this eight-month period. This period of unemployment was beyond her 
control, but I am not convinced that she aggressively and diligently sought employment. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment from September 2012 to September 2013 was 
voluntary and was a major factor in creating the financial problems reflected in her first 
bankruptcy. Her unemployment after being laid off in September 2016 was a condition 
beyond her control, and she acted responsibly by accepting a job in November 2016 
that involved a lengthy commute, but she was already in financial distress. Furthermore, 
she presented no evidence of responsible conduct toward her creditors. She presented 
no evidence that she contacted her creditors, tried to refinance or modify her mortgage 
loan, or sought payment agreements with her unsecured creditors. She has made no 
payments on her second bankruptcy and now intends to dismiss it in the hope that she 
can sell her home at a profit sufficient to resolve all her delinquent debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully established. Financial counseling was required by 
Applicant’s bankruptcy petitions, but her financial problems are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. A Chapter 13 bankruptcy is a legal and often 
appropriate means of resolving financial problems, but Applicant has not established a 
track record of payments under a bankruptcy plan. To the contrary, her first bankruptcy 
was dismissed for failure to make the required payments, and she has made no 
payments on her second bankruptcy and intends to dismiss it in the hope that she can 
 
7 
 
generate sufficient funds from the sale of her home to resolve her delinquent debts. 
Even if Applicant is able to sell her home for more than the balance on her loan, I am 
not confident, based on her track record, that she will establish and adhere to payment 
plans to satisfy the $3,176 judgment for unpaid condominium fees and resolve more 
than $22,000 in unsecured debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. Applicant is financially naïve and undisciplined. She 
bought a home and committed herself to mortgage loan payments with no specific 
employment plans after retirement. Her testimony left me uncertain about her sense of 
urgency while job-hunting during the eight months after her retirement. She left the 
Navy with no firm financial plan and is still searching for a solution to her financial 
problems. She is trustworthy and reliable in her personal relationships, but she appears 
to lack good judgment in financial matters.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
