 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01559 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on June 24, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for January 30, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 3 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. The objection to GE 2 was sustained. Applicant testified, but he did not 
submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits 
 
2 
 
(AE) A through D and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2016. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 
1985 until he was honorably discharged in 1994. He attended college for a period 
without earning a degree. He is married with an adult child.1 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen and resident of another country. Applicant met her 
when he was stationed in her country while in the military. He was able to get a job in 
that country after his discharge from the military. He became a dual citizen of the United 
States and his wife’s country. In 2010, he went to another foreign country for a job 
opportunity, and his wife remained with their child in her home country. He returned to 
her country in 2011 where he was unemployed for about four months. He worked in a 
third country from 2011 until November 2015. He was unemployed from November 
2015 until July 2016 when he started his current job in the United States. His wife and 
child are still in his wife’s native country.2 
 
 Applicant did not have financial problems until his wife developed a medical 
condition in about 2009 that hindered her ability to work. A 2011 credit report did not 
show any derogatory accounts. His wife was diagnosed with a significant disease in 
2016, which completely prevented her from working. The combination of his periods of 
unemployment and his wife’s inability to work resulted in financial problems. Applicant 
also had his own medical problems in November 2016.3 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts and that Applicant did not file his federal 
income tax returns for tax years 2014 and 2015. Some of the debts are charged off and 
others are just past due. The delinquent amount of the debts is about $28,000. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.h and 1.i.  
 
 Applicant denied owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i. The debts are to 
the same collection company on behalf of two banks. Applicant did not recognize the 
collection company. The underlying accounts to the banks are listed on the 2011 credit 
report as current. The collection accounts are both reported by Experian on the August 
2016 combined credit reports. They are not listed on the subsequent Equifax credit 
reports. Applicant stated that he disputed the accounts online, but he did not provide 
copies of the disputes or the results.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18-21; GE 1; AE C.  
 
2 Tr. at 17-24, 30, 51; GE 1.  
 
3 Tr. at 17, 23, 35-36, 53-54.  
 
4 Tr. at 39-41; GE 3-6.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant initiated a $25 per month payment plan for the $418 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. As of February 2018, the balance had been reduced to $343. He has 
payment arrangements to pay the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b ($87 past due with a $383 
balance), but the first payment was to be made after the hearing date. He has not paid 
any of the other debts.5 
 
 Applicant filed federal income tax returns for 2011 through 2013 while he was 
working in a foreign country. He stated that he had to file the returns because he was 
working for a U.S. company. He worked in the same country for a non-U.S. entity from 
2013 to 2015. He did not file federal income tax returns for 2014 and 2015. He stated 
that he did not realize that he had to file the returns because he was working in a 
foreign country and he was not receiving any U.S. benefits. He did not file his 2016 
federal income tax return even though he was working in the United States. He stated 
that he did not think he had to file a return if he was due a refund.6  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He stated that he intends to pay 
his debts. He filed his 2016 federal income tax return post-hearing. He wrote that he has 
been informed that even though he does not owe any taxes for 2014 and 2015 when he 
was working overseas, he still must file his returns. He wrote that he was still in the 
process of getting all the paperwork, and he will file them as soon as he receives 
everything.7 
 
Applicant submitted a letter attesting to his professionalism, work ethic, and 
trustworthiness. The author wrote that Applicant “is always respectful of privacy, 
classified information, rules and restrictions.”8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 24-29, 52; GE 4-6.  
 
6 Tr. at 41-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. The SOR did not allege that Applicant did not file his 
2016 federal income tax return. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application 
of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
7 Tr. at 26-29, 53; AE A, B.  
 
8 AE D. 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including delinquent debts and 
unfiled tax returns for 2014 and 2015. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for about four months in 2011 and from November 
2015 until July 2016. His wife developed a medical condition in about 2009 that 
hindered her ability to work and a significant disease in 2016 that completely prevented 
her from working. Applicant also had his own medical problems in November 2016. 
Those events were beyond his control.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to file his income tax returns were not beyond his control. He 
has spent many years living and working outside the United States. His ignorance about 
his tax-filing responsibilities is baffling, particularly in this age of information where the 
answer is a click away on the Internet.9 In any event, he knew his unfiled returns were a 
concern at least by June 2017 when he submitted his response to the SOR. The returns 
have still not been filed.  
 
 Applicant’s repeated failure to fulfill his tax obligations suggests that he does not 
possess the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons granted 
access to classified information and that he has a problem with complying with well-
established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information. See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 
at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).  
 
  Applicant has paid a total of about $75 toward his delinquent debts. He denied 
owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i, but he did not provide documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute. The underlying accounts to the banks are listed 
on the 2011 credit report as current. I conclude Applicant is responsible for these two 
debts. He stated that he intends to pay his debts. Intentions to pay debts in the future 
are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013). 
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
                                                          
9 See https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/us-citizens-and-resident-aliens-abroad:  
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, the rules for filing income, estate, and gift tax 
returns and paying estimated tax are generally the same whether you are in the United 
States or abroad. Your worldwide income is subject to U.S. income tax, regardless of 
where you reside. 
 
7 
 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), 20(e), and 20(g) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable, but it is insufficient to mitigate the concerns raised by Applicant’s 
failure to file his tax returns and pay his debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service and favorable character evidence. 
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
