 
1 
                                         
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 17-00511 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant assaulted, battered, and injured his spouse in November 2000, August 
2009, and June 2014. On November 30, 2016, he intentionally lied to an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator when he falsely denied that he ever 
physically hurt or physically injured his spouse. Personal conduct security concerns are 
not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On January 8, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On April 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline E (personal conduct). 
 
On May 11, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR. HE 3. On August 9, 2017, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On October 5, 2017, the case was assigned 
to another administrative judge. On December 18, 2017, the case was transferred to me. 
On January 4, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing, setting the hearing for January 17, 2018. HE 1. Applicant waived his right to 
15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. Tr. 10. Applicant’s hearing 
was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant offered 
six exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 13-17; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-F. On January 24, 2018, DOHA 
received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. 
Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a, and he said 
he could not remember some of the other information alleged in the SOR. I have 
concluded that he denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.m. Tr. 12. He also provided extenuating 
and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old linguist. Tr. 19. He received an associate’s degree in 
Iraq. Tr. 19. In 1991, he married, and he has a 24-year-old son. Tr. 20. A government 
contractor has employed him in Iraq since 2015 to support the U.S. Army. Tr. 20. Three 
days after his hearing, he was scheduled to return to Iraq. Tr. 21. He has had multiple 
assignments as a linguist to Cuba, Europe, Texas, and Iraq. Tr. 38-39. He estimated that 
he had served about 7 to 10 years with U.S. forces in Iraq. Tr. 38. 
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In June 2000, the police went to Applicant’s residence because of a domestic 
disturbance complaint made by Applicant’s spouse. SOR ¶ 1.l; GE 3 at 2.  Applicant did 
not remember the June 2000 incident. Tr. 21-22. In July 2000, the police went to his 
residence due to a dispute between Applicant and his neighbor. SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant 
called the police because his neighbor threatened Applicant’s son. Tr. 22-23; GE 3 at 5, 
8. In July 2000, the police went to Applicant’s residence because of another verbal dispute 
between Applicant and his spouse. SOR ¶ 1.j. No one was arrested because of these 
three incidents. Tr. 23. 
 
In November 2000, the police arrested Applicant, and he was charged with 
domestic assault and battery. SOR ¶ 1.i; GE 3 at 14; Tr. 24. Applicant’s spouse said he 
assaulted and battered her at Applicant’s residence; she left her home and went to her 
mother’s home; and Applicant went to his mother-in-law’s resident and struck his spouse 
on her head two or three times. GE 3 at 10-16. Applicant’s mother-in-law called the police. 
Tr. 24. Applicant’s mother-in-law and spouse provided statements to the police about him 
striking her on the head at his mother-in-law’s residence. Applicant said he could not 
remember the incident. Tr. 25. He denied that he was arrested or convicted. Tr. 25. The 
report describes his arrest, and indicates the charge was dismissed. GE 3 at 14-16.   
 
In July 2006, the police went to Applicant’s residence because of a verbal domestic 
dispute. SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant said he did not remember the incident in July 2006. Tr. 25. 
In October 2006, the police interviewed Applicant because he was involved in an assault 
and battery over bicycle parking. SOR ¶ 1.g; GE 3 at 20. He denied he assaulted anyone 
over a dispute concerning a bicycle, and he said he could not remember assaulting 
anyone. Tr. 26. No one was arrested after the two incidents in 2006. Tr. 27.  
 
In February 2009, the police went to Applicant’s residence because of a verbal 
dispute between Applicant and his spouse. SOR ¶ 1.f. This dispute did not result in an 
arrest. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that in about August 2009, the police went to Applicant’s 
residence because of an allegation that Applicant assaulted his spouse with his cane. In 
September 2009, Applicant’s spouse made a statement to the police that Applicant beat 
her with his hand and cane. GE 3 at 27. He hit her head, and she started bleeding.  GE 
3 at 27. He choked her sufficiently to cause her to feel faint. GE 3 at 27. A warrant was 
issued for his arrest. GE 3 at 30. Applicant provided a handwritten statement indicating 
he argued with his spouse; she wanted to leave their residence; he tried to stop her; she 
called the police; and she scratched his chest, face, and neck. GE 3 at 28. The police 
report indicates Applicant was choking her, and she scratched him to get him to release 
her. GE 3 at 29. After he released her, he hit her on the head with his cane. GE 3 at 29. 
The police observed a bump on her forehead and a cut and a scratch on Applicant’s neck. 
GE 3 at 29. The next day she told police that he had been assaulting her for years; 
however, she did not want him to be charged. GE 3 at 29. Applicant said he did not 
remember threatening his spouse with a cane. Tr. 27. He remembered that he was under 
a lot of pain because of an injury he suffered in Iraq. Tr. 28, 40. He denied that he was 
 
4 
                                         
 
arrested or charged. Tr. 28. He did remember going to the police station and completing 
some paperwork. Tr. 28-29. He went to the police station because his spouse told him 
the police wanted to see him. Tr. 28. Applicant said he did not appear before a judge 
because of the incidents in 2009. Tr. 29. The record indicates he received a video 
arraignment by a magistrate; Applicant pleaded not guilty; and he was given a $1,000 
bond. GE 3 at 29. The case was closed because Applicant’s spouse did not want to 
support the prosecution. GE 3 at 30.   
 
In March 2010, the police went to Applicant’s residence due to a dispute between 
Applicant and his spouse. SOR ¶ 1.d. In April 2010, the police went to Applicant’s 
residence because of a 911 call “hang up.” SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant said he may remember 
the police coming to his residence. Tr. 29-30. As to the 911 “hang up,” Applicant said 
maybe a mentally handicapped child was in their house, and the child may have dialed 
911 and hung up the phone. Tr. 30; AE F. 
 
In June 2014, an assault and battery complaint was filed against Applicant after 
his spouse went to the hospital with injuries. SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s spouse said that she 
and Applicant argued; he forced her onto the bed; and he kicked her leg. GE 3 at 36. The 
police observed a small “quarter sized bruise on her left shin.” GE 3 at 36. She went to 
the hospital; she received an X-ray; and there was no fracture. GE 3 at 36. She said she 
reported the assault because she wanted to use it for the divorce and not for criminal 
charges. GE 3 at 37.3 In September 2014, the police went to Applicant’s residence after 
a 911 call “hang up.” SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant said he was a truck driver, and he was away 
from his residence in June 2014, when the assault and battery allegedly occurred. Tr. 30-
31. He did not present employment documentation to corroborate his alibi defense. He 
conceded he was at home at times in June 2014. Tr. 31. He said that he did not think he 
assaulted his spouse in June 2014. Tr. 32, 40. He denied knowing that his spouse went 
to the hospital to obtain treatment for her injury. Tr. 32.  
 
Applicant denied that he was convicted of any crime. Tr. 33. He said the last time 
he remembered the police coming to his residence was “I don’t remember to be honest 
with you. I don’t remember. 2000 maybe. I don’t remember. 2000. I don’t remember.” Tr. 
35. When asked if he ever assaulted his spouse, he said, “I don’t remember, but I don’t 
think so.” Tr. 35. He said no family member or friend had ever told him about being 
concerned relating to his treatment of his spouse. Tr. 35. He repeated that he did not 
remember hitting his spouse. Tr. 37. He has never received counseling for spouse abuse. 
Tr. 37-38.   
 
In Applicant’s January 8, 2015 SCA he denied that he had been arrested in the 
previous seven years; however, in the comments section he said “in 2009 disagreement 
with my wife I was [held] for about 5 hours and then case [was] dismiss[ed].” GE 1 at 44.  
 
                                            
3 On January 11, 2018, Applicant’s spouse signed a statement relating to the June 2014 incident 
indicating “I filed a complaint and misled the authorities while I made up the story. I have since then regretted 
my actions . . . .” AE F. She attributed the “hang up” of the 911 calls in 2010 and 2014 to a child she was 
babysitting that suffered from down syndrome. AE F.  
 
5 
                                         
 
On November 30, 2016, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant about the 
domestic violence allegations. SOR ¶ 1.m alleges Applicant falsely denied that he had 
ever assaulted his spouse. The OPM summary states, “Subject repeatedly denied that 
he ever physically hurt or physically injured his wife.” GE 2 at 23. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories, he did not provide any changes or corrections to the OPM summary. In 
response to the question about what he told the OPM investigator, Applicant said, “I told 
him, I don’t remember. In my knowledge, I don’t remember if I assault my wife or not, but 
in my knowledge, I don’t think so. I didn’t – my knowledge, I don’t think so, I assault my 
wife.” Tr. 33. He said he told the truth to the OPM investigator. Tr. 34. He considers 
himself to be an honest and trustworthy person. Tr. 34.   
 
Applicant denied remembering the arrest described in the OPM interview where 
he was arraigned. Tr. 40-41; GE 1 at 44. He did not consider this to be an arrest because 
it was done to calm the situation, and Applicant was in pain due to his injury in Iraq. Tr. 
42. 
 
Applicant agreed that kicking his spouse is a physical assault, and he could not 
remember whether he kicked his spouse. Tr. 49. He said, “maybe we’ll push each other, 
but not [hitting with his fist] or kicking my foot, no, sir. I don’t remember that.” Tr. 50. 
Similarly, he said he did not remember striking her with a cane on her head. Tr. 50.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Eight character letters from friends, colleagues, supervisors, and officers who 
served with him and certificates of appreciation laud his diligence, honesty, helpfulness, 
professionalism, loyalty to the United States, and contributions to the U.S. Government 
and national security. AE C; AE D. These documents support approval of his security 
clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
 
6 
                                         
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
 
7 
                                         
 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this 
case including: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . . ; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
  The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(d), and 16(e) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 
8 
                                         
 
Six personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable 
in this case:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
 
9 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies to the offenses in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 
and 1.l. The allegations in 2000, 2006, and 2009, involve verbal arguments and are 
relatively minor and not recent. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c relate to “hang ups” of 911 calls. The 
police did not arrest anyone for these nine incidents.   
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.i are not mitigated. Applicant physically assaulted 
(technically an assault and battery) his spouse by striking her on the head in November 
2000, by striking her on the head with his cane or his hand in August 2009, and by kicking 
her in June 2014. These assaults were reported to the police who noted physical injuries 
or were observed by a third party. The physical injuries and third party witness statement 
corroborate his spouse’s account of being assaulted and battered on those three 
occasions. Applicant’s spouse’s statement are close in time to the incidents and are more 
credible than her statement on January 11, 2018.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.m is not mitigated. The OPM summary states, “Subject repeatedly denied 
that he ever physically hurt or physically injured his wife.” GE 2 at 23. Applicant 
intentionally lied to the OPM investigator. He knows and remembers that he hit her on the 
head in November 2000 and in August 2009, and he kicked her leg in June 2014. 
Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline E are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old linguist. He received an associate’s degree in Iraq. In 
1991, he married. A government contractor has employed him in Iraq since 2015 to 
support the U.S. Army. He has had multiple assignments as a linguist to Cuba, Europe, 
Texas, and Iraq. He estimated that he had served about 7 to 10 years with U.S. forces in 
Iraq.  
 
10 
                                         
 
Eight character letters from Applicant’s friends, colleagues, supervisors, and 
officers who served with him and certificates of appreciation laud his diligence, honesty, 
helpfulness, professionalism, loyalty to the United States, and contributions to the U.S. 
Government and national security. These documents support approval of his security 
clearance. 
 
The evidence against mitigation of security concerns is more substantial. Applicant 
committed assaults and batteries on his spouse. He hit her on the head in November 
2000 and in August 2009, and he kicked her leg in June 2014. In his 2016 OPM interview, 
Applicant repeatedly and falsely denied that he ever physically hurt or injured his wife. 
His statement at his hearing about not remembering that he physically injured his spouse 
is not credible. His false statements were deliberate, improper, and made with intent to 
deceive. AG ¶ 15 indicates, “Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes.” Applicant’s falsifications raise serious security concerns. The protection of 
national security relies on applicants to self-report conduct that jeopardizes security, even 
when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career. Applicant cannot be trusted to 
disclose potentially derogatory information related to security issues. He did not establish 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant  
 
  
 
11 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
