 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01466 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 1, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on October 23, 
2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 7 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. He denied the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree 
in 1987 and 1992, respectively. He married in 1988 and divorced in 1995. He remarried 
in 2001 and has an eight-year-old child from the marriage. He has been employed by his 
present employer, a federal contractor, since 2009.1  
 
 Applicant admitted in his SOR answer that he has consumed alcohol, at times in 
excess and to the point of intoxication, from 2010 until at least July 2017. He admitted 
that in about April 2016, one or more employees at his work reported that he smelled of 
alcohol during work hours. He admitted that he was sent to his employer’s human 
resource department and was referred for alcohol treatment. He admitted he received 
inpatient treatment from approximately May 2016 to July 2016, and that he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. SOR ¶ 1.d alleged that following treatment, and despite 
his diagnosis, Applicant resumed regularly drinking, and consumed alcohol to the point 
of intoxication on multiple occasions. Applicant denied this allegation and his response 
said, “I deny. Never at work. Only during personal time.”2 
 
 On April 21, 2016, Applicant’s employer initiated an incident report. It stated that 
several employees reported smelling alcohol on Applicant’s breath in the office and during 
work hours. The office manager contacted Applicant who admitted having issues with 
alcohol due to ongoing family issues. The Human Resource Department contacted 
Applicant with suggested treatment options. The report reflected that Applicant started 
treatment on May 4, 2016. He was given time off by his employer with pay.3  
 
 Applicant was admitted to the treatment facility with a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence. He reported that after college his alcohol consumption increased and 
eventually developed into binge drinking. He admitted to the admissions counselor that 
he used alcohol daily for the past 20-30 years, which consisted of “about 6 glasses, at 
least 12 oz. each of Vodka.”4 His last use was the day he was admitted, and it consisted 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 4, 5.  
 
4 Item 7. 
 
3 
 
 
of two glasses of vodka and diet coke and a margarita. He was prescribed medicine for 
nausea and vomiting due to acute alcohol withdrawal, but also had chronic nausea for 
years that worsened due to stress. He told the admissions counselor that in the past two 
years his alcohol consumption increased after his boss became sick and he had to take 
on additional work responsibilities, and also when his father developed an illness and 
later died in December 2015. His admission diagnosis was “alcohol dependence with 
induced mood disorder; alcohol dependence with withdrawal; sedative abuse with 
induced mood disorder; generalized anxiety disorder; and depressive disorder, 
unspecified.”5 
 
 Applicant participated in the alcohol treatment program and was subsequently 
given a treatment plan. He was treated by qualified medical professionals, alcohol 
counselors, and was diagnosed by a medical doctor. Applicant worked diligently in a small 
group, obtained an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) sponsor who he met weekly for a face-
to-face meeting, and who called him daily. He completed an individualized Relapse 
Prevention Plan, identifying high-risk situations and triggers, along with specific plans and 
behavior to cope with each situation. He completed a Continuing Care Plan, which 
identified his willingness to attend regular recovery groups meetings, aftercare therapy, 
helping others with recovery, and becoming involved in the Twelve-Step Fellowship. 
Additional areas were identified and included in the plan. He committed to attending a 
local aftercare facility close to his home to begin in July 2016.  
 
 Applicant was discharged from the inpatient treatment facility on July 10, 2016. His 
discharge diagnosis was as follows: alcohol dependence with induced mood disorder; 
alcohol dependence with withdrawal, resolved; sedative abuse with induced mood 
disorder; generalized anxiety disorder; and depressive disorder, in early remission. He 
was discharged, after meeting all of the criteria for a successful discharge “with a 
“guarded prognosis.”6 In addition to noting that Applicant complete the above aftercare 
programs, the discharge document recommended that Applicant obtain a permanent 
sponsor upon returning home and participate in counseling near his home town.7 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on March 30, 2017. He 
told the government investigator that he participated in an inpatient alcohol treatment 
program for ten weeks, was seen by one of two different psychologists for counseling 
every two weeks, but he did not recall being diagnosed with a disorder or a prognosis. He 
told the investigator that he was not referred to any other counseling or mental health 
providers, but it was suggested by his inpatient treatment providers that he become a 
member of AA. He told the investigator that he attended AA for two to three months after 
he was discharged, but found the religious aspect of AA did not align with his personal 
beliefs, so he discontinued going. He did not resume alcohol consumption for three to 
four months after the treatment program. His intention upon completing treatment was 
                                                          
5 Item 7.  
 
6 Item 7 page 5. 
 
7 Item 7. 
 
4 
 
 
not to drink alcohol again, but in late 2016, he decided to have an alcoholic drink. He told 
the investigator that he did not know why he made that decision. Since late 2016, he 
admitted he consumes approximately two vodka and cola drinks each evening and has 
consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication on five or six occasions since about late 
2016. He drinks at home with his wife or alone. He told the investigator that he feels he 
is managing his use of alcohol appropriately. He has less pressure in his life now and has 
not felt the need to drink heavily to ease his stress.8  
 
 Applicant did not provide any updated information about his alcohol consumption 
since his March 2017 interview.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
                                                          
8 Item 5. 
 
5 
 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following to be potentially applicable:  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g. 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant’s coworkers reported that he smelled of alcohol while at work. Although 
there were no specific negative incidents reported, this information is sufficient to raise 
AG ¶ 22(b). He participated as an inpatient in a 10-week alcohol treatment program and 
was diagnosed by a duly qualified medical professional as alcohol dependent. There is 
sufficient evidence to conclude he failed to follow treatment advice after he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent and discharged from the treatment facility in July 2016. 
He abstained from alcohol consumption for three to four months after his discharge and 
then resumed consuming alcohol. In March 2017, he admitted to the government 
 
6 
 
 
investigator that he had resumed drinking alcohol nightly, and had been intoxicated five 
to six times since his resumption. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from alcohol consumption. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.  
 
 Applicant completed a 10-week inpatient treatment program. He was diagnosed 
as alcohol dependent with a guarded prognosis. He developed a Continuing Care Plan 
and a Relapse Prevention Plan. Applicant identified a willingness and commitment to 
become involved with a Twelve-Step Fellowship and obtain a permanent sponsor upon 
returning home and agreed that he would participate in counseling near his hometown. 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant complied with any of the aftercare plans. 
Shortly after being discharged from treatment, he resumed drinking alcohol and believes 
he can now better manage his alcohol consumption. He made this statement to the 
government investigator in March 2017 and acknowledged he had been intoxicated five 
to six times in the past five months. He continued to drink alcohol nightly. Although there 
have been no reported alcohol incidents, the evidence is sufficient to raise questions 
about Applicant’s failure to control impulses when it comes to consuming alcohol, which 
may lead to the exercise of questionable judgment and can raise questions about his 
reliability and trustworthiness. The Government is not required to wait for an incident to 
occur before raising questions about Applicant’s judgment that raises security concerns. 
Applicant failed to show that he has changed his conduct to reduce the risk associated 
with his continued alcohol consumption. Basically, after inpatient alcohol treatment, he 
resumed the conduct that was alleged as a security concern. In addition, he did not 
provide updated information about his current alcohol consumption, post-treatment 
progress, or compliance with aftercare. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He has a history of consuming alcohol to the point of 
intoxication. His coworkers reported smelling alcohol on him during work hours. He 
participated in a 10-week inpatient alcohol treatment program and was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent. Despite developing plans to abstain from alcohol consumption, 
several months after he was discharged from a treatment facility, he resumed drinking 
alcohol and at times to the point of intoxication. Applicant’s continued consumption of 
alcohol raises serious questions about his judgment and reliability. He did not provide 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption. The record 
evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline G, alcohol consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
