 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-02081 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant has unresolved financial problems. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on January 21, 2016. On July 11, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. The 
action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 3, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. On October 12, 2017, a complete copy of the File of Relevant 
 2
Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant and received by her on 
October 16, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s Items. Hence, 
Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not submit 
a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 The SOR alleges failure to pay fourteen debts, totaling $19,505 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.n.). In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted to all but two of the 
allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 39 years old, and since May 2016, has worked for her current employer 
as a customer service representative. She requires a position of trust for this employment. 
Applicant has been married to her husband since 2004, and they have two children. 
Applicant has attended some college. She served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 
January 2002 and April 2003, and received an honorable discharge. She was a stay-at-
home mom between July 2005 and February 2008 and July 2010 and September 2015. 
During these periods she was financially supported by her husband, who served on active 
duty in the U.S. military. She attributes her financial issues to her family’s status as a 
single-income household (Item 4).  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed she was in the process of resolving 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d. through 1.i., and 1.l. through 1.n. through a debt management and credit 
counseling service (Item 2). She did not provide documentation regarding this credit 
counseling, but asserted these debts would all be resolved by April 2019. Applicant 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c. because she disputed the services and her responsibility for 
the outstanding debts. Applicant claimed she was going to resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.j. and 1.k. 
with her September 2017 paychecks. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security application (Item 3) unless otherwise 
indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Administrative Guidelines (AG) ¶ 2 (a). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 4
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and her credit reports establish two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of 
not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the 
following potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  
  
I considered that Applicant is not required to be debt-free in order to qualify for a 
public trust position.2 However, she has not provided proof of payments or resolution 
toward her delinquent debt. Moreover, she failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
establish that she acted responsibly to address her debt. Thus, I cannot conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the Guideline F concerns at this time.  
 
 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (An applicant does not have to be debt-free in 
order to qualify for a public trust position. Rather, all that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant 
conduct” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan). 
 
 5
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant    
Subparagraph 1.b.-1.c.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d. – 1.n.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
