1 
 
          
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )         ISCR Case No. 17-02975 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
04/20/2018 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement and substance misuse), but the concern under Guideline E (personal 
conduct) is duplicative conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
on January 2, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on January 29, 2018, and had 30 days 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence, but he provided a response to the FORM. 
The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 3, is admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s response is also admitted. The case was assigned to me on April 
13, 2018.  
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He obtained his undergraduate degree in 1991 and 
received his master’s degree in 1998. He served in the U.S. Army on active duty from 
1991 to 2000, receiving an honorable discharge. He has been employed as a senior 
systems engineer by his current federal contractor since 2016.  He married in 1996 and 
has four children. Applicant has held a previous security clearance since August 2003.   
 
On March 8, 2016, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA),2 
and disclosed that he experimented with marijuana twice in September 2015. (Item 2). 
He noted that only medicinal marijuana use is legal in his state. He described the 
marijuana as cannabis oil (CBD). In his Answer to the SOR dated November 14, 2017, 
Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1. a-c. However, he provided a different 
explanation. He wrote that he used “cannibidiol (CBD) for the sole purpose of pain relief. 
He has chronic back pain and stated that CBD is the non-psychoactive component of 
marijuana. (Item 1) He elaborated that it upset his stomach and since he does not want 
to use opiates, he now goes to physical therapy. He also admitted that his use occurred 
during the time he held a clearance but at the same time said he did not have access to 
any classified information. He also admitted to the allegation that he intended to continue 
use in the future. In his Answer, he modified his response by indicating that that he had 
not ruled out the use of CBD if it would prove efficacious to his pain if prescribed. He then 
stated that he has not used marijuana since September 2015 and prefers physical 
therapy. (Item 1)  
 
Applicant also admitted the allegation under Guideline E (personal conduct) in 
SOR ¶ 2.a. with explanations. He stated that he “was not read onto any classified program 
and did not have access to any classified information.”  He again stated that he has not 
used marijuana since 2015. 
 
In his interview, dated 2017, Applicant reiterated that he used marijuana offered 
by a friend to treat his pain.  It made him sick and did not help, so he decided not to use 
marijuana again. He had researched CBD and found that he would try that if prescribed 
by a physician and legal in his state.  He did not report it to his FSO. (Item 3) 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant acknowledged that marijuana is a 
controlled substance but he was not aware that CBD was included in that definition.  He 
stated he was using it for therapeutic reasons. He stated that he had a clearance but at 
the time did not have access to classified information.  He further explained that he did 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 8, 2016 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 2) and his summary of clearance interview by a background investigator 
dated 2017 (Item 3).  
 
2 Item 2.  
 
3 
 
not mean to imply he would use marijuana in the future, but that he would consider CBD 
if it was declassified from a Schedule 1 drug. (Response to FORM)  
 
In addition, Applicant argued that the whole-person concept was not considered in 
his case.  He elaborated that he was cooperative with the investigators and has held 
multiple levels of security clearances. He stated that he never had a security incident. He 
included a JPAS investigations summary with his response to the FORM. The purpose of 
the adjudicative summary is to show that he has a favorable adjudicative history. 
 
 
  Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017.3 Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
                                                          
3 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
4 
 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
      Analysis  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
          The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG  
¶ 24:   
 
 The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
          The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
 ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
5 
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse.  
 
                 Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. The latest incident 
was in September 2015. He stated that he may use CBD in the future if it was not a 
Schedule 1 drug. He stated that he had a security clearance but at the time had no access 
to classified information. He claimed it was for therapeutic use, but he provided no 
evidence of such. He stated that he now goes to physical therapy for his back pain. All of 
the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
            AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
           (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
           (b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
      (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
     (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
     (3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
                                                    
              Applicant admits he used marijuana in September 2015 on two occasions. He 
stated that he did not know that a derivative CBD was illegal. It is not clear what he meant 
by that statement. He had no information providing a medical therapeutic reason or a 
prescription. And even if he did, federal law does not permit the use of marijuana.  He 
stated that it made him sick and thus, he did not use it anymore, but chose physical 
therapy. He had a security clearance but said he did not have access to classified 
information at the time. He fully disclosed the incidents during his investigative interview. 
He said he might use again, but also said that he will pledge to abstain from ever using it 
again.  He has not provided evidence that would allow mitigation under any of the 
6 
 
mitigating conditions at this time. His marijuana use is too recent, and he seemed 
uncertain as to future use.   Applicant knew that he held a security clearance and the 
impact that use of an illegal drug would have on such a clearance. He did not provide any 
letter of intent to abstain in the future. It is insufficient to mitigate the illegal drug use, 
particularly while possessing a security clearance. To accept Applicant’s assertion that 
he was unaware marijuana use was illegal stretches credibility. Although some states 
have decided to legalize marijuana use for medical use, it is still illegal under Federal law 
in all circumstances. (Internal Reform and Terror Protection Act (IRTPA) as amended, 50 
U.S.C. 3343 (2008). Applicant’s security clearance falls under federal authority. His 
conduct continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 26(b) is partially applicable.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure 
to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following normally will result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified information. This includes but is not 
limited to, consideration of: 
 
   (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client  
             confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized              
release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
 
   (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
   (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; . . . . 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
7 
 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; and 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while 
legal there, is illegal in the United States. 
 
 Applicant admitted the use of marijuana in 2015, but parsed his language as to 
CBD and a difference between that and marijuana. His response to the FORM showed 
no acknowledgement that he did anything to jeopardize his security clearance. He stated 
that at the time he had no access to classified information.  During his interview, he spoke 
about the use of the marijuana and disclosed an “experimentation” on his SCA. However, 
I have doubts as to his judgment and reliability and do not find that he has mitigated the 
personal conduct concerns with his varying responses. He was cooperative but evasive 
in his varying answers and response to FORM. The allegations under personal conduct 
are the same as the ones alleged under drug or substance abuse. AGs 16 d (3) and 16 
e (1) apply.  
 
    Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could potent ia l l y mitigate security concerns 
include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
My analysis above under adjudicative guideline H is the same under this 
adjudicative guideline E, and is herein incorporated by reference. Applicant admitted to 
his use of marijuana while holding a security clearance.  He has not mitigated the drug 
usage while holding a security clearance under Guideline H. SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges 
under the personal conduct guideline the same conduct alleged under the drug 
8 
 
involvement guideline. All of Applicant’s conduct causing a security concern in SOR ¶ 2.a 
is explicitly covered under Guideline H, and that conduct is sufficient to warrant revocation 
of his security clearance under Guideline H. Applicant’s involvement with marijuana 
affects his professional and community standing. However, this conduct does not create 
a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because security officials are aware 
of it.  Guidelines H and E address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, 
and reliability. Guideline E concerns in SOR 2.a constitute a duplication of the concerns 
under Guideline H. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has worked for a federal contractor 
directly supporting DOD’s mission and he held a security clearance for a number of years. 
He served in the U.S, Army on active duty and received an honorable discharge. He never 
acknowledged poor judgment for the use of marijuana in 2015, while holding a security 
clearance. He believed that his whole-person was not considered given his many years 
of holding a security clearance and no security incidents. However, his answer and 
response to FORM are not credible despite the fact that he stated he used it for 
therapeutic reasons and that his previous history of holding a security clearance should 
mitigate any concerns.   
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has acknowledged the 
egregiousness of his drug involvement while holding a security clearance. He has not met 
his burden of persuasion under Guideline H. The record evidence leaves me with serious 
9 
 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline  H.  Guideline E conduct is duplicated.  
 
    Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
        
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c:                 Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:                   For Applicant  
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Noreen A. Lynch 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
