1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 17-03975 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information in a public trust position is 
denied. 
 Statement of the Case 
On December 12, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR on December 27, 2017, and elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 24, 
2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
(NOH) on March 22, 2018, scheduling the hearing on April 10, 2018. However, 
04/30/2018
 
2 
 
 
Applicant did not receive either the physical copy or e-mail copy of the NOH because 
she moved recently. (Tr. 12) So, Applicant was contacted telephonically and agreed to 
have her hearing on April 11, 2018. (Tr. 15) Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 
wait 15 days from the NOH to the date of her hearing. (Tr. 13) Also, since Department 
Counsel’s luggage was sidetracked in route to the hearing, he did not have the 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) for the hearing. I left the record open until April 25, 2018 for 
department counsel to mail the GE’s to Applicant and give her an opportunity to object. 
She had no objections and submitted post-hearing documents during this period.1 I 
conducted the hearing on April 11, 2018. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on April 20, 2018. 
  
                    .    
   Applicant is 25 years old. She graduated from high school in 2010. She was 
never married, but has a two-year old daughter. Applicant lives with the child’s father, 
who is her fiancé. Applicant took some college courses, and she intends to return to 
college in the future to pursue a nursing degree. (Tr.19) She has been working in a 
position of trust at a health care corporation for one year, with no problems. (Tr. 11) 
Applicant testified that she was attending college full-time when she incurred three of 
the debts from rental arrearages. She was working, oftentimes at two jobs; she was 18-
19 years old; and she conceded her financial mismanagement at that time in her life. 
(Tr. 22) She was laid-off from her job as certified nursing assistant (CNA) in December 
2010 and could not make rental payments. (Tr. 23)  
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the alleged delinquent debts 
placed for collections at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.d, and the charged-off debt at SOR ¶ 
1.c. She also stated she was looking for a second job to pay off these debts. She 
denied the medical debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e and disputed it because she had health 
insurance, which should have covered it. After she disputed it, this debt was removed 
from her credit report. (GE 4) She testified that the delinquencies alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b and 1.d, resulted from her inability to pay her rent when she was in college from 
2010 to 2012. (Tr. 24-25) She provided a transcript of her college courses. She did not 
obtain a degree. (AE A) Her credit reports reflect that these debts first became 
delinquent in 2012. (GE 2, 3, 4) Applicant provided post-hearing documents showing 
that she reached out to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d and established a payment plan, 
making an initial payment of $107 toward that $982 debt. (AE B) Her five delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR total just over $13,000.  
 
Applicant testified that the charged-off debt for $2,725 at SOR ¶ 1.c was for a 
bank-credit card that she opened in 2015. (Tr. 27) She and her live-in fiancé used it to 
pay living expenses. When he lost his job in 2015, and she became pregnant, they 
could not keep up with the payments on this credit card. She had to give up her CNA 
job due to the pregnancy. (Tr. 27-28) Applicant stated her intent to pay all of her 
delinquent debts. (Tr. 29) Applicant testified that she is current on payments of $400 per 
month on $52,000 in student loans, which are outstanding. (Tr. 31) She is looking for a 
                                                          
1 E-mail from Applicant to Department Counsel dated April 23, 2018 stating that she had no objection.  
 
 
3 
 
 
second job to help with expenses, and she is exploring an income-based repayment 
plan for her student loans.4 
 
Applicant claims to have disputed the debt at SOR ¶ 1.e for $172. The record 
was left open for two weeks specifically so that she could produce some documentary 
evidence of this dispute, along with a budget and other substantiation of any 
correspondence with creditors. (Tr. 29-30, 43) She did not provide the requested 
documents. She testified that she did have some semblance of a budget, and usually 
had approximately $300 left over each month, after paying expenses. (Tr. 43) She had 
no financial counseling. (Tr. 38) Applicant presently earns $34,000 per year, and her 
fiancé earns $30,000. She stated that now that they have two incomes, she plans to 
start a repayment plan with her creditors and buy a home. (Tr. 46) She provided no 
evidence of any correspondence or repayment plans with her creditors.             
 
          Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
4 The SOR does not allege delinquencies on the student loans.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding information. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the government’s exhibits support the following AG ¶ 
19 disqualifying conditions:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
 
5 
 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admitted four of the five delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling 
approximately $13,000. She provided a post-hearing document to show a payment 
pursuant to a plan on SOR ¶ 1.d. These longstanding debts are evidenced by her most 
recent credit bureau report. She has endured periods of unemployment. In her Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant claimed that she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e (medical) but 
provided no evidence. Applicant produced no documents to show that she 
corresponded with, or established repayment plans with the bank in SOR ¶ 1.c, or the 
creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. There is sufficient evidence to support the application 
of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;   
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant stated that she intended to pay her debts. Intentions to pay debts in the 
future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 23, 2013). She testified 
credibly that she disputed the $172 medical debt at SOR ¶ 1.e, and it was removed 
from her credit report. Otherwise, she produced no documentation to show payments or 
progress on any of her delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The delinquencies alleged 
in the SOR are longstanding and ongoing. Her periods of unemployment were 
 
6 
 
 
conditions beyond Applicant’s control, but short-lived. She has not demonstrated that 
she acted responsibly under the circumstances. She provided no evidence of financial 
counseling, good-faith efforts to repay creditors, or a budget to show that her financial 
problems have been resolved and are under control. None of the mitigating conditions 
enumerated above apply except for ¶ 20 (e) in connection with SOR ¶ 1.e.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Applicant is the mother of a two-year old child. She 
has endured brief periods of unemployment and struggled through a downturn in the 
economy.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a trustworthiness concern. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 1. a – 1.d:                       Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:                                   For Applicant  
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a  public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
