KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant argues the Judge did not apply all of the mitigating conditions and whole-
person factors.  However, he failed to identify any specific condition or factor that the Judge did
not consider or apply.  This assignment of error fails for lack of specificity. An applicant must
set forth an assignment of error with sufficient specificity to permit review on appeal. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00599.a1
DATE: 04/24/2018
DATE: April 24, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00599
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April  3, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 31, 2018, after
the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Arthur E.
Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The SOR alleged that Applicant used different illegal drugs with varying frequency over
certain periods, i.e., marijuana from 2002 to 2015; ecstasy and cocaine from 2009 to 2015; LSD
from 2009 to 2013; and psilocybin mushrooms from 2008 to 2013.  It also alleged that he purchased
those drugs during certain periods.  In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the SOR
allegations with an explanation.   
In concluding that Applicant failed to mitigate the alleged security concerns, the Judge
emphasized two factors.  The first factor involved the nature and recency of Applicant’s drug
involvement.  Although Applicant has been drug-free since October 2015, he used an assortment
of drugs over a decade and acquired some of those substances over the “dark web.”  Under these
circumstances, the Judge concluded that less than three years of abstinence was insufficient to
demonstrate a firm commitment to being drug-free.  The second factor involved Applicant’s
continued socialization with individuals with whom he once used illegal drugs.  Although these
encounters are now limited due to him moving to a new location, he failed to extricate himself from
these individuals when they used controlled substances in his presence.  “Such circumstances not
only present temptation, but, more importantly, demonstrate poor judgment.”  Decision at 6.  
The Judge found that Applicant’s employer has a policy against on-duty and off-duty drug
use, conducts random drug tests, and Applicant was subject only once to drug testing when he 
initially applied for his job.  In the appeal brief, Applicant claimed “the record evidence shows that
the Administrative Judge made presumptions about the drug policy at [his] place of work, without
evidence to support this assumption.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  At the hearing, Applicant testified as
follows:
[Department Counsel]:  Does [your employer] have a drug policy?
[Applicant]:  Yes, sir.
[Department Counsel]:  What is it?
[Applicant]:  That - - I shall abstain from all illegal drugs.  I don’t --.
[Department Counsel]:  Both on and off duty, in other words --?
[Applicant]:  Yes, sir.
[Department Counsel]:  Okay.
[Applicant]:  At all times.
[Department Counsel]:  Did they -- do they drug test?
[Applicant]:  They drug tested me when I applied for the job and was initially
accepted, but I haven’t been tested subsequent to that although I know it is policy
that I can be tested at any time.1
The Judge’s findings about the employer’s drug policy and drug testing are based upon substantial
evidence or constitute reasonable inferences or conclusions that could be drawn from the evidence. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant argues the Judge did not apply all of the mitigating conditions and whole-person
factors.  However, he failed to identify any specific condition or factor that the Judge did not
consider or apply.2  This assignment of error fails for lack of specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
ISCR Case No. 14-05920 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016) for the proposition that an applicant must set
forth an assignment of error with sufficient specificity to permit review on appeal. 
Applicant also contends the Judge did not consider all of the evidence in the record and mis-
weighed the evidence.  He argues he mitigated the alleged security concerns.  In his arguments, he
emphasizes that the amount of time that has passed since he last used illegal drugs, his voluntary
reporting of his drug involvement, his signed statement of intent, and his actions to avoid illegal
drugs.  The Judge, however, made findings about those matters.  Applicant’s arguments are neither
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01717 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2017).   We give due
consideration to the Hearing Office cases that Applicant has cited, but they are neither binding
precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id.  Additionally,
we find no basis for concluding the Judge erred in his whole-person analysis.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
1 Tr. at 26.
2 In the decision, the Judge specifically addressed the two mitigating conditions (Directive, Encl. 2, App. A
¶ 26(a) and 26(b)) that Applicant raised in his appeal brief.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale             
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
