1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 17-00768 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had not filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 
2015 or his state income tax returns for tax years 2002 through 2015 by June 2017. He 
retained a professional tax service to assist him in preparing his delinquent returns in June 
2017, but they have not yet been filed. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable to 
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance 
eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On June 14, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On July 24, 2017, the Government submitted a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of six exhibits (Items 1-6). DOHA forwarded a copy 
of the FORM to Applicant and instructed him to respond within 30 days of receipt. 
Applicant received the FORM on September 8, 2017. There is no indication that he 
responded to the FORM. On December 15, 2017, I was assigned the case to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel submitted as Item 5 a summary of a subject interview of 
Applicant conducted on August 11, 2016.2 The summary was part of the DOD Report of 
Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s case. Under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive, a DOD personnel 
background report of investigation may be received in evidence and considered with an 
authenticating witness, provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of 
Evidence. The interview summary did not bear the authentication required for admissibility 
under ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
 In ISCR Case No. 16-03126 decided on January 24, 2018, the Appeal Board held 
that it was not error for an administrative judge to admit and consider a summary of 
personal subject interview where the applicant was placed on notice of her opportunity to 
object to consideration of the summary; the applicant filed no objection to it; and there is no 
indication that the summary contained inaccurate information. In this case, Applicant was 
provided a copy of the FORM and advised of his opportunity to submit objections or 
material that he wanted the administrative judge to consider. In a footnote, the FORM 
advised Applicant of the following: 
 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) (Item 4) [sic] is being provided to the 
Administrative Judge for consideration as part of the record evidence in this 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
 
2 Also included in Item 5 are investigator reports of subsequent contacts with Applicant: by telephone on 
October 26, 2016, and in person on December 1, 2016. The FORM does not identify these contacts as items 
for inclusion in the record so I have not considered them. 
3 
 
case. In your response to this File of Relevant Material (FORM), you can 
comment on whether the PSI summary accurately reflects the information 
you provided to the authorized OPM investigator(s) and you can make any 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates necessary to make the 
summary clear and accurate. Alternatively, you can object on the ground that 
the report is unauthenticated by a Government witness and the document 
may not be considered as evidence. If no objections are raised in your 
response to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, the 
Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any objections to 
the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as evidence 
in your case. 
 
 Concerning whether Applicant understood the meaning of authentication or the legal 
consequences of waiver, Applicant’s pro se status does not confer any due process rights 
or protections beyond those afforded him if he was represented by legal counsel. He was 
advised in ¶ E3.1.4 of the Directive that he may request a hearing. In ¶ E3.1.15, he was 
advised that he is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, or mitigate facts 
admitted by him or proven by Department Counsel and that he has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision. While the Directive does not 
specifically provide for a waiver of the authentication requirement, Applicant was placed on 
sufficient notice of his opportunity to object to the admissibility of the interview summary, to 
comment on the interview summary, and to make any corrections, deletions, or updates to 
the information in the report. 
 
Applicant is a high school graduate, who served in the United States military for 13.5 
years and has been employed as a field engineer for a succession of defense contractors 
since April 2001. He can reasonably be held to have understood the footnote, and he did 
not respond to the FORM. In the absence of any objections or indication that the interview 
summary contains inaccurate information, I accepted Item 5 in the record, subject to issues 
of relevance and materiality in light of the entire record. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant had failed to timely file his federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2010 through 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and his state income tax returns for 
tax years 2002 through 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Item 1.) Applicant admitted the allegations but 
explained that he has worked abroad since April 2001 as a civilian contractor and qualified 
for the Foreign Earned Income Tax Exclusion, and that his income has been consistently 
under the income limit set by the exclusion. Yet, he also indicated that his failure to timely 
file tax returns had more to do with his “personal laziness and procrastination and the 
knowledge that filing would cause a refund of the taxes that had been withheld.” (Item 2.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s response to the SOR as 
Item 2, I make the following findings of fact. 
4 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old high school graduate who has worked abroad as a field 
engineer for a succession of defense contractors since April 2001. He served honorably in 
the U.S. military from September 1987 to February 2001. He has held a Top Secret 
security clearance since 1988. (Items 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant was married from April 1992 to May 2000. At the time of their divorce, he 
and his spouse were residing in state X, where he was stationed with the U.S. military. 
Applicant rented an apartment in state X from June 2000 to April 2001, when he moved 
abroad for his employment in the defense industry. (Item 4.) 
 
 To renew his security clearance eligibility, Applicant completed and certified to the 
accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on October 29, 2010. 
In response to a financial record inquiry concerning any failure in the last seven years to 
pay federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax return when required by law or ordinance, 
Applicant indicated that he had received refunds totaling $30,000 from the IRS after he 
filed his delinquent tax returns for tax years 2002 through 2009, and he expected to receive 
additional refunds. He explained in part: 
 
I failed to file Federal Income Tax Returns for Tax years 2002-2009 due to 
my misunderstanding of my tax status. Since I have become aware of my 
error, I have contacted a tax attorney (listed as the agency handling the 
case) and his company has filed my delinquent returns with the IRS. Since 
the filing of my returns, I have received three checks from the IRS (each 
covering an individual year, where taxes were deducted from my paycheck, 
that due to my subsequent tax filings, were found to be over-pays), and 
expect to receive more. 
 
Applicant gave a date of April 2010 for when his federal tax issues had been resolved. 
Regarding his state income taxes, Applicant explained that state X had garnished his 
wages to recover $3,000 in state-assessed income taxes. The IRS filed substitute returns, 
and state X taxed him based on the “incorrect information contained in the ‘absentia’ 
returns,” which failed to account for his income’s “tax-free” status. (Item 4.) Applicant’s Top 
Secret clearance eligibility was renewed in May 2011 on the basis that he had resolved his 
outstanding tax issues and was current. (Item 6.) 
 
 On an SF 86 completed on August 3, 2016, to renew his security clearance 
eligibility, Applicant responded affirmatively to an inquiry concerning any failure to file 
returns or pay federal, state, or other taxes in the last seven years. Applicant disclosed that 
he had failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for taxes years 2002 through 
2015. The IRS filed income tax returns for him for tax years 2002 through 2009. After he 
filed his delinquent returns for tax years 2002 through 2009, he received refunds because 
all of income is “Tax-free due to the Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.” Applicant 
explained that he was in the process of contacting the same tax attorney who assisted him 
in filing those returns for the purpose of filing his income tax returns for tax years 2010 
through 2015. He reiterated that all of his income was tax free because of the foreign 
earned income exclusion. Concerning his state income tax filings, Applicant disclosed that 
5 
 
he had not filed his state X returns for tax years 2002 through 2015. He indicated that he 
was seeking a certified tax attorney in state X to handle the filing of all of his delinquent 
state X tax returns. He estimated that he overpaid his state X income taxes for 2002 
through 2015 by $10,000. (Item 3.) 
 
 On August 11, 2016, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Concerning his income tax issues, Applicant 
related that he filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2002 through 2009 but not 
for tax years 2010 through 2015 because of “laziness.” Applicant expressed an intention to 
file his federal income tax returns for those tax years in September 2016. Regarding his 
state income taxes, Applicant explained that he has to pay taxes to state X because it was 
his last known residence in the United States before going abroad for work in 2001. He had 
not yet filed his state X income tax returns for tax years 2002 through 2015, but he 
expressed a plan to file them in September 2016. He expected state tax refunds of 
approximately $10,000. He knew of no penalties having been assessed against him by the 
IRS or state X because of his failure to file his returns. He asserted that he would try to 
timely file his tax returns in the future. (Item 5.) 
 
 On May 7, 2017, the DOD CAF issued a SOR to Applicant because of his failure to 
file federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2015 and state X income tax 
returns for tax years 2002 through 2015. After Applicant received the SOR, he contacted a 
certified accounting firm in state X to assist him with the preparation of his delinquent 
returns. On June 13, 2017, the accounting firm advised Applicant that it would prepare his 
federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2016. Additionally, because 
Applicant has been assigned overseas for work, the accounting firm would determine his 
state residency status and prepare state tax returns for 2010 through 2016 for his state of 
residence. The accounting firm advised Applicant that it would advise him of any filing 
requirements for other tax years if it was determined that he should have filed returns. 
Applicant was informed that it was his responsibility to inform the firm of his state-filing 
obligations and his duty to file his federal and state tax returns. About his claim of 
entitlement to the Foreign Earned Income Exclusion, Applicant was advised that, although 
under the law the Foreign Earned Income Exclusion remains valid unless revoked, the IRS 
could find that he revoked the election because of his failure to file a tax return when 
required. Applicant engaged the services of the accounting firm at an hourly fee ranging 
from $105 to $275 depending on the staff time required to prepare his returns. The 
accounting firm estimated that it would cost him about $600 for each tax year. (Item 2.) 
 
 On July 14, 2017, Applicant admitted in response to the SOR that he had not yet 
filed his delinquent federal and state X income tax returns. He indicated that his failure to 
file his tax returns “has more to do with [his] personal laziness and procrastination and the 
knowledge that filing would cause a refund of the taxes that had been withheld,” which he 
acknowledged were not valid reasons for his noncompliance with his tax-filing obligations. 
Applicant provided a copy of his retainer agreement for the accounting firm as evidence 
that he was working on resolving his tax issues. (Item 2.) Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM, so the current status of his tax filings is not in evidence. 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
7 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result 
from criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of noncompliance with his tax-filing obligations starting 
with tax year 2002. After the IRS filed returns for him that were inaccurate, he filed his 
delinquent federal returns for tax years 2002 through 2009 with the assistance of a tax 
attorney, and he received tax refunds. Applicant made no effort to file his delinquent state 
X income tax returns for those tax years, however, and the state garnished his wages 
based on the substitute returns filed by the IRS. After asserting in October 2010 that he 
had misunderstood his tax status because of the foreign earned income exclusion, but also 
that he was aware of his error in that regard, he made no attempt to file his federal and 
state X income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2015 by May 2017. 
 
 U.S. tax law provides that citizens and U.S. resident aliens living abroad are taxed 
on their worldwide income. However, they may qualify under the foreign earned income tax 
exclusion to exclude from taxation an amount of their foreign earnings adjusted annually 
for inflation. The maximum foreign earned income credit was $92,900 for 2011, $95,100 for 
2012, $97,600 for 2013, $99,200 for 2014, and $100,800 for 2015. Applicant likely qualified 
for the foreign earned income exclusion for all of the tax years at issue. According to IRS 
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad, to claim the 
foreign income exclusion, his tax home must be in a foreign country;3 he must have foreign 
earned income; and as a U.S. citizen, he must be a bona fide resident of a foreign country 
for an uninterrupted period that includes an entire tax year, or physically present in a 
foreign country or countries for at least 330 full days during 12 consecutive months. There 
is no evidence that Applicant had any earned income in, or resided in the United States 
since April 2001. Even if Applicant could validly claim the foreign earned income tax 
exclusion, he was still required to file income tax returns if his gross income from worldwide 
sources as a single taxpayer was at least $9,350 in 2010, $9,500 in 2011, $9,750 in 2012, 
$10,000 in 2013, $10,150 in 2014, and $10,300 in 2015.4 Applicant indicated, with no 
                                                 
3 Tax home is defined as the general area of one’s main place of business, employment, or post of duty, 
regardless of family home. To meet the bona fide residence of physical presence test, the person must live in 
or be present in a foreign country, which includes any territory under the sovereignty of a government other 
than that of the United States. It does not include U.S. possessions. See IRS Publication 54. 
 
4 The tax filing thresholds are available at www.irs.gov and are set forth in IRS Publication 17 for each of the 
tax years. 
 
8 
 
evidence to the contrary, that his income has been under the annual income threshold of 
the foreign earned income tax exclusion. However, there is no information that his income 
has been less than the threshold required for filing a return. The IRS would not have filed 
substitute returns for him if he had not met the income threshold for filing. 
 
 According to state X’s department of revenue, a state X resident reporting U.S. 
federal taxable income must continue to file state X returns as a full-year resident, no 
matter how long he is out of the United States. All foreign income that is exempt for federal 
purposes is also exempt for state X purposes. Continued state X residency is presumed if 
the individual has not severed all connections to state X. For example, an individual who 
still carries a state X driver’s license, votes in state X by absentee ballot, or returns to state 
X is presumed to be a state X resident. Individuals may abandon state X domicile and 
become permanent residents of a foreign country and in that case no longer be required to 
file state X income tax returns. However, the burden of proving abandonment of state X 
residency is on the individual.5 There is no evidence that Applicant has severed domicile in 
state X. Applicant does not dispute the requirement to file federal or state X returns for the 
tax years at issue. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax as required,” is established. 
 
 Applicant has the burden of presenting evidence of explanation, extenuation, or 
mitigation to overcome the security concerns raised by his years of noncompliance with his 
tax-filing obligations. The security concerns are potentially mitigated under one or more of 
the following conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
                                                 
5 See www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/defualt/files/Income28.pdf. 
9 
 
 Applicant’s tax issues are too recent for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant 
admitted in June 2017 that he had not yet filed his delinquent federal and state tax returns 
for the tax years alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(b) has not been shown to apply. Applicant 
may have believed before 2010 that he was not required to file federal or state X income 
tax returns while living and working abroad for a U.S. employer and earning less than the 
foreign earned income exclusion. However, he knew in or before April 2010 that he was 
required to file federal and state X income tax returns irrespective of whether he was owed 
refunds because of the foreign earned income tax exclusion. He did not act responsibly by 
not filing timely federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2015 due, 
in part, to “personal laziness and procrastination.”  
 
 Applicant is credited with retaining the services of a tax professional in June 2017 to 
assist him in preparing his delinquent income tax returns. However, his belated effort at 
rectification appears to have been prompted by the SOR and the potential loss of his 
security clearance eligibility. There is no evidence that any of his delinquent income tax 
returns had been filed as of October 2017. There are no clear indications that his tax 
issues are being resolved or are under control or that he is in compliance with his tax 
obligations. Neither AG ¶ 20(c) nor AG ¶ 20(g) are satisfied. 
 
 The Appeal Board has long held that an applicant who fails to file timely tax returns 
does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons 
granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00221 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 29, 2016), citing ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014). 
Applicant’s security clearance was renewed in May 2011 after he had reportedly resolved 
his federal income tax-filing issues for tax years 2002 through 2009. By then, Applicant 
knew that he had an obligation to file his tax returns on time. His failure to file tax returns 
for tax years 2010 through 2015 engenders considerable doubts about whether he can be 
trusted to comply with his tax-filing obligations going forward. The financial considerations 
security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d). The analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The security clearance adjudication is not intended to punish an applicant for past 
mistakes or shortcomings. Rather, it involves an evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness in light of the security guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). At the same time, Applicant can be expected 
to comply with such an important obligation as filing tax returns. Applicant admitted that the 
reasons given for his noncompliance (“[his] personal laziness and procrastination and the 
knowledge that filing would cause a refund of taxes that had been withheld”) were not valid 
reasons. 
10 
 
 The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that the government need not wait until an 
applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before denying or revoking 
security clearance eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, 
citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well settled that once a 
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). Based on the evidence before me, I am unable to 
conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security 
clearance eligibility for Applicant at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
