 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-08394 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel, &  
John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Holly Emrick Svetz, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding personal conduct. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2002, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On December 31, 2008, he submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing version of a Security Clearance 
Application (e-QIP).2 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on July 13, 2010.3 On September 21, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
                                                          
1
 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated October 25, 2002. 
 
2
 Government Exhibit 2 (e-QIP), dated December 31, 2008. 
 
3
 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated July 13, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline E (personal conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 27, 2011. In a sworn 
statement, dated October 17, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On February 6, 2012, the 
Government amended the SOR, and on February 24, 2012, Applicant responded to the 
amended SOR allegations. On June 22, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed. The case was initially assigned to another 
administrative judge on June 29, 2012, but reassigned to me on July 2, 2012. A Notice 
of Hearing was issued on July 18, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
August 9, 2012.  
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
 After Applicant rested his case, the Government called a “rebuttal” witness to 
provide testimony “not directly related to an SOR allegation, but it was directly related to 
Applicant’s credibility.”4 That information was essentially that: (1) Applicant lied to the 
witness and other employees about Applicant’s reasons for making plans to transfer the 
employer’s contracts to Applicant’s company; (2) the reasons stated by Applicant about 
the employer’s lack of support and cooperation were false; (3) Applicant’s testimony 
regarding the preparation of DoD requirements related to facility security clearances 
and the guidance he purportedly received from the Defense Security Service (DSS) 
Industrial Security Representative (IS Rep.) was not credible; (4) Applicant’s testimony 
regarding a particular contract’s classification status was false; and (5) Applicant’s 
conduct during the period preceding Applicant’s termination was unethical.5  
 
Upon the conclusion of the direct presentation, I questioned the Department 
Counsel regarding the propriety of calling the witness as a rebuttal witness rather than 
as a witness in the Government’s case-in-chief.6 I asked for briefs on the issue and 
offered Applicant’s counsel the opportunity to object to the testimony or to cross-
                                                          
4
 Government’s Reply Brief in Opposition to Applicant’s Motion to Strike, at 9. 
 
5
 Tr. at 312-324; Government’s Reply Brief, supra note 4, at 5. 
 
6
 A judge “may control the scope of rebuttal testimony [and] may refuse to allow cumulative, repetitive, or 
irrelevant testimony, and may control the scope of examination of witnesses.” Geders v. United States, 425 U.S. 80, 
86-87 (1974). See also Fed.R.Evid. 403: “Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” 
 
3 
                                      
 
examine the witness. Applicant’s counsel chose to proceed with cross-examination of 
the witness and, after the record was closed, she subsequently submitted a motion to 
strike. Department Counsel submitted a brief opposing the motion a motion to strike. 
 
It is well-settled that rebuttal testimony should be limited to that which is 
“precisely directed to rebutting new matter or new theories presented by the 
[appellant’s] case-in-chief.”7 In this instance, the rebuttal witness generally rehashed the 
evidence presented by the Government witness who had testified in the case-in-chief. 
The only substantially “new” material evidence presented by the rebuttal witness was 
related to the witness’ impression regarding Applicant’s lack of truthfulness. Unresolved 
during the hearing, was whether the rebuttal witness was called to provide substantive 
evidence regarding those actions alleged in the SOR, matters already in evidence by 
virtue of documentation or the testimony of the original Government witness, or to 
provide evidence to impeach the Applicant’s testimony – evidence which was both 
introduced by the Government in its case-in-chief and by Applicant in his case-in-chief. 
Department Counsel now seems to assert both. 
 
Impeachment involves evidence that calls into question a witness’ veracity. It 
deals with “matters like the bias or interest of a witness, his or her capacity to observe 
an event in issue, or a prior statement of the witness inconsistent with his or her current 
testimony.”8 “[R]ebuttal testimony is offered to explain, repel, counteract, or disprove 
evidence of the adverse party.”9 
 
Applicant’s position is that the rebuttal witness’ testimony should, as a matter of 
law, be stricken because it should have been presented when the issue it addressed 
was first presented in the Government’s case-in-chief, rather than on rebuttal. 
Department Counsel urged me to disallow the motion as untimely and as “an improper 
effort to limit the record evidence based upon an overly restrictive application of . . . 
technicalities.”10 While Fed. R. Evid. 403 authorizes the exclusion of relevant evidence, 
the rule favors admission.11 Moreover, the Directive states: “. . . technical rules of 
evidence may be relaxed . . . to permit the development of a full and complete record.”12 
Based on all of the above, my ruling on the motion to strike is that it is denied. 
                                                          
7
 Bowman v. Gen. Motors Co., 427 F. Supp. 234, 240 (E.D. Pa. 1977); see also Peals v. Terre Hauge Police 
Dept., 535 F.3d 621, 630 (7
th
 Cor. 2008) (“[T]he proper function of rebuttal evidence is to contradict, impeach or 
defuse the impact of the evidence offered by an adverse party.”) (internal citations omitted); U.S. v. Neary, 733 F.2d 
210, 220 (2d Cir. 1984) (“The normal function of rebuttal is to explain or rebut evidence offered by the adverse 
party.”). 
 
8
 U.S. v. Harris, 557 F.3d 938, 942 (8
th
 Cir. 2009); Berry v. Oswalt, 143 F.3d 1127, 1132 (8
th
 Cir. 1998). 
 
9
 Harris, 557 F.3d at 942; Sterkel v. Fruehauf Corp., 975 F.2d 528, 532 (8
th
 Cir. 1992). 
 
10
 Government’s Reply Brief, supra note 4, at 11-15. 
 
11
 Fed.R.Evid. 403, Authors’ Comments. “. . . a trial judge’s decision to admit or exclude evidence under 
Fed. R. Evid. 403 may not be reversed unless it is ‘arbitrary and irrational.’” Bhaya v. Westinghouse Electric Corp., 
922 F.2d 184, 187 (3d Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 501 U.S. 1217 (1991). 
 
12
 Directive & E3.1.19. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Nevertheless, while I have permitted the testimony of the witness to stand, the issue as 
to the weight given to that testimony will be further discussed below. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all three factual allegations pertaining 
to personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c. of the SOR). In his Answer to the amended 
SOR, Applicant admitted two of the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct 
(¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d. of the amended SOR). Those admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old owner of a defense contractor, currently serving as its 
president. A 1992 high school graduate, he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in 
1995, a Master of Science degree in 1998, and a doctor of computer science degree in 
2001. He has not served in the U.S. military. He was previously employed in a variety of 
positions by different employers. He was an assistant academic director from 1994 until 
1995; an engineer from 1995 until 1996; a regional information technology manager 
from 1996 until 1998; a senior systems engineer from 1998 until 1999; a senior sales 
engineer from 1999 until 2002; a member of the technical staff from 2002 until 2006; 
and a general manager and facility security officer (FSO) from 2006 until 2008. He 
joined his present employer in 2008. Applicant was married in 1998. He and his wife 
have two sons, born in 1999 and 2003. Applicant was previously granted a top secret 
security clearance.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.c.): In July 2002, when he was serving as a senior sales engineer, 
Applicant and his employer (hereinafter referred to as company X) agreed that it would 
be best for Applicant to leave the company under unfavorable circumstances, as set 
forth below in Applicant’s own words:13  
 
I left [company X] because of an incident involving used equipment. 
During my tenure at [company X in location A] I was working on an 
account with some peers that sold a customer a new wireless network to 
meet the needs of higher security standards. In order to give the customer 
the price that they wanted we used an internal program called “TMP” or 
Technology Migration Program. This program gives the customer extra 
discounts for replacing older equipment. Typically when this program is 
used the replaced equipment is shipped back to headquarters. However, 
during the time between the sale and the network migration the TMP 
program was canceled. When the equipment was ready to ship to 
headquarters I notified the appropriate business unit and was told since 
the program was canceled they could not take the equipment. Therefore, I 
had the equipment shipped to our office in [location B], which we were in 
the process of moving (we were locating the department and the office 
                                                          
13
 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated October 17, 2011, at 7; See also Tr. at 188-190. 
 
5 
                                      
 
was to remain [company X] leased space). I notified our move coordinator 
that this equipment needed to stay with the department and move to 
[location C]. A few weeks later I was notified from facilities that the 
equipment was not moved and needed to be removed from [location B]. I 
asked them to ship it and was told it would cost too much so I drove to 
[location B] loaded my truck and drove it to [location C]. When I got to 
[location C] I was told there was no room to store the equipment and they 
would not let me bring it back to [location B] so I put it in my garage. On 
our next weekly team call I mentioned the predicament I was in with this 
equipment and my team members said they wanted me to ship some of 
the equipment to each of them for their use. So I did. [Six] months went by 
and still had nothing to do with this equipment. At this time I was in the 
process of building a training lab for our [company X] certification. I 
purchased some equipment on eBay and noticed that equipment similar to 
what I had in my garage was selling on eBay, so I sold 5 pieces. I used 
this money to purchase a piece of test equipment for the training lab. The 
test equipment was about $2500 and I had only made [about] $1500 from 
selling that equipment. The last person I sold to had a question about me 
selling the equipment and sent his inquiries to [company X] which 
prompted an internal investigation. During the investigation my teammates 
pleaded ignorance to the whole situation, however I had some 
documentation to support my case. This documentation was enough to 
prove that there were breakdowns in the TMP process and I should have 
never ended up with the equipment. Also it was concluded that I should 
not have sold that equipment and needed to pay [company X] $1500.00 
for the equipment sold, I agreed and paid them. 
 
 Applicant also subsequently added additional facts:14  
 
The equipment occupied approximately 10-15% of my garage. . . . After 
over six months had passed I made five different attempts to properly 
dispose of the [company X] owned equipment, I was left with 95% of it 
occupying my home garage. . . . Suddenly a [company X] attorney flew out 
to my . . . home from headquarters in [a state across country], wanting to 
know about the equipment I sold on eBay and wanting to look at all of my 
e-mails. I explained the entire story. Despite the fact that I hauled 
[company X’s] equipment around in my own truck and stored it in my own 
garage and used proceeds from the eBay sale to benefit the [company X] 
laboratory, the [company X] attorney demanded the following: (i) I turn 
over any equipment I had left, which I gladly did; (ii) leave the equipment I 
had purchased for the [company X] laboratory in place, which I did; (iii) 
pay [company X] $1500, which I did by check; and (iv) submit my 
resignation, which I did one week later. Sometime later, [company X] 
returned the check, uncashed, apparently because [company X] could not 
figure out what to do with it. 
                                                          
14
 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 13, at 9. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
 
 Applicant disclosed the situation in his 2002 SF 86, in his 2008 e-QIP, in his 2011 
responses to interrogatories, in his 2011 Answer to the SOR, in his 2012 Answer to the 
amended SOR, and during his testimony. Although he is no longer an employee of 
company X, Applicant continues to work closely with it on a vendor basis, and maintains 
a good working relationship with company X.15 Applicant has acknowledged that he 
should have pursued a higher authority approval to execute the actions he eventually 
took. 
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.): In January 2006, Applicant was offered a variable 
employee position as managing partner of the infrastructure/telecom business unit of 
another corporation (hereinafter referred to as company Z). Company Z was certified as 
a small, disadvantaged company under the 8(a) program of the Small Business Act by 
the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA).16 The offer was made by Dr. Q, the 
president and IT management consultant of company Z. In addition to various financial 
benefits and perks, Applicant was to receive a substantial hourly compensation and a 
one-third share of the profit from the projects Applicant brought to company Z.17 
According to Dr. Q, Applicant’s annual salary came to approximately $200,000 and the 
combined salary and profit sharing over a two year period was $1,000,000.18  
 
 In August 2007, Dr. Q was informed by the DSS Chief, Facility Clearance Branch 
(FCB), that Dr. Q’s interim secret personnel security clearance had been withdrawn by 
the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO). As a result of that action, 
company Z’s interim secret facility security clearance (FCL) was considered defective.19 
On September 4, 2007, in an effort to forestall any lasting damage to company Z’s 
ability to function, company Z’s attorneys submitted a proposed mitigation plan to the 
DSS Industrial Security Field Office (ISFO).20 The purpose of the proposed mitigation 
                                                          
15
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 1; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 13, at 8. 
 
16
 Company Z was a “minority-owned” business based on Dr. Q’s middle-eastern ethnicity. Tr. at 55, 129-
130; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 13, at 3. The 8(a) program regulations are contained in 13 CFR 
124, and regulations concerning performance requirements in “set-aside” awards, including sole-source 8(a) 
contracts, are contained in 13 CFR 125.6. The SBA enters into federal contracts that are reserved exclusively for 
companies in the 8(a) program, and subcontracts out to qualified 8(a) participants. According to Federal Acquisition 
Regulation (FAR) Subpart 1.602-2, contracting officers are responsible for ensuring performance of all necessary 
actions for effective contracting, ensuring compliance with the terms of the contract, and safeguarding the interests of 
the United States in its contractual relationships. 
   
17
 Atch. A (Letter from company Z, dated January 31, 2006) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. 
The letter of engagement did not spell out any “fiduciary duties,” and did not include a post- employment non-
competition clause. Tr. at 136-137. 
  
18
 Tr. at 82. Applicant contended that the employment letter terms were subsequently verbally modified, and 
Dr. Q insisted on paying Applicant with a hybrid W2 and 1099 in order to minimize Dr. Q’s taxation. Applicant filed his 
1099 returns to include the taxes Dr. Q did not want to pay. See Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 6. 
 
19
 The DISCO action was based on security concerns of foreign influence because of Dr. Q’s middle-eastern 
family connections, as well as possible foreign ownership, control or influence (FOCI) issues. Response to the SOR, 
supra note 13, at 4; Tr. at 51-52. 
 
20
 Government Exhibit 4 (Proposed Mitigation Plan, dated September 4, 2007); Tr. at 53-54. Dr. Q 
envisioned the mitigation plan to be a permanent arrangement, at least until he received the SOR and documents for 
his personnel security clearance. Tr. at 54-55. 
 
7 
                                      
 
plan was to ensure that while Dr. Q’s personnel security clearance issues were being 
considered by DOHA, all requirements associated with classified information were fully 
met. In addition, the proposed mitigation plan acknowledged compliance with all existing 
DoD contracts that required a facility security clearance as a condition of continuing 
performance. The proposed mitigation plan included the following provisions:  
 
(a) the current organizational structure of company Z would be altered to remove 
Dr. Q from “any direct or indirect involvement with [company Z’s] DoD contracts which 
involve classified information”; 
 
(b) Dr. Q would relinquish his status as company Z’s FSO; 
 
(c) a new, wholly-owned subsidiary (hereinafter referred to as Newco) would be 
created; 
 
(d) Newco would be “a totally separate business entity with a separate board of 
directors, separate officers and a separate management structure”; 
 
(e) Dr. Q would have no role in Newco; 
 
(f) all of company Z’s DoD contracts would be assigned to Newco and placed 
under the full and direct control of Applicant because he held a top secret security 
clearance; 
 
(g) a separate FCL would be established for Newco;  
 
(h) Applicant would become the Newco FSO;21 and, 
 
(i) the mitigation plan would be immediately implemented. 
 
On September 19, 2007, Applicant was designated FSO for company Z, 
replacing Dr. Q.22 Nevertheless, on October 2, 2007, the FCB informed the contracting 
officer representative (COR) of the pertinent military department that company Z’s FCL 
had been invalidated because Dr. Q’s interim secret personnel security clearance had 
been withdrawn.23 While in the invalidated status, neither company Z nor its employees 
were eligible to be awarded additional classified contracts, “or have access to additional 
classified information.” Because company Z had two classified contracts, the ISFO was 
to be given 30 days from that date to determine whether company Z could continue 
performance on the existing classified contracts pending resolution of the issues. On 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
21
 “The FSO will supervise and direct security measures necessary for implementing applicable 
requirements of this Manual and related Federal requirements for classified information.” Department of Defense 
Manual 5220.22-M, National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), dated February 28, 2006, ' 1-
201. 
 
22
 Government Exhibit 5 (Letter from Dr. Q, dated September 19, 2007). 
 
23
 Government Exhibit 8 (DSS FCB letter, dated October 2, 2007). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
October 3, 2007, a representative of DSS notified Dr. Q and his attorney, but not 
Applicant, that the proposed mitigation plan had been determined to be “acceptable.”24 
The COR contacted Applicant and it was determined that because a mitigation plan had 
been submitted and approved, Applicant had replaced Dr. Q as FSO, Dr. Q no longer 
had access to classified information associated with the contract, and Applicant 
possessed the appropriate security clearance, company Z could continue performance 
on the existing classified contract pending resolution of the issues associated with its 
FCL. However, company Z was not eligible for additional classified contracts.25 
  
In October 2007, Dr. Q informed Applicant that Newco would be created within 
the week as Dr. Q and his attorneys had completed drafting the articles, bylaws, and 
actions of the directors to comply with DSS requirements. Dr. Q advised Applicant to 
meet with company Z’s outside attorney – who was also the secretary-designate of 
Newco – to review the Newco paperwork in anticipation of Applicant’s meeting with DSS 
to obtain approval for transferring classified contracts to Newco. It was Dr. Q’s plan that, 
after the interim secret FCL was granted, the attorney would work with DSS to satisfy 
any potential FOCI issues.26 On December 19, 2007, Dr. Q, as the sole director of 
company Z, took the following board actions: (a) issued a board resolution excluding 
company Z from access to classified information in the possession of Newco; (b) issued 
a board resolution designating the principal place of business for Newco, and increasing 
the number of directors to three; and (c) elected Applicant, the Newco secretary, and 
one other individual as directors of Newco.27 Applicant was designated as chairman of 
the board of Newco on December 21, 2007.28 
 
On February 1, 2008, on behalf of Newco, Applicant leased 1,000 square feet of 
office space so he could relocate Newco operations out of his residence.29 One month 
later, again on behalf of Newco, Applicant increased the leased space to 1,500 square 
feet.30 
 
                                                          
24
 Applicant Exhibit A (E-mail from DSS, dated October 3, 2007). Despite Dr. Q’s contention that the 
information was forwarded to Applicant “immediately” after the mitigation plan was accepted, the e-mail was not 
forwarded to Applicant by Dr. Q until March 12, 2008. See Applicant Exhibit A (E-mail from Dr. Q, dated March 12, 
2008); Tr. at 57. The accuracy and significance of the issue of acceptability has become an issue, for although there 
is the one e-mail indicating the proposed mitigation plan was deemed acceptable, according to two letters from DSS, 
dated January 25, 2012 and February 15, 2012, a search of DSS IS records pertaining to company Z revealed no 
mitigation plan. DSS indicated that the proposed mitigation plan had been located, but there was nothing reflecting an 
approval of that plan. See, Atch. M (Letter from DSS, dated January 25, 2012, and Letter from DSS, dated February 
15, 2012) to Response to the Amended SOR. 
 
25
 Government Exhibit 8 (COR letter, dated October 29, 2007). 
 
26
 Applicant Exhibit B (E-mail from Dr. Q., dated October 23, 2007). 
 
27
 Applicant Exhibit C (E-mail, with attachments, dated December 21, 2007). 
 
28
 Government Exhibit 9 (Board Resolution, dated December 21, 2007). 
 
29
 Applicant Exhibit G (Commercial Lease Agreement, dated February 1, 2008); Tr. at 210. 
  
30
 Applicant Exhibit H (Commercial Lease Agreement, dated March 1, 2008). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
The record is silent regarding subsequent actions and activities of company Z 
and Newco with relation to the mitigation plan until February 2008. By then, Applicant 
had reached a “high level of frustration with the lack of engagement, involvement and 
momentum.”31 On February 6, 2008, Applicant sent an e-mail to his two Newco board-
member colleagues and Dr. Q, stating that DSS had been “turning up the heat” for them 
to complete the novation of the classified contracts. Applicant urged them to put 
together a tiger team and meet face to face to work out the details early the following 
week to expedite things.32 Newco’s secretary acknowledged the suggestion and urged 
Dr. Q to make completion of the “stand-up” of Newco and the novation of contracts a 
priority. He added:33 
 
There are a number of tasks involved (inter-company agreement, transfer 
of employees, transfer of assets, financials, etc.) that, while not difficult, 
need to be addressed before we can submit the novation request. 
Novation of contracts was one of the elements of the mitigation plan we 
submitted to DSS. We need to get this completed before DSS asks us 
again where the novations are. 
 
Dr. Q delegated the execution of the mitigation plan to his two law firms, and “it 
was up to the law firms to work with DSS on executing the mitigation plan.” Applicant 
was given no authority to certify that the mitigation plan was being executed, despite the 
fact that the mitigation plan so states.34 In other words, Dr. Q ignored Applicant’s duties 
and responsibilities as FSO and simply ignored his advice and requests. Unbeknownst 
to Applicant, Dr. Q and his attorneys had shifted their focus and strategy from the 
mitigation plan to getting company Z cleared.35 Dr. Q did not recall ever advising 
Applicant of the shift.36 Furthermore, Dr. Q acknowledged that despite Applicant’s 
urgings and “false sense of urgency” as the FSO that the mitigation plan process be 
implemented at a faster rate, Dr. Q was getting advice from, and listening to, the more 
moderate strategies developed by his attorneys.37 As Dr. Q stated: “. . . the mitigation 
plan is proceeding according to [Newco], and this is what was approved by the DSS.”38 
Further complicating the situation was that Dr. Q’s interpretation of the mitigation plan 
differed from Applicant’s interpretation. Dr. Q contended that novation did not have to 
take place immediately, and it was not company Z’s responsibility to do so. He believed 
the responsibility was with the government contracting officer to novate contracts, not 
                                                          
31
 Tr. at 209. 
 
32
 Applicant Exhibit D (E-mail, dated February 6, 2008). 
 
33
 Applicant Exhibit D (E-mail, dated February 6, 2008). 
 
34
 Tr. at 102, 109-110. 
 
35
 Tr. at 112-113. 
 
36
 Tr. at 113. 
 
37
 Tr. at 142-144. 
 
38
 Tr. at 72. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
company Z. Also, DSS had purportedly approved for him to continue to control both 
companies and authorized company Z to continue operating pending resolution of 
company Z’s FCL.39 
 
On February 8, 2008, Dr. Q informed the Newco board that he had opened a 
Newco bank account with a particular bank (in another state) where company Z already 
had its accounts.  He added:40 
 
I want to emphasize the fact that . . . we need to limit creating a separate 
infrastructure to ONLY and STRICTLY what DSS requires at this point. 
Anywhere we have an opportunity to keep shared services, common 
procedures, shared resources, we really need to do so. We do not have 
the overhead and the resources at this point to fully support two different 
infrastructures unless we absolutely must do so. 
 
Applicant responded to Dr. Q on February 12, 2008:41 
 
I disagree, we need to talk before we do this because I cannot continue to 
try and run a company off my credit cards and minimal support. You and I 
need to change this, improve communication if we are really going to do 
this. The common accounts will be at [the selected bank], all the [company 
Z] accounts will be there, there is no reason that I can’t have visibility and 
full authority of the funds coming into [Newco], then we move the profits 
and under-runs into a common account.  
 
This is only one of the discussions that we need to have if we are going to 
establish this as a true partnership, where each of us consults each other 
on all decisions, information each other with all the ongoing information 
and direction. 
 
That same day, Dr. Q responded, in part:42 
 
I agree. . . .There is no way you can and will continue to run around with 
no resources and using your personal credit cards. That is why we have 
retained [the treasurer and bookkeepers for Newco]. . . . We really need to 
keep our banking infrastructure consolidated. . . . I won’t have visibility to 
that account wherever it is . . . . but I better have visibility into the 
accounting reports . . . . that is why it is important to have [the treasurer] 
doing it consistently for both companies. [The Newco secretary] directed 
                                                          
39
 Tr. at 71, 105, 115-116. According to Dr. Q: “Novation of the contract is not an action that’s to be taken by 
[company Z]. Those contracts belong to the government. They decide whether they want to novate or not.” Tr. at 116. 
 
40
 Atch. F (Dr. Q E-mail, dated February 8, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. See also, 
Tr. at 54-55. 
 
41
 Atch. F (Applicant E-mail, dated February 12, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. 
 
42
 Atch. F (Dr. Q E-mail, dated February 12, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
me to open up that account a while ago and I deposited $10,000 dollars in 
it and we have [the treasurer] as the signatory on it since he is the 
treasurer in the bylaws we submitted to DSS. You and [the treasurer] 
should agree on accounting reports to give you (us) the visibility we need 
and on the operating procedures so that you are no longer using personal 
funds. Him and I will work on how we sweep cash to support payroll 
primarily and overall [company Z] accounting for audit purposes. I hope 
this clarifies my intent. 
 
Despite the assertion by Dr. Q that he had followed the advice of the Newco 
secretary to open up the Newco account and designated the Newco treasurer as the 
signatory on it, in compliance with the bylaws previously submitted to DSS, Applicant 
disputed those assertions and contended that Dr. Q had remained as the sole signatory 
on the account.43 Applicant felt that he had no control over the contracts. Furthermore, 
according to Applicant, despite the creation of Newco, there was “no entity to speak of, 
so business as usual went on, with me on the side, trying to get this mitigation plan on 
the rails.”44 Applicant was aware that mitigation plans are common, and that there were 
templates available, but he could not get Dr. Q to approve inter-operating agreements.45  
 
Applicant contends that Dr. Q was reluctant to comply with the terms of the 
mitigation plan because he was fearful of losing his 8(a) status because he would lose 
his control over Newco. Dr. Q acknowledged that the 8(a) status had to be 
safeguarded.46 Applicant also stated:47 
 
[Dr. Q] fought against and made every effort to stall the implementation of 
the necessary steps to remove him from contact, responsibility, and 
authority over the classified Pentagon contracts which were necessary to 
implement the DSS mitigation plan. The contracts needed to be novated 
to the separate legal entity and that entity needed to operate 
independently. [Dr. Q] refused to let go of the functions that were 
necessary, such as the establishment of a separate bank account and 
giving the personnel with security clearances the authority to operate it. 
 
He added:48 
 
According to [company Z’s] FOCI Mitigation Plan with the DSS, I had the 
responsibilities of the FSO for [Newco]. While [Dr. Q] would retain his 
                                                          
43
 Atch. F (Applicant’s handwritten notes on Dr. Q E-mail), supra note 42, at 1. 
 
44
 Tr. at 206. 
 
45
 Tr. at 211. 
 
46
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, dated February 24, 2012, at 3; Tr. at 55-56, 70-71. 
 
47
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 3. 
 
48
 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 13, at 4. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
ownership interest, the FOCI Mitigation Plan required that new executive 
management control all business related to the classified work. As the 
FSO, however, I was concerned that [Dr. Q] was refusing to comply with 
the FOCI Mitigation Plan and was not relieving control over the classified 
work to the [Newco] Federal management team. He refused to novate any 
of the contracts to [Newco] and continued to have uncleared foreign 
nationals work performing classified work. As the FSO, I was responsible 
for communicating with DSS regarding the company’s progress in putting 
the FOCI Mitigation Plan in place. The DSS attorney responsible for 
[company Z’s] facility security clearance was very concerned about the 
delayed execution of the plan. The most I could do was to get [Dr. Q] to 
agree to allow me to use an external company to control the classified 
business as this would mean that he would not need to make changes to 
[company Z]. 
 
According to Applicant, he suggested to Dr. Q that since Dr. Q had continuing 
concerns regarding [Newco] being the entity that performed the classified work, 
Applicant would offer “an entirely different legal entity” (hereinafter referred to as 
company S) to handle the classified contracts, and offered the use of a corporate entity 
that Applicant had formed in May 2005, but had never made operational. Dr. Q denied 
recalling any such suggestion.49 Applicant discussed various options with DSS, and on 
March 28, 2008, following DSS guidance,50 as FSO for Newco, Applicant submitted a 
FCL request with an attached DD Form 254, Department of Defense Contract Security 
Classification Specification, to DSS for company S, with the plan to use that company to 
control the classified business, based on his earlier discussions with Dr. Q. The request 
indicated it was based on a “bona fide procurement requirement to access classified 
information,” and listed a particular contract number because that was the contract with 
the longest remaining period of performance, and gave Applicant the best opportunity to 
work with Dr. Q.51 On March 31, 2008, a staff specialist at FCB returned the request 
without final action because, under the NISPOM, prior government agency approval had 
not been obtained as required when this category of classified information is involved.52 
Applicant and DSS conducted a routine exchange of correspondence on how to correct 
the DD Form 254, including which blocks to fill, and which blocks to leave blank.53  
 
Applicant also stated:54 
 
                                                          
49
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 3; Tr. at 66. 
 
50
 Tr. at 221-222. 
 
51
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 3; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra 
note 13, at 4; Tr. at 223-224. 
 
52
 Atch. G (FCB letter, dated March 31, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. 
 
53
 Atch. G (E-mail stream, April 4-8, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR; Government 
Exhibit 10 (DD Form 254, undated).  
 
54
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 6; See also Tr. at 215-216. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
As [Dr. Q] continued to not make any movement toward the compliance of 
the mitigation plan, I provided [Dr. Q] with options, one of them being that I 
could use [company S] . . . and novate the contracts AND the risk (in 
response to his concern about being left with the liability). [Company S] 
would perform as a subcontractor to [company Z] and/or [Newco]. [Dr. Q] 
and I discussed the potential impact of my departure, which he realized 
would be an issue with his then-invalidated FCL. [Dr. Q] wanted me to 
assist him with the transition of the work, since a contract termination 
could be devastating. In the division that I ran, I had about 26 employees 
that I was concerned for. [Dr. Q] and I discussed how I could transfer the 
work with me to my new company and how my new company and 
[company Z] would maintain the profit share agreement . . . for the 
remainder of the performance. . . . In no way did [Dr. Q] express anything 
but desires to support a non-disruptive continuation of the existing work.  
The novation of government contracts, especially those dealing with classified 
information, while not an unusually complex process, requires that substantial steps be 
taken by various entities and individuals, including the corporations or companies 
involved, and the contracting officers. In this instance, since there was an 8(a) contract 
involved, the SBA involvement would be required. One party or one individual cannot 
cause a novation without complying with the established process, a point stated by 
Applicant.55 Federal law generally prohibits the transfer of government contracts to a 
third party.56 When the government concludes it is not in its interest, the government 
can refuse to novate a contract and hold the original contractor liable. If the contractor 
fails to perform, the contract can be terminated for default, and the original contractor 
held liable for all obligations resulting from the default termination.57  
However, the government may recognize a third party as the successor in 
interest to a government contract when the third party’s interest in the contract arises 
out of the transfer of all the contractor’s assets or the entire portion of the assets 
involved in performing the contract.58 When seeking a novation, the contractor is 
required to submit the proposed novation agreement and other specified documents to 
the contracting officer. Among those required documents are: (1) a document describing 
the proposed transaction; (2) a detailed list of all affected government contracts; (3) 
evidence of the transferee’s capability to perform;  (4) certified copies of the resolution 
of the involved corporate boards of directors authorizing the asset transfer and minutes 
of each company’s stockholder meeting necessary to approve the asset transfer; and 
                                                          
55
 Tr. at 220. 
 
56
 See 41 U.S.C. § 15. 
 
57
 See FAR 42.1204 (c). 
58
 See FAR 42.1204 (a). 
 
14 
                                      
 
(5) a legal opinion of counsel for both parties stating that the transfer was properly 
effected.59   
Four existing DoD contracts, including three 8(a) contracts, were listed in the 
proposed mitigation plan in September 2007. They were to be novated from company Z 
to Newco, “but only with the express approval of the cognizant contracting officer.”60 
However, according to Dr. Q, by April 2008, most of them had been closed and there 
was only one left.61 Applicant disputed that fact and claimed the one remaining contract 
was merely a proposed contract which was never awarded to company Z or Newco 
because of questions regarding company Z’s inability to pay bills on time.62 
 
Applicant was concerned that he had a conflict because he was put in place to 
certify the mitigation plan had been implemented, but he was having difficulties 
motivating Dr. Q to fully do so. DSS advised Applicant to keep pushing forward to find a 
resolution. Also, DSS, the customer community, and the vendor community were all 
upset that the contracts had not been novated; invoices were not being paid;63 and the 
organization was in disarray. As late as April 2008, Dr. Q still maintained total control 
over the transferring of assets between company Z and Newco, and he was controlling 
payment of employees and subcontractors performing work on classified contracts, 
contending that his role was approved by DSS.64 Commencing shortly after Dr. Q had 
lost his interim secret personnel security clearance, and continuing thereafter, Applicant 
became very frustrated with his futile efforts. Applicant eventually informed Dr. Q that he 
was leaving the company. Dr. Q requested that he not quit, so they agreed to continue 
to profit share on the current work that Applicant brought to company Z.65 
 
During this entire time, Applicant met with the program management team of 
Newco and informed them of the continuing problems related to the non-compliance 
with the mitigation plan as well as the proposal to establish company S as the 
alternative to Newco to keep the business afloat.66 Applicant claimed it was “parallel 
                                                          
59
 See FAR 42.1204 (e) and (f). 
60
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 20, at 4-5. 
 
61
 Tr. 118-121. 
 
62
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 8. 
 
63
 Dr. Q acknowledged that there were a lot of complaints from subcontractors and employees about late 
payments, but attributed some of the reasons for those complaints to Applicant’s “sending out expectations with these 
vendors without consulting with me, as far as payments.” The vendors had been working on classified contracts. Dr. 
Q’s position was that “[w]e paid the vendors, but we paid them in the proper time per their contract and per the 
government payment requirements.” Tr. at 113-114. One witness acknowledged there were payment issues with 
company Z because payments were not always made on time and the witness’ company had additional work to do to 
collect owed monies. See, Tr. at 169. 
 
64
 Tr. at 105-106. 
 
65
 Tr. at 225-228, 267-268; Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 3 
 
66
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 10. 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
planning,” and was discussed as an option to Newco, “depending on how comfortable 
[Dr. Q] would be with the options, status and briefed to him.”67 One member of that 
program management team (Mr. G) – hired by Applicant to be a program manager for a 
particular contract, and subsequently appointed by Dr. Q to be Applicant’s successor as 
president and FSO of Newco – attended several of those meetings and was upset 
because he felt the meetings were inappropriate. Mr. G subsequently separated himself 
from the rest of the program management team, and they distanced themselves from 
him.68 
 
According to Dr. Q, Applicant first informed him of his plans to “take the contracts 
of [Newco] and its employees, and move them to [company S]” on the phone on either 
April 28, 2008 or April 29, 2008.69 Dr. Q denied ever discussing the novation process 
other than one occasion in early February 2008.70 It was Dr. Q’s contention that the 
mitigation plan was proceeding according to plan, and taking the contracts to company 
S was unnecessary. Accordingly, Dr. Q immediately called the Newco secretary for 
advice. He was advised to terminate Applicant for cause. They agreed, and the Newco 
secretary, in his capacity as company Z’s attorney, started drafting the termination 
letter.71 On April 29, 2008, as he had previously promised, Applicant furnished Dr. Q 
with status details pertaining to each of their corporate contracts, and added some 
comments about his proposed reorganization plan.72 In turn, Dr. Q forwarded the e-mail 
to Newco’s secretary, treasurer, and company Z’s senior vice president.73  
 
On May 1, 2008, following earlier discussions with each other, Applicant 
submitted a more detailed plan to Dr. Q. That plan included, among other steps, 
expedited submission of invoices; seeking a way to obtain new funds for the staff; and 
moving forward with plans regarding company S.74 That same evening, Dr. Q 
responded:75 
 
I do not concur in any way with your apparent plan to divert these 
contracts to an entity that you are creating. I am advised by counsel that 
your planned actions would constitute a misappropriation of corporate 
assets and would be a breach of your fiduciary duties to the company. . . . 
[I]mmediately cease and desist all communications with [company Z’s] 
                                                          
67
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 10. 
 
68
 Tr. at 312-317. 
 
69
 Tr. at 67. 
 
70
 Tr. at 68, 119. 
 
71
 Tr. at 72-73. 
 
72
 Applicant Exhibit E (E-mail to Dr. Q, dated April 29, 2008). 
 
73
 Applicant Exhibit E (Dr. Q’s e-mail, dated April 29, 2008). 
 
74
 Government Exhibit 11 (E-mail from Applicant, dated May 1, 2008). 
 
75
 Government Exhibit 11 (E-mail from Dr. Q, dated May 1, 2008). 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
customers and vendors until you receive further written notice from me. As 
an employee of [company Z] I expect you to follow through with that 
request. 
 
That same evening, by email and overnight mail, Dr. Q sent Applicant a letter 
advising him that his employment with company Z was terminated, effective 
immediately. The letter said, in part:76 
 
. . . your employment with [company Z] and all association with [Newco] 
are terminated effective immediately. . . [B]e advised that the termination 
is for cause.  
 
We have obtained substantial information to support the causes of this 
termination. If you would like to be advised of the specifics of the causes, 
please feel free to have your counsel contact the companies’ legal counsel 
[Newco’s secretary]. It is sufficient for this action that you be advised that 
the termination is for cause. The companies are currently investigating 
your conduct and activities, and will determine whether there is any 
culpability or liability on your part to the companies. . . .  
 
You are required to remove yourself from the physical premises of the 
companies’ offices. We realize that you work out of your home to a large 
extent. All of the documents, files, records and assets of the companies in 
your home are the property of the companies and are not to be removed, 
destroyed or altered by you. . . .  
 
You may not communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, with any 
employees of [company Z or Newco] until you have completed the 
turnover process and are no longer in possession of any company assets. 
 
That same evening, other letters were sent to the customers and all employees 
informing them of Applicant’s termination for cause and advising them that Applicant’s 
planned actions would have constituted a misappropriation of corporate assets and a 
breach of his fiduciary duties to the company.77 In addition, one other employee, 
Applicant’s assistant, received a letter temporarily suspending her with pay and 
benefits, but did not identify any suggested wrong-doing by her.78 She was eventually 
reinstated.79 As a direct result of Applicant’s termination, company Z purportedly lost 
between 60 and 70 percent of its business.80 
 
                                                          
76
 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 13, at 5. 
 
77
 Atch. I (Letter from Dr. Q to all employees, dated May 1, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended 
SOR; Tr. at 337. 
 
78
 Atch. I (Letter from Dr. Q, dated May 1, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. 
 
79
 Tr. at 132. 
 
80
 Tr. at 73. 
 
17 
                                      
 
According to Dr. Q, following Applicant’s termination, he discovered incidents of 
“significant wrongdoing” that Applicant had purportedly committed while he was an 
employee of company Z and Newco:81 (a) Applicant had falsified the DD Form 254 
discussed above; (b) Applicant was closing deals through company S while he was 
employed at company Z; and (c) Applicant was using company Z resources for the 
benefit of company S. Dr. Q contended he had no previous knowledge of those three 
examples of “significant wrongdoing.” Applicant denied all of the above, and furnished 
explanations disputing the allegations.82 
 
In June 2008, company Z sued Applicant, company S, another company 
established by Applicant, and three other individuals (all formerly employees of 
company Z, but now employees of Applicant’s new company) in the federal district 
court, alleging, in part, that Applicant had: (a) made plans to obtain and misappropriate 
for himself and his company valuable contracts and business opportunities belonging to 
company Z; (b) misappropriated for himself proprietary confidential information 
belonging to company Z; (c) arranged with a DoD employee to improperly acquire 
contracts for Applicant’s benefit, rather than the benefit of company Z; (d) with others, 
conspired to obtain contract opportunities away from company Z to Applicant’s new 
company; (e) retained possession of valuable propriety confidential business 
information belonging to company Z; (f) breached his fiduciary duty to company Z by his 
actions; (g) violated the state business conspiracy act; (h) breached his contract of 
employment with company Z; (i) engaged in tortious interference with contractual 
relationships; (j) engaged in tortious interference with business expectations; and (k) 
stolen valuable property. Company Z sought damages of not less than $10,000,000 for 
each of the first three counts, plus an unspecified amount for the remaining four 
counts.83 Company Z’s emergency motion for temporary restraining order and 
preliminary injunction and motion for leave to conduct expedited discovery were denied 
on June 11, 2008.84 
 
On June 27, 2008 and June 30, 2008, Applicant and one other defendant, 
respectively, filed counterclaims against company Z, alleging lack of compliance with 
labor laws and failure to provide consideration. On September 5, 2008, Newco sought 
leave to intervene as a co-plaintiff in the same case. The litigation was settled on 
September 26, 2008, releasing all claims against Applicant and the other parties; 
establishing a confidentiality agreement; requiring company Z to pay Applicant 
substantial expense reimbursement sums and unpaid salary; and requiring that Dr. Q 
and his companies and managerial personnel and Applicant and his company and 
managerial personnel not make any disparaging or derogatory remarks about each 
                                                          
 
81
 Tr. at 74-81. 
 
82
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3, at 7-11. 
 
83
 Government Exhibit 12 (Complaint for Damages and Injunctive Relief, filed June 6, 2008). 
 
84
 Atch. N (Order, dated June 11, 2008) to Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR. 
 
 
18 
                                      
 
other to any third party.85 The agreement was signed by each of the defendants, 
including Applicant, and each plaintiff, including Dr. Q and Mr. G. As of September 
2009, one year after the lawsuit was settled, final payments from company Z to 
Applicant still had not been made.86 
 
Dr. Q had received his SOR from DOHA in March 2008, had his hearing before 
an administrative judge in August 2008, and received a favorable decision granting his 
eligibility for a security clearance in October 2008. He was finally granted a security 
clearance in November 2008.87  
 
Based on the evidence produced, I conclude that the mitigation plan submitted 
by Dr. Q’s attorneys and purportedly adopted by DSS, was intentionally never fully or 
immediately implemented by Dr. Q or his companies. No employees performing 
services under those contracts had been transitioned from company Z to Newco.88 The 
inter-company agreements were never completed, and no contracts were ever 
novated.89 Dr. Q continued to exercise direct and indirect control over the activities of 
both company Z and Newco. He also routinely ignored the advice of Applicant, his FSO.  
Dr. Q also explained his actions “because the contracting officers decided to keep the 
operation of these specific contracts under [company Z], per their letter to DSS.”90 In 
addition, at one point during the hearing, Dr. Q stated that the mitigation plan did not 
prohibit his management of Newco through at least February 2008.91 He essentially 
denied that comment later in the hearing.92 The evidence also reveals a serious failure 
in oversight by the CORs and various offices of DSS in failing to insure compliance with 
the mitigation plan for a period of over one year. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): In March 2009, Dr. Q was interviewed by an investigator from the 
U.S. Office of Personal Management (OPM) in relation to Applicant’s security clearance 
review. During that interview, Dr. Q made certain assertions against, and 
characterizations about, Applicant, all of which Applicant denied, including:93 
 
                                                          
85
 Government Exhibit 3 (Settlement and Release Agreement, dated September 26, 2008); Applicant’s 
Response to the SOR, supra note 13, at 5; Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, at 4. 
 
86
 Government Exhibit 3 (E-mail stream between Applicant and Newco treasurer, various dates). 
 
87
 Tr. at 147. 
 
88
 Government Exhibit 12, supra note 83, at 6; Tr. at 128. 
 
89
 Tr. at 336, 349. 
 
90
 Tr. at 134-135. 
 
91
 Tr. at 69. 
 
92
 Tr. at 91. 
 
93
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 4-12. It should be noted that neither party 
submitted the full interview appearing in the OPM report of investigation (ROI) to me, and references to Dr. Q’s 
comments refer to extracts quoted by Applicant. 
 
 
19 
                                      
 
(a) Applicant obtained his PhD online;94 
 
(b) It became increasingly difficult for Dr. Q to communicate with Applicant, for 
Applicant would not return calls, and not discuss various problems with Dr. Q; 
 
(c) Applicant never discussed his plans to leave company Z, take three 
employees from Newco to company S, and take company Z’s contracts with 
him until one or two days before Applicant was terminated; 
 
(d) Applicant violated his trust and fiduciary duties by falsifying the contractual 
relationship between company Z and Applicant’s company (hereinafter known 
as company T);95 
 
(e) Applicant had destroyed a significant amount of confidential information that 
was stored on company Z’s computers at Applicant’s home office;96 
 
(f) Applicant was guilty of computer fraud;97 
 
(g) Applicant “is very bright but he lacks business sense. He is naïve and does 
not understand government regulations. . . . As time went on, [Dr. Q] began to 
question [Applicant’s] mental stability. [Applicant] got hysterical when 
problems developed and became very emotional. . . .[Applicant] did not 
handle pressure well. . . .”;98 
 
(h) [Applicant] may have a problem with excessive use of alcohol. . . “ citing his 
belief that Applicant was intoxicated when on conference calls;99 
 
(i) Dr. Q has serious concerns about Applicant’s judgment in trying to illegally 
take work from [company Z] and tampering with [company Z’s] computers:100 
 
                                                          
94
 Tr. at 177; Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 4. Applicant noted that the 
campus of the university where he obtained his degree was located only 10-15 minutes from Dr. Q’s residence and 
office. 
95
 Applicant’s new company, company T, was not established until May 5, 2008, four days after he was 
terminated by Dr. Q. See Atch. 6, Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 13. 
 
96
 The computers in question were actually government computers, and they were used for testing only, not 
the storage of confidential company information. See, Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 
8. 
 
97
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 7-8. According to Applicant, Dr. Q’s 
forensic analyst concluded Applicant’s computer use was appropriate and that Applicant’s associate had “wiped” h is 
personal information from his personal laptop. No missing data was ever identified by Dr. Q. See, Applicant’s 
Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 8. 
 
98
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 9. 
 
99
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 10. During the hearing, Dr. Q could not 
recall saying that Applicant had a problem with alcohol. Tr. at 139. 
 
100
 Applicant’s Response to the Amended SOR, supra note 46, at 11. 
 
 
20 
                                      
 
[Applicant] did not consider the laws he was breaking and 
exhibited a total lack of integrity. [Dr. Q] has no confidence or 
trust about [Applicant’s] ability to properly handle classified 
information. [Dr. Q] feels [Applicant] acts in unpredictable 
ways and could not be trusted with classified information. 
[Applicant] would put his personal interests first as he has no 
respect for boundaries and has a total disregard for the law. 
 
 In December 2011, when Applicant saw Dr. Q’s assertions and characterizations 
about him, he thought back to the settlement agreement and believed Dr. Q had clearly 
violated it by constantly “disparaging” him. Applicant did not know how to stop Dr. Q 
from his actions so he sent Dr. Q two text messages. The first one said: “Bet you didn’t 
know I can get a copy of the lies you told DSS, better call your friends at [Dr. Q’s law 
firm]! Its on baby!!!!”101 The second message said: “I’ll just say my Christmas present 
may be a little late. . .”102.103 Dr. Q’s position is that Applicant tried to coerce and 
threaten him not to cooperate with the OPM investigation.104 Other than Dr. Q’s opinion, 
there is no evidence that Applicant ever actually tried to coerce or threaten him not to 
cooperate. 
 
Character References 
 
 In addition to Dr. Q’s negative characterizations regarding Applicant appearing 
above, Dr. Q testified that Applicant acted in inappropriate or unpredictable ways, and 
his reactions tend to be impulsive and based on poor judgment.105 He added:106 
 
So as far as I’m concerned, if I can’t trust him with my business, and I 
can’t trust the fact that he will honor his fiduciary duty to [company Z], I 
don’t see why the federal government should trust him with classified 
information. 
 
Dr. Q also characterized Applicant as “reckless” and furnished an example of a 
potential violation of the FAR when Applicant and a government employee supposedly 
wanted to “funnel some money” to Applicant’s wife as a consultant on a particular 
contract at $300 per hour.107 
                                                          
101
 Government Exhibit 13 (Test message, undated, but listed as being sent at 8:45 am). 
 
102
 Government Exhibit 13 (Test message, undated, but listed as being sent at 9:00 am). 
 
103
 Tr. at 270. 
 
104
 Tr. at 83-85. 
 
105
 Tr. at 84-85, 141. During his later testimony, Dr. Q modified his characterization of Applicant by stating 
the “pattern of unpredictable behavior” was really a “disagreement” over strategy. Tr. at 143-144. 
 
106
 Tr. at 86-87. 
 
107
 Tr. at 144-145. Applicant denied the accusation, stating that his wife is a stay-at-home mom of two 
children, and has no interest in working. Tr. at 179. 
 
 
21 
                                      
 
Mr. G, Applicant’s former subordinate, but now his successor as president and 
FSO of Newco, with a top secret security clearance, joined in the lawsuit against 
Applicant. Dr. Q brought several facts to his attention after he was promoted regarding 
the mitigation plan and Applicant. First, “there was a mitigation plan that was in place, 
and it was in the process of being executed or followed.”108 Second, after his promotion, 
neither the contracting officers nor DSS ever said anything to him about being 
concerned over the process of the mitigation plan.109 Based on the above, he quickly 
concluded that what Applicant had said about the mitigation plan and DSS concerns 
was not true.110 Mr. G’s interactions with Dr. Q became more frequent (about two times 
per week) and Dr. Q “turned out to be a very, you know, genuine gentleman. He was 
very business-oriented. He was very communicative. He was very supportive.”111 Third, 
although Mr. G believed what Applicant had said to him about the difficulties in dealing 
with Dr. Q and the fact that Applicant had been discussing the options with Dr. Q, he no 
longer believes him.112 Mr. G maintained his opinion of Applicant as a liar even after 
being shown e-mails reflecting those discussions, because, as he observed, the e-mails 
were only dated two days before Applicant was terminated.113 
 
A corporate president, with a secret security clearance, who has known Applicant 
for about ten years, both socially and professionally, is very supportive of Applicant’s 
application. He has seen Applicant in social situations and has seen no evidence of any 
alcohol problem. When the witness was a subcontractor for company Z, and thereafter 
in another relationship, in working together professionally, he noted that Applicant 
“demanded that shortcuts not be taken in the development of the [their work] . . . . 
[Applicant is] straightforward, a straight shooter.”114 Applicant’s reputation in the 
community, based on observations and discussions, is that Applicant is an honest 
person, with the utmost integrity.115 They do not have a current professional 
relationship.116 
 
The chief operating officer of company T, with a top secret security clearance, 
has known Applicant professionally and socially since approximately 2004. The witness 
was working inside the Pentagon as a manufacturer representative for another 
company and Applicant was “the architect and one of the chief influencers for systems 
                                                          
108
 Tr. at 311. 
 
109
 Tr. at 317-318. 
 
110
 Tr. at 319. 
 
111
 Tr. at 319-320, 340. 
 
112
 Tr. at 351. 
 
113
 Tr. at 352. 
 
114
 Tr. at 155. 
 
115
 Tr. at 159-160. 
 
116
 Tr. at 157-158. 
 
 
22 
                                      
 
and technologies that were being implemented inside the Pentagon.”117 Over the years, 
they have partnered on some opportunities together and competed on others. He did 
not observe Applicant having any problem with alcohol.118 Applicant is a very 
trustworthy person and the witness trusts him implicitly.119 Applicant is compliant in the 
areas of “security, contractual and financial,” and drives the point home all of the 
time.120 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”121 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”122   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”123 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to 
                                                          
117
 Tr. at 166. 
 
118
 Tr. at 171, 173. 
 
119
 Tr. at 173, 175. 
 
120
 Tr. at 174. 
 
121
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
122
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
123
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
 
23 
                                      
 
establish a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.124  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”125 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”126 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of both Applicant and the 
government’s primary witnesses, Dr. Q and Mr. G, observe their respective manner and 
deportment, appraise the way in which they responded to questions, assess their 
candor or evasiveness, read their statements, and listen to their testimony. As to 
Applicant, it is my impression that his explanations regarding his personal conduct are 
consistent, and considering the quality of the other information before me, have the 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
124
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
125
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
126
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
24 
                                      
 
solid resonance of truth. On the other hand, as to Dr. Q and Mr. G, my impressions will 
be discussed further below.  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  
 
Under AG ¶ 16(c), it is potentially disqualifying if there is: 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
It is also potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(d), if there is: 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include 
breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; (4) evidence 
of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or 
resources. 
 
 Security concerns may also be raised under AG ¶ 16(e) if there is: 
 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 
25 
                                      
 
In July 2002, Applicant and his employer, company X, agreed that it would be 
best for Applicant to leave the company under unfavorable circumstances because 
Applicant had sold equipment owned by company X on an internet website. In March 
2008, while serving as the president and FSO of company Z, Applicant submitted a DD 
Form 254 to DSS based on a “bona fide procurement requirement to access classified 
information,” and listed a particular contract number, when there apparently was no 
such “bona fide procurement requirement,” and there was no contractual relationship 
between the two companies listed. On May 1, 2008, Applicant’s employment at 
company Z and Newco was terminated for cause. On December 20, 2011, Applicant 
sent two text messages to his former employer at company Z, expressing anger over 
Dr. Q’s “campaign of constantly disparaging him.” AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) have 
seemingly been established by these situations and actions. However, further review 
and commentary are necessary. 
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if: 
 
the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  
 Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if: 
 
the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Similarly, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
 
 In addition, AG ¶ 17(f) may apply if “the information was unsubstantiated or from 
a source of questionable reliability.” 
 
 With respect to Applicant’s July 2002 issue, based on the evidence, the conduct 
was relatively minor, ten years have passed since it occurred, the action was isolated, 
and it happened under such unique circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur. 
Furthermore, Applicant conceded that he probably should have handled the situation 
differently. Department Counsel argues that the 2002 episode was merely the first in a 
pattern of episodes which ended when Applicant was terminated for cause in 2008, but 
that argument is too simplistic under the circumstances to deserve much weight. True, 
the 2002 incident resulted in a resignation under unfavorable circumstances, but one is 
left to ponder the severity of the incident after the employer returned Applicant’s check 
to him. Accordingly, as to the 2002 issue, AG ¶ 17(c) applies.  
 
 
26 
                                      
 
 As to the entire environment and circumstances involving the issues that 
included Applicant’s submission of the DD Form 254, and concluded with his eventual 
termination for cause, substantial discussion is appropriate. Both facts are established, 
for Applicant did submit the DD Form 254 and he was terminated for cause. However, 
as to the remaining allegations and facts leading up to the termination, I conclude the 
information was unsubstantiated or from sources of questionable reliability. Regarding 
the circumstances surrounding both incidents, there is conflicting evidence. For the 
government, there are two witnesses whose conclusions are based largely on their 
respective interpretations of Applicant’s actions. Those interpretations were sometimes 
supported by documentation, and sometimes not. Dr. Q’s allegations against Applicant, 
made in his letter of termination, his purported subsequent discoveries, the lawsuit filed 
against Applicant, his statements to the OPM investigator, and his testimony in this 
hearing, were so strong, and in many ways inconsistent, as well as contrary to 
documentary evidence, as to generate the impression that they were more revenge-
based than based solely on fact. While an employer’s decisions and characterizations of 
events are generally entitled to some deference, I am not bound by those 
characterizations if they are contradicted by other internally inconsistent or implausible 
evidence and are erroneous.127  
 
It is of substantial significance that Dr. Q settled the lawsuit he filed against 
Applicant, and was required to pay Applicant; Applicant was not required to pay Dr. Q 
any sum of money. It is also interesting to examine the various negative allegations Dr. 
Q made against Applicant, and with the assistance of documentation or prior 
inconsistent statements, to peel back layers of purported fact, until they were laid bare 
and proven to be inconclusive or baseless. After reviewing all of the evidence, I 
conclude that Dr. Q’s testimony and negative characterizations against Applicant are 
largely incredible and not worthy of substantial belief. Throughout the chronology of 
events leading from the submission of the proposed mitigation plan through the present, 
Dr. Q’s inconsistent statements and actions reflected an individual who was willing to 
propose changes to the status quo to DSS and Applicant, but who in reality chose to 
ignore the basic requirements of that plan to keep himself in control, in violation of the 
NISPOM and other DSS requirements. In doing so, he lied to DSS and to Applicant, his 
FSO. In this regard, it is interesting to note that no DSS or COR was called to furnish 
evidence against Applicant or to support the many positions furnished by Dr. Q. 
 
Nevertheless, that having been said, Applicant did submit the DD Form 254. 
There is unrebutted evidence that Applicant discussed various options with DSS, and, 
following DSS guidance, as FSO for Newco, Applicant submitted a FCL request with an 
attached DD Form 254 to DSS for company S, with the plan to use that company to 
control the classified business, based on his earlier discussions with Dr. Q. Dr. Q. 
denied any such discussions. As noted above, the request indicated it was based on a 
“bona fide procurement requirement to access classified information,” and listed a 
particular contract number because that was the contract with the longest remaining 
period of performance, and gave Applicant the best opportunity to work with Dr. Q. A 
staff specialist at FCB returned the request without final action because, under the 
                                                          
127
 See, e.g., Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564 at 575 (1985); ISCR Case No. 10-03886 at 3-4 
(App. Bd. April 26, 2012); ISCR Case No. 09-02839 at 4 (App. Bd. May 17, 2010). 
 
27 
                                      
 
NISPOM, prior government agency approval had not been obtained as required when 
this category of classified information is involved. It is unrebutted that Applicant and 
DSS conducted a routine exchange of correspondence on how to correct the DD Form 
254, including which blocks to fill, and which blocks to leave blank. This is not to say 
that I have uncritically accepted Applicant’s version of what had taken place. However, 
under the circumstances presented by the evidence, Applicant’s version seems more 
reasonable than the mere allegation of evil intent. 
 
Dr. Q and the government contend that Applicant’s actions constituted an 
attempt to steal a particular contract, but there is evidence that the contract had not 
been awarded to company Z. As noted above, the novation of government contracts, 
especially those dealing with classified information, while not an unusually complex 
process, requires that substantial steps be taken by various entities and individuals, 
including the corporations or companies involved, and the contracting officers. In this 
instance, since there was purportedly an 8(a) contract involved, the SBA involvement 
would also be required. Since one party or one individual cannot cause a novation 
without complying with the established process, it would have been impossible for 
Applicant to steal or even attempt to steal any contracts from company Z or Newco 
without Dr. Q’s knowledge and approval. 
 
 Mr. G, the second government witness (who was called as a rebuttal witness), 
offered a conclusion against Applicant based on input from Dr. Q and his own 
interpretations of Applicant’s actions, generally unsupported by documentation. Mr. G 
had joined in the lawsuit against Applicant, but he too had to settle the matter. Mr. G’s 
allegations against Applicant, made in the lawsuit filed against Applicant, and his 
testimony in this hearing, were strong and unshakable. Even when he was offered the 
opportunity to review documentation which would seem to support Applicant’s honesty 
regarding one issue, he chose to ignore the documentation and reiterate his conclusion 
that Applicant was dishonest regarding that issue. Mr. G stated that since DSS had not 
complained to him after Applicant had been terminated, there was no truth to 
Applicant’s statements that they had done so when Applicant was still the president and 
FSO of Newco. One such fact does not serve as proof of the other fact. While I have 
considered Mr. G’s comments, I have chosen to give them reduced weight due to Mr. 
G’s interest as an employee of Dr. Q and his own possible bias in the matter.  
 
 There is substantial evidence, including documentation and testimony from 
Applicant and Dr. Q supporting Applicant’s explanations regarding his frustrations over 
Dr. Q’s refusal to abide by the mitigation plan. That frustration was exacerbated by Dr. 
Q when he continued to exercise direct and indirect control over the activities of both 
company Z and Newco. Dr. Q also routinely ignored the advice of Applicant, his FSO.  
Dr. Q explained his actions “because the contracting officers decided to keep the 
operation of these specific contracts under [company Z], per their letter to DSS.” No 
DSS personnel testified to confirm or support Dr. Q’s stated position which stands 
starkly at odds with the purportedly accepted mitigation plan. There is no “questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that Applicant may not properly 
safeguard protected information.” To the contrary, there is abundant evidence that 
 
28 
                                      
 
Applicant possesses characteristics directly opposite to those characterizations. Based 
on all of the above, AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) have not been established.  
  
In December 2011, when Applicant saw Dr. Q’s assertions and characterizations 
about him, he thought back to the settlement agreement and believed Dr. Q had clearly 
violated it by constantly “disparaging” him. Since Applicant did not know how to stop Dr. 
Q from his actions, he sent Dr. Q the two text messages. As noted above, in sending 
those texts, Applicant simply wanted Dr. Q to cease lying about him, especially after the 
settlement agreement, and did not intend to harm or threaten him. Applicant denied any 
intention of keeping Dr. Q from cooperating with the OPM investigation, he simply 
wanted Dr. Q to stop his campaign of constantly disparaging him, and to tell the truth. It 
is interesting to note that the communications occurred after the OPM interview and not 
before it. Dr. Q’s position that Applicant tried to coerce and threaten him not to 
cooperate with the OPM investigation is unsupported by any other evidence, and is 
merely Dr. Q’s opinion. Nevertheless, while the texts may not have been intended to 
threaten Dr. Q, they were rather juvenile and unwise. AG ¶ 16(e) has been established. 
 
 The disparaging remarks and negative characterizations by Dr. Q and Mr. G 
stand in stark contrast to the positive characterizations made by Applicant’s character 
witnesses  – individuals who have known and worked with him over a number of years. 
They describe Applicant as a straightforward, straight shooting, honest person, with the 
utmost integrity. As to SOR ¶ 1.d., AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. As noted above, 
Appellant was suspected of a lengthy litany of personal and corporate misconduct, 
initially in 2002, and subsequently during the period 2008 through 2011. In July 2002, 
Applicant and his then-employer agreed that it would be best for Applicant to leave the 
 
29 
                                      
 
company under unfavorable circumstances because Applicant had sold equipment 
owned by the employer on an internet website. In March 2008, while serving as the 
president and FSO of another company, Applicant submitted a form to DSS based on a 
“bona fide procurement requirement to access classified information,” and listed a 
particular contract number, when there apparently was no such “bona fide procurement 
requirement,” and there was no contractual relationship between the two companies 
listed. On May 1, 2008, Applicant’s employment was terminated for cause. In December 
2011, Applicant sent two text messages to his former employer expressing anger over 
the employer’s campaign of constantly disparaging him. 
  
 The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is much more 
substantial. Applicant was appointed an FSO when Dr. Q lost his personnel security 
clearance and the corporation was threatened with losing the FCL. Despite assurances 
by Dr. Q that the proposed mitigation plan would be immediately implemented as 
required by DSS once the plan was accepted, he refused to do so. He stalled. Instead 
of accepting his FSO’s advice, Dr. Q relied on his two teams of attorneys and ignored 
his obligations and responsibilities in an effort to maintain control over his companies. 
Applicant’s frustrations increased over Dr. Q’s refusal to abide by the mitigation plan. As 
the FSO and a business partner, Applicant offered Dr. Q some options, and 
commenced working on those options. Unhappy with Applicant’s efforts either to force 
him to relinquish control over his companies or cede control over classified contracts to 
a company established by Applicant, Dr. Q terminated Applicant for cause. Dr. Q sued 
Applicant, but that lawsuit was settled, and Dr. Q was required to pay Applicant a 
substantial sum of money. Although the settlement stipulated that Dr. Q and his 
companies and managerial personnel and Applicant and his company and managerial 
personnel not make any disparaging or derogatory remarks about each other to any 
third party, Dr. Q commenced a campaign of constantly disparaging Applicant. 
Applicant finally had enough of Dr. Q’s actions, and in December 2011, sent Dr. Q two 
texts to get Dr. Q to cease lying about him, especially after the settlement agreement. 
Applicant did not intend to harm or threaten Dr. Q, and had no intention of keeping Dr. 
Q from cooperating with the OPM investigation regarding Applicant’s security clearance 
review.  
 
 In evaluating this case, I have considered Applicant’s actions and efforts under 
the concept of a “meaningful track record” of security consciousness, compliance, 
honesty, and integrity. Appellant has offered substantial evidence of those 
characteristics. The negative evidence from Dr. Q, as well as Mr. G, is in large measure 
self-contradictory and largely based upon speculation and conjecture. The conclusion 
that Appellant lied or tried to steal contracts is based upon false premises. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the handling protected information and personal conduct conditions security concerns. 
See AG ¶¶ 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(9).  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without substantial questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
 
30 
                                      
 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant    
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
