 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06701 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 14, 2012. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 22, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 19, 2012, with a hearing date of August 16, 2012. The 
 
2 
 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
7, which were admitted into evidence without objections, although Applicant did 
question the accuracy of some of the factual information in GE 6. I informed him those 
questions would go to the weight of the document.1 Counsel’s exhibit index was marked 
as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not offer documentary evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 31, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, except for SOR 
¶ 1.d. These admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is married and has two adult children. He currently 
works for a defense contractor as a systems engineer. He began working for his current 
employer in 2009. He previously worked for the private sector for 23 years until he was 
laid off in 2001. After this layoff, he worked for a government agency for over six years. 
He was laid off from this job in 2008. He held a security clearance in that position. He 
holds a bachelor’s degree in computer science. He has no military service.2   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes demonstrating excessive use of 
alcohol in the following manner: In 2006, being arrested, charged, and pleading nolo 
contendere to driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI); in 2007, having his security 
clearance revoked by another government agency because of alcohol abuse concerns; 
in 2008 and 2011, being diagnosed by qualified medical professionals as alcohol 
dependent; from age 16 years old until at least July 2011, consuming alcohol, 
sometimes in excess and to the point of intoxication; and his continued use of alcohol. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e) 
  
 Applicant began drinking when he was 16 years old. His drinking frequency 
progressed through his adult years. In 2001, after he was laid off from his job, his 
drinking occurred on a daily basis at the rate of three to four beers a day and three 
shots of whiskey. In 2006 he was arrested for DUI. He had a blood alcohol level of .12 
percent. He pled nolo contendere to the charge. He was working for another 
government agency at the time of his arrest and held a security clearance. He was 
required by his employer to undergo alcohol counseling. As a result of the counseling, 
his security clearance was revoked. In 2008, he was laid off from his position.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-29. 
 
2 Tr. at 33; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 34-35; GE 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 While he was unemployed, he participated in a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. He was admitted into the program in July 2008 and was given an initial 
diagnosis of alcohol dependence by a certified alcohol counselor. He continued with the 
program through November 2008. He discontinued the program at that time because he 
had taken a new job and it was inconvenient for him to continue treatment because of 
his work schedule and his commuting time. Upon his departure, he was given an 
alcohol dependence diagnosis by a licensed clinical social worker. He was abstinent 
while participating in this program.4 
 
 After leaving the alcohol treatment program, he resumed drinking alcohol on a 
daily basis. He would consume up to five beers a day. He began experiencing other 
health problems such as gout flair ups. His physician told him to cut back on his alcohol 
consumption. In February 2009, he claims to have voluntarily reduced his drinking to 
weekend consumption only. Currently, he states that he drinks alcohol on an occasional 
weekend. His last consumption was at a wedding three weeks ago. He was selected as 
the designated driver for the group. He drank four beers that evening over the course of 
several hours. His longest period of abstinence, since he left the alcohol treatment 
program in November 2008, has been three weeks. He does not agree with some of the 
principles of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).5 
  
 In July 2011, as part of his current security clearance application, Applicant was 
evaluated by a medical doctor, specializing in addiction medicine, concerning his 
alcohol use. After a clinical interview, Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. 
The doctor also stated: “I do not believe a security clearance should be implemented 
until a satisfactory period of abstinence (6-12 months) has been demonstrated.” He also 
recommended that Applicant attend a men’s AA group. Applicant continues to consume 
alcohol and does not attend any AA group. He did not present any evidence concerning 
his work performance record or character evidence from friends, coworkers, or 
relatives.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 35-36; GE 5. 
 
5 Tr. at 38-42, 45, 47, 50. 
 
6 Tr. at 39, 45, 52; GE 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Four are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
(d) diagnosis by a qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or dependence; and 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant’s pattern of drinking from 1974 (when he was 16 years old) to July 
2011, including a DUI conviction, and his diagnosis of alcohol dependence by both a 
licensed clinical social worker and a medical doctor, support the application of all the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol despite his alcohol dependence 
diagnosis. The reoccurrence of his alcohol use and abuse is a reality as long as he 
continues to consume alcohol. His past pattern of alcohol use casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
 Although Applicant sought treatment in 2008, he failed to complete the program 
even though he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He continues to consume alcohol 
despite his diagnosis, and therefore refuses to acknowledge his issues of alcohol 
dependence. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant did not successfully complete an inpatient alcohol treatment program in 
2008. He discontinued treatment prior to its conclusion. He has not established a 
pattern of abstinence, nor does he participate in AA or any similar group. AG ¶ 23(d) 
does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
his company. I also considered the seriousness of his actions. Additionally, I considered 
his partial completion of an alcohol treatment program. However, Applicant’s alcohol 
dependence is longstanding. He continues to consume alcohol despite the multiple 
recommendations to cease this activity. It is affecting his health through his gout 
affliction. A little over a year ago, a medical doctor performed the latest evaluation and 
recommended that Applicant have between six and twelve months of abstinence before 
a security clearance should be considered for him. Applicant has zero months of 
abstinence because he continues to consume alcohol. Applicant’s continued 
consumption of alcohol raises security concerns and he did not meet his burden to 
provide sufficient evidence to mitigate those concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
