                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 09-06978
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 13, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
           Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on November 25, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1)  On May 25, 2011, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B and E for Applicant.  The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 28, 2011, and requested an
administrative decision without a hearing.  Department Counsel requested that the case
be converted to a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to
the undersigned Administrative Judge on July 21, 2011.  A notice of hearing was initially
issued on August 3, 2011, scheduling the hearing for September 6, 2011.  The
Applicant was in Afghanistan and unable to be present.  The matter was rescheduled on
January 20, 2012, and set for February 16, 2012.  The Applicant was still unable to be
present at the hearing. After extensive conversations with the Applicant’s security
department, the matter was rescheduled on March 9, 2012, and set for July 30, 2012.
At the hearing, the Applicant presented four documentary exhibits, referred to as
2
Applicant’s exhibits A through D, which were received without objection.  He also
testified on his own behalf.  The Government presented three exhibits referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection.  The transcript
of the hearing (Tr.) was received on August 7, 2012.  Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
concerning the current political conditions in Afghanistan.  (Tr. p.20.)  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 23.)  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record.  The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDING OF FACTS
The Applicant is 61 years old and married.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as a Linguist, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence, which could result in the
compromise of classified information.
The Applicant was born in 1950 in Kabul, Afghanistan.  He grew up, attended
high school, and served one year in the military  in Afghanistan.  In 1976, he immigrated
to the United States to attend college with the intent of returning to Afghanistan.
Instead, he remained in the United States and became a naturalized United States
citizen in 1999.  The Applicant is married and has two native-born American children.
For the past three-and-a-half years he has been employed with a defense contractor, in
a highly sensitive position stationed in Afghanistan.  (Tr. p. 29.)
The Applicant testified that he comes from a very wealthy and influential family in
Afghanistan.  He explained that his father’s family ruled Afghanistan for almost 200
years.  They are of the same tribe as all of the kings of Afghanistan.  (Tr. p. 39).  His
family is very well-known and respected by the Afghan people and hated by the Taliban.
He also testified that culturally Afghan families are very close, as is his family.  (Tr. p.
38.) 
The Applicant has a number of relatives that include several cousins and an
uncle who have held or are presently holding high ranking positions in the Afghan
government.  One of his cousins was a high level Afghan official.  He is now retired and
3
living in the United States.  (See allegation 1.(a) of SOR and Tr. p. 32.)  The Applicant’s
uncle was a high ranking Afghan official in one capacity, and then he became a high
ranking Afghan official for another agency.  He is now living in the United States.  (See
allegation 1.(c) of SOR and Tr. pp. 36-37.)  Another cousin, the daughter of a high
ranking Afghan official, lives in Afghanistan but works for a United States company.  (Tr.
p. 43.)  Another cousin was a high level Afghan official.  He presently lives in the United
States.  (See allegation 1.(d) of SOR and Tr. p. 40.)  The Applicant has a friend who is a
high ranking Afghan official.  (See allegation 1.(b) of SOR and Tr. p. 34.)  The Applicant
believes that his friend is still an Afghan citizen, but he has not had contact with him for
the last five years.  The Applicant’s brother is a citizen of Afghanistan and resides in the
United States.  (Tr. pp. 41-42.)  His two cousins and uncle, discussed above, are United
States citizens.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process. 
The Applicant completed two security clearance applications, one dated January
30, 2008, and the other dated November 25, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  In
response to questions concerning his relatives and associates on the application, the
Applicant failed to disclose any of his relatives or associates that have worked for or are
presently working for a foreign government.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  He has provided
no reasonable excuse for failing to answer these questions correctly.  (Tr. p. 45.)
During an interview with a DoD investigator dated June 22, 2009, the Applicant
failed to reveal that he had a friend who is a high ranking Afghan official.  (Tr. p. 45.)
The Applicant could not explain why he did not tell the investigator about this foreign
friend.  (Government Exhibit 3.)
During that same interview, the Applicant described his uncle and two cousins as
“distant relatives” with whom he had no contact and learned of them from information
from other family members.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  The Applicant testified, however,
that he comes from a large, close, wealthy, influential family who is well known in
Afghanistan.  (Tr. p. 39.)    
In response to interrogatories dated September 22, 2010, the Applicant was
asked if he has any relatives or friends who have ever been employed by a foreign
government.   The Applicant answered, “NO.”  (Government Exhibit 2.)  This was a
blatantly false answer.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Tr. pp. 32 - 45)       
The Applicant stated that he has 300 family members and that he listed his
father, mother, brother and sisters.  (Tr. p. 45.)  He gave no legitimate reason as to why
he failed to disclose any of his high ranking foreign government family members and/or
his friend to the Government on his security clearance applications, during his
interviews and in response to interrogatories.  (Tr. pp. 44 - 45.)  It is clear from the
4
record that he is close to his family.  It can only be presumed that he did not want the
government to know about these family members or his friend.   
A letter of recommendation from the Applicant’s immediate supervisor indicates
that the Applicant has served with distinction in his position for the United States.  He is
said to have performed his duties admirably and with respect.  His service has been
exemplary and has helped our forces to accomplish their mission to great success.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)
A letter of recommendation from the commander states that the Applicant has
served brilliantly in his position and has always acted with calm and cool demeanor.  He
is said to have performed his tasks with efficiency while respecting the culture of the
Afghanistan and Pakistani people.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.) 
A letter from the military headquarters commanding officer indicates that the
Applicant has performed his duties in an exceptional manner and has demonstrated
loyalty, reliability, trustworthiness and integrity to the United States.  He has served in a
demanding position which he executed flawlessly over the past ten months.  He has
excellent skills and an ability to built rapport with high ranking Government officials.  He
has a unique ability to quickly process, analyze and translate with appropriate meaning
invaluable information.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
The Applicant has received several certificates of appreciation for his
outstanding  job performance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A.)
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is an Islamic republic.  It has been an independent nation since August 19,
1919, after the British relinquished control.  In December 1979, Soviet forces invaded
and occupied Afghanistan.  Afghan freedom fighters, known as mujaheddin, opposed
the communist regime.  The resistance movement eventually led to the Geneva
Accords, signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union.  In
mid-1990's the Taliban rose to power largely due to the anarchy and the divisions of the
country among warlords that arose after the Soviet withdrawal.  The Taliban sought to
impose an extreme interpretation on the entire country and committed massive human
rights violations.  The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden since the
mid-1990's, to al-Qa’ida generally, and to other terrorist organizations.  After September
11, 2001 terrorist attacks, U.S. demands that Afghanistan expel Bin-laden and his
followers were rejected by the Taliban.  U.S. forces and a coalition partnership
commenced military operations in October 2001 that forced the Taliban out of power by
November 2001.  
Although there has been some progress since the Taliban was deposed,
Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges, principally defeating terrorists and
insurgents, recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and rebuilding a shattered
physical, economic and political infrastructure.  Human rights problems included
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; poor prison conditions, widespread official
impunity; ineffective government investigations of local security forces; arbitrary arrest
and detention; judicial corruption; violation of privacy rights, restrictions of freedom of
religion, limits on freedom of movement; violence and societal discrimination against
5
women; sexual abuse of children; abuses against minorities; trafficking in persons;
abuse of worker rights; and child labor.  Overall, the State Department has declared that
the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, and travel to
all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, landmines,
banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups and the possibility of terrorist
attacks.   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.
 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7. (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15. The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
6
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16. (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities; and
16. (b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other
official government representative.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The voluntariness of participation;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
7
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in foreign influence and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
 This evidence indicates unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the
Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there
is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guidelines B
and E of the SOR.
Under Foreign Influence, Guideline B, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the Mitigating Conditions are applicable.  
This is a unique case.  It is noted that the Applicant has lived most of his life in
the United States, has become a naturalized United States citizen, and has two native
born American children.  Despite this, he comes from a very wealthy, close, influential
family in Afghanistan, who are or have been high level officials in the Afghan
government.  These relatives, who are or have been high level officials, are foreign
8
contacts that pose a significant security risk.  His family is well-known in Afghanistan
and as such the Applicant, who carries the name, is a prime target for the Taliban.  This
in turn subjects the United States to an undue risk of danger.  Although his high ranking
foreign government family members are now United States citizens, they obviously
maintain relatively close ties with the Afghan Government because of the positions they
have held or presently hold.  Multiple family members who maintain close
communication with the Applicant, and who may be influenced by the Afghan
Government, is of utmost concern here.  Therefore, the emotional bond that the
Applicant has with his foreign family members are foreign contacts that poses a security
risk.  Under the heightened scrutiny analysis, the Applicant’s family in Afghanistan pose
a significant security risk.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under this guideline. 
Under Personal Conduct, Guideline E, Disqualifying Conditions 16. (a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities, and 16. (b) deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative apply.  None of the
Mitigating Conditions are applicable.
I find that the Applicant intentionally falsified two security clearance applications
by failing to disclose his foreign contacts, in response to interrogatories, and during an
interview with the investigator from DoD.  His failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process raises serious questions about his
trustworthiness.  Accordingly I find against the Applicant under this guideline.   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  I have also
considered his favorable evidence, including his awards and favorable letters of
recommendation.  The evidence does not mitigate the negative effects his foreign
influence and personal conduct can have on his ability to safeguard classified
information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.    
9
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.    
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.    
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant. 
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.d.:    Against the Applicant.
 
CONCLUSION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
