 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09767 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption, but he did mitigate the concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption and Guideline H, drug involvement. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 14, 2012, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on June 29, 2012. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
he received it on July 24, 2012. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit a reply. 
The case was assigned to me on September 24, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted allegations ¶¶ 1.c - 1.d and 2.a – 
2.d. He denied ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e of the SOR. The admissions will be treated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He has been divorced once and either is separated or 
divorced a second time (the record is unclear). He has two children from his first 
marriage. He has worked as a software engineer for a defense contractor since October 
2009. He has a master’s degree. He has no prior military service and has not previously 
held a security clearance. He was the subject of a favorable public trust determination 
by another government agency (AGA) in 2006.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) consuming alcohol to the 
point of intoxication from his high school years to the present; (2) receiving substance 
abuse counseling from March 2009 through August 2011, where he was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependence; (3) receiving inpatient substance abuse treatment from May 
through June 2009, where he was diagnosed with alcohol and cannabis dependence; 
(4) receiving outpatient substance abuse treatment from June through August 2009, 
where he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence; (5) continuing to consume alcohol 
despite his alcohol dependence diagnosis (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e.); (6) using marijuana from 
January 2003 through June 2009; (7) using cocaine from January 2003 through May 
2009; (8) being diagnosed as cannabis dependent (see (3) above); and (9) purchasing 
marijuana and cocaine (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.d).2 
  
 Applicant first started drinking alcohol when he was in high school. Prior to last 
year, he became intoxicated at least once a week. He usually drank in social settings 
with family and friends. He drank both beer and wine. He did not know how much 
alcohol it took for him to become intoxicated, but at some point he was drinking up to 12 
beers on an almost daily basis. At a certain point, the drinking was depressing him to 
the extent that he sought out treatment in March 2009.3 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5, 7. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Items 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was seen on an outpatient basis by a licensed clinical psychologist 
from a recognized substance abuse program starting in March 2009. He was given an 
initial diagnosis of, among other things, alcohol dependence. During the course of this 
outpatient treatment program, he was admitted to an inpatient program from May 
through June 2009. He was given a discharge diagnosis by a physician of alcohol and 
cannabis dependence. Additionally, his prognosis was described as “guarded”. He 
followed his inpatient treatment with an outpatient program from June to August 2009. 
No records were made available from this treatment program, but Applicant admitted to 
attending this program in a statement to a DoD investigator and in his answer to the 
SOR. In August 2009, he resumed counseling session with the clinical psychologist he 
first saw in March 2009. Those counseling sessions were on a regular basis (sometimes 
weekly, sometimes longer) and lasted until he moved out of the area because of a job 
move in August 2011. At his last session before the move, his psychologist 
recommended that he get involved with Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings upon 
arrival and find a therapist in a timely manner. There is no evidence of continued 
counseling at his new location.4 
 
 Applicant admitted that after his relocation in August 2011, he began drinking 
alcohol again. He drank on a number of occasions in the evenings before he went to 
bed. He claims to have stopped drinking again and resumed attending AA meetings 
beginning in November 2011. He described his resumption of drinking as, “a brief 
relapse between August 18, 2011 and November 29, 2011.” He claims a desire to 
“pursue continuous sobriety the remainder of my life.”5 
  
 Applicant used marijuana in college during the 1980s. He also admitted to 
distributing marijuana to his friends at that time. He was a habitual marijuana user from 
January 2003 until May 2009. He used on weekends at home and for recreational 
purposes. He either rolled joints or smoked from a pipe. His last use of marijuana was in 
May 2009 before he entered the inpatient substance abuse program. He has not used 
marijuana since then. He also used cocaine between five and ten times between 
January 2003 and May 2009. He used it recreationally at parties or while camping. He 
also contributed to buying the cocaine. He has not used cocaine since he entered the 
inpatient substance abuse program in May 2009.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 5, 7, 8. 
 
5 Items 3, 5. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying and considered the following relevant: 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or dependence; and  
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 Applicant’s pattern of drinking, his diagnosis of alcohol dependence in March and 
June 2009, and his resumption of alcohol consumption beginning in August or 
September 2011, after he received alcohol treatment, support the application of all the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and considered the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
 
6 
 
 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant has a demonstrated pattern of alcohol abuse related back many years. 
These incidents were not infrequent, nor did they happen under unusual circumstances. 
Applicant recently used alcohol despite receiving alcohol treatment, thus he has not 
established that similar incidents are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in March and August 2009 by two 
different medical providers. Applicant resumed drinking again from September 2011 to 
November 2011 and has not resumed counseling. He claims to have resumed AA 
participation, but provided no supporting evidence of such participation. With his 
resumption of alcohol consumption less than one year ago, and with an alcohol 
dependence diagnosis, he has not established a pattern of abstinence. AG ¶ 23(b) does 
not apply.  
 
 Although Applicant completed an alcohol treatment program, he has not 
continued his abstinence and there is a lack of evidence of AA participation. He also did 
not provide evidence of a favorable diagnosis by a medical professional. AG ¶ 23(d) 
does not apply.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including…purchase, sale, or distribution; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly authorized medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana and cocaine on a number of occasions. He also 
purchased cocaine and marijuana for his own use. In August 2009, he was diagnosed 
as cannabis dependent. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s use of drugs was frequent, particularly marijuana, and fairly recent 
(last use May 2009). His period of abstinence is sufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s 
intent not to use in the future. He completed his substance abuse program in May 2009 
and has remained abstinent from marijuana and cocaine use since then. AG ¶ 26(a) 
does not apply, and AG ¶¶  26(b) and 26(c) both apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s age, 
 
8 
 
 
education, his 2009 diagnosis as being alcohol dependent, and his recent resumption of 
drinking after treatment and two years of sobriety. I also considered Applicant’s total 
abstention from marijuana and cocaine since his treatment in 2009. Although Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement concerns, he has not presented sufficient mitigating 
evidence to overcome the alcohol concerns stated in the SOR. 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
