 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05120 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a diagnosed alcohol abuser convicted of an April 2009 driving while 
intoxicated (DWI) offense, his fourth alcohol-related driving incident. Despite months of 
counseling, he resumed drinking in situations conducive to his excessive consumption in the 
past. In late August 2012, he began new counseling for the education and support needed 
to help him make the changes necessary to prevent recurrence. The alcohol consumption 
concerns are not fully mitigated, but personal conduct concerns were not established 
because Applicant did not deliberately falsify his response to interrogatories. Clearance 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 17, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, explaining why it could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility. DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
 
 
 2 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated answer, in which he responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing. On July 13, 2012, the case was assigned to me to 
consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him. On July 20, 2012, I scheduled a hearing for August 15, 2012. 
On August 7, 2012, I issued an amended notice moving the hearing to August 16, 2012, to 
accommodate the Government’s travel schedule, with no objection from Applicant. 
 
The hearing was convened as rescheduled. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) 
and four Applicant exhibits (AEs A-D) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant also testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received by DOHA on August 28, 
2012. 
 
I held the record open after the hearing until August 30, 2012, for Applicant to 
submit additional documents. On August 29, 2012, Applicant submitted a letter from a 
licensed alcohol counselor, which was entered as AE E without objection. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline G that Applicant was convicted of an April 2009 
driving while intoxicated (DWI) offense (SOR 1.a); that as a result of that conviction, he 
attended a multiple offender program in September 2009, received counseling with a 
licensed alcohol and drug counselor (LADC) from October 2009 to May 2010, and 
attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings starting in December 2009 (SOR 1.b); that 
he was drinking alcohol as of June 2011 and intended to continue to do so in the future 
(SOR 1.c); that he was diagnosed with alcohol abuse in September 2011 and 
recommended to attend counseling with an LADC, abstain from alcohol and drugs, attend 
AA, and be evaluated by an LADC after completing treatment; and that he attended weekly 
substance abuse group treatment from September 22, 2011, through January 12, 2012 
(SOR 1.e). Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his June 1, 2011, response to 
interrogatories when he denied ever receiving medical treatment, counseling, or supportive 
treatment because of the use of alcohol (SOR 2.a). 
 
Applicant admitted the Guideline G allegations without explanation. As for the 
Guideline E allegation, he admitted that he had responded negatively to whether he had 
ever received treatment or counseling due to the use of alcohol. However, he denied any 
intentional falsification in that he had indicated that he attended a multiple offender 
program in September 2009, LADC counseling from October 2009 to May 2010, and AA. 
 
 3 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the alcohol consumption allegations are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old maintenance mechanic, who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since September 2001. (GEs 1, 3; Tr. 27.) He has held a secret 
clearance for most of his employment. (GE 1.) Applicant is in charge of handling chemicals 
and hazardous materials (GE 2), and he needs his clearance to access secured areas at 
work. (Tr. 33.) Applicant completed two years of junior college and 2.5 years of university 
study, but he did not complete his degree. (Tr. 30.) Although he has never married, 
Applicant has been in a relationship for the past nine years. He has an 18-year-old son, 
who lives with him. (GE 3; Tr. 29.) Applicant and his son have a close relationship. (Tr. 29.) 
  
Applicant had his first drink of alcohol at age 15. At age 18, around 1985, he began 
drinking socially once a month, two to three beers per occasion. Alcohol led him to feel 
more relaxed and outgoing. He worked for one year after high school, at a pizza place, to 
save money for college. (Tr. 35.) In college, Applicant consumed five to six beers at a 
sitting on the weekends.
1
 Occasionally, he drank as many as 12 to 15 beers with no 
adverse consequences. At age 23, Applicant reduced his use of alcohol to every other 
weekend, four to six beers each time. (GE 3.) However, on at least one occasion in 1990, 
he consumed about 10 to 12 beers at a barbecue and then attempted to drive home. 
Applicant failed to negotiate a curve due to excessive speed, and he crashed into a ditch. 
Applicant admitted to responding police that he had been drinking. He was arrested for 
driving under the influence (DUI). He pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of reckless driving, 
lost his license for 90 days, and had to pay court fees of $475. (GE 2; Tr. 37.) Applicant 
testified that he also attended AA for 15 weeks, where he learned that drinking and driving 
was a “very serious issue.” (Tr. 37.) 
 
En route home after drinking 8 to 10 beers at a bar in 1997, Applicant was pulled 
over for driving the wrong way down a one-way street. Following the administration of field 
sobriety tests, the police arrested him for DUI. Applicant pleaded guilty, again to a reduced 
charge of reckless driving. He lost his license for about six months, and he was required to 
attend a weekend alcohol education class that cost him $800. Applicant attended 
recommended AA meetings twice weekly for one month. (GE 2; Tr. 38.)  
 
In early April 2000, Applicant drank eight beers at a pizza place. He struck a tree on 
the way home, totaling his car. Since he was only two blocks from his residence, he walked 
home and called the police. After field sobriety testing, he was arrested for DUI. He pled 
                                                 
1
Applicant indicated during his September 2011 substance use evaluation that he began drinking every 
weekend in college, five to six beers at a sitting and occasionally as many as 12 to 15 beers. (GE 3.) He 
testified discrepantly at his August 16, 2012, security clearance hearing that he attended college in a 
predominantly dry state, so his drinking was “very limited.” (Tr. 35.) 
  
 
 4 
guilty to the charge, and was ordered to pay $460 restitution for property damage. Also, he 
lost his operating privileges for 90 days.
2
 (GE 2; Tr. 39-40.) 
 
Applicant’s pattern of drinking four to six beers per occasion every other weekend 
eventually became three to eight beers at bars with friends twice a week by 2009. About 
once a month, he drank more than eight beers to intoxication. After work on April 25, 2009, 
Applicant stopped off at a local fraternal club, where he consumed alcohol with some 
regularity on Friday nights. He drank around ten 12-ounce beers while socializing with a 
friend. Applicant decided to drive home, even though he felt very tired and had been 
drinking. He was pulled over for failure to stay in marked lanes and arrested for DWI after 
failing field sobriety tests. At the police station, his blood alcohol level registered at .10%. 
(GE 2; Tr. 43-46.) Around early May 2009, Applicant reported his DWI arrest to his facility 
security officer (FSO) as required by employees holding a security clearance. (AE B; Tr. 
31.)  
 
In July 2009, Applicant pled guilty to DWI and was ordered to attend a multiple 
offender program, which cost him $1,875. He was fined $500 plus fees, and his license 
was revoked for 320 days. Applicant attended a week-long residential multiple offender 
program in September 2009, where it was recommended that he obtain ten months of 
alcohol counseling. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 46-47.) 
 
Applicant attended 15 to 21 sessions of outpatient alcohol counseling with a LADC 
(LADC #1) for about six months starting in October 2009. (Tr. 49.) On the advice of the 
LADC, he also went to one AA meeting a week starting December 2009. (GEs 2, 3; Tr. 49.) 
According to Applicant, she diagnosed him as being “addicted to alcohol” and advised him 
to abstain. (Tr. 49.) 
 
On November 16, 2009, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his security clearance. He listed his April 2009 
DUI and then current counseling with LADC #1. (GE 1.) 
 
On March 22, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant provided details about his four alcohol-
related driving incidents, which he characterized as isolated events. He also denied ever 
                                                 
2
The SOR does not allege the alcohol-related incidents that occurred in 1990, 1997, and 2000, presumably 
because they had been adjudicated favorably. Applicant was granted his secret clearance around 2001. In 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which 
conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: 
  
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for the whole-person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3. 
  
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004) and ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes, and not for any other 
purpose.   
 
 5 
being diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or as alcohol dependent, including by his current 
counselor, whom he was seeing once every other week since October 2009. Applicant 
added that he was attending AA once weekly on the advice of his LADC. He indicated that 
after his April 2009 DUI, he reduced his alcohol consumption to three beers at a sitting 
twice a month when out at bars with friends. He denied drinking to intoxication since then, 
and he expressed his intent to maintain his current level of alcohol use. (GE 2.) 
 
Between March 2010 and September 2010, Applicant attended about eight AA 
meetings. He “thought [he] got a better understanding of how alcohol controls people’s 
lives and how it controlled [his].” (Tr. 67-68.)  
 
On June 1, 2011, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories about his alcohol 
consumption. He indicated that he was still drinking, around 24 to 26 ounces of beer once 
or twice a week, although not to intoxication or to ever reporting to work under the 
influence.
3
 He expressed his intent to continue to drink alcoholic beverages. Applicant 
responded negatively to whether he had ever received “any medical treatment, counseling, 
or supportive treatment from a drug or alcoholic rehabilitation center or other organization 
due to the use of alcohol,” as well as to whether he was participating in AA. (GE 2.) 
Applicant answered no because had already provided the information, as outlined in the 
report of subject interview sent to him with the interrogatories. (Tr. 58-60.)  In response to 
any arrests or charges, Applicant indicated that he had been charged with reckless driving 
in 1990 and 1997 and with DUI on April 5, 2000, and April 25, 2009. (GE 2.) 
 
 On September 20, 2011, Applicant was evaluated for substance use by a LADC 
(LADC #2) for his clearance renewal. In test scores and based on information self-
reported, Applicant exhibited some minimization about his substance abuse. He initially 
reported consuming one or two beers twice weekly since his April 2009 DUI, although 
occasionally, he consumed three or four beers on a daily basis. He later revealed that that 
“the four or five beers at times became five or six,” but he denied any daily drinking. 
Applicant indicated that he last drank on September 9, 2011, when he decided to stop 
“because nothing good has come out of drinking.” The LADC diagnosed Applicant with 
“alcohol abuse, rule out alcohol dependence.” Applicant matched two criteria associated 
with alcohol dependence, with three needed for the diagnosis, although in her clinical 
opinion, Applicant “may have under-reported his use and/or consequences of his use of 
alcohol.” The LADC recommended that Applicant participate in six to eight counseling 
sessions with a LADC, to further his understanding of the disease concept of addiction and 
his insight into his relationship with alcohol. She advised Applicant to abstain completely 
from all mood-altering substances, including alcohol, and to attend AA until he began 
counseling. His treating clinician would then determine the need for additional abstinence 
and AA. LADC #2 recommended that Applicant undergo another substance abuse 
evaluation after he completed counseling to rule out alcohol dependence. (GE 3.) 
 
                                                 
3 
Applicant testified that he drank “one or two beers twice a week, three beers at the most.” Yet, when asked 
whether he consumed alcohol in greater quantity before he began counseling in September 2011, Applicant 
responded, “I might have, but I’m not sure.” (Tr. 68.) 
 
 6 
From September 22, 2011, to January 12, 2012, Applicant attended weekly 
substance abuse group treatment sessions under the therapeutic guidance of a LADC 
(LADC #3) and the supervision of a licensed clinic social worker at a local mental health 
center. In the opinion of the substance abuse clinicians, Applicant achieved his treatment 
goals, and he was at low risk for recidivism. In addition to abstaining since September 9, 
2011, he showed improved insight and more accurate assessment into his relationship with 
alcohol. He also had in place a “believable plan for continued sobriety through identifying 
triggers, establishing a relapse prevention plan and adhering to it.” Applicant also attended 
weekly self-help meetings regularly, as required. (Tr. 79.) He expressed his intent to 
continue with AA. (AE D.) After counseling ended, Applicant attended only two or three 
more AA meetings and none after February 2012. (Tr. 69.) 
 
  Thinking he was “cured” of his drinking problem because he had abstained from 
alcohol while in counseling (Tr. 55), Applicant resumed drinking in March 2012, on “just a 
normal day.” He “probably had two or three” beers at home on a weekend. (Tr. 70-71.) He 
also drank once a week at the fraternal club, to as recently as August 8, 2012, although he 
took taxis home. (Tr. 55-56, 77.) Applicant admitted that he stayed at the club longer than 
he intended on occasion, depending on who was there (Tr. 78), although he denied 
consuming more than three drinks at a sitting since February 2012. (Tr. 71.) 
 
After receiving the SOR in May 2012, he considered returning to AA or counseling to 
show the Government that he was serious about dealing with his alcohol abuse problem, 
but in the end, he did not think his problem was severe. (Tr. 72.) At his August 16, 2012 
hearing, he expressed remorse for his past drunk driving and expressed a need for 
additional counseling, as he now believes alcohol should not be part of his life. (Tr. 28, 57.) 
He expressed his intent to abstain completely from alcohol (“I have to abstain from alcohol 
due to the fact that this overwhelming evidence is against me and there is no way that even 
if I try to have a few drinks and then get a ride, that it’s not going to trigger another incident 
or episode, so I just have to quit.”). (Tr. 61, 73.) As for his plan, he indicated he would 
attend AA and contact LADC #3 for additional counseling. (Tr. 81.) 
 
As of mid-August 2012, Applicant was still associating on a regular basis with friends 
who consume alcohol, and he identified being out at a club with friends as a trigger for him 
drinking more than two beers. (Tr. 76.)  He maintains that his job is more important to him 
than drinking beer with his friends. (Tr. 74.) On August 28, 2012, Applicant had the first of 
12 weekly counseling sessions with a LADC (LADC #4) to “help him establish recovery 
supports and help understand his addiction.” Applicant displayed a very positive and 
motivated attitude in his first session. (AE E.) 
 
Annual reviews of Applicant’s performance for the defense contractor confirm he 
has been a valuable contributor from the start of his employment. He has consistently 
displayed dedication, reliability, and competence in carrying out his duties. Applicant took it 
upon himself to learn hazardous waste and chemical management so as to improve his 
value to the team. For the rating periods 2008 and 2009, he was considered to be a high 
contributor, exceeding key objectives and expectations. In 2010 and 2011, he earned the 
highest rating, exceptional contributor, for completing job objectives far in excess of his 
 
 7 
employer’s expectations and demonstrating outstanding commitment. (AE C.) Applicant 
has been involved in no security incidents at work. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
 
 
 
 8 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G—Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” Applicant abused alcohol to the point of negative impact on his judgment, 
as evidenced by his drunk driving. Applicant’s April 2009 DWI implicates disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.” This DWI is the fourth alcohol-related offense on his record, 
which includes three previous arrests for DUI. Although Applicant pled down to reckless 
driving in the first two incidents, he drank enough to become intoxicated (10-12 beers at a 
barbecue in 1990 and 8-10 beers at a bar in 1997) on those occasions. He drank eight 
beers at a pizza place before his April 2000 DUI. Applicant’s April 2009 DWI must be 
evaluated in light of these previous failures to control impulses due to alcohol. 
 
 Applicant’s pattern of drinking four to six beers per occasion every other weekend 
after his April 2000 DUI eventually became three to eight beers at bars with friends twice a 
week by 2009. About once a month, he drank more than eight beers to intoxication. Before 
his arrest for DWI in April 2009, he drank ten 12-ounce beers while socializing with a friend 
at the fraternal club that he was still frequenting as of August 2012. AG ¶ 22(c), “habitual or 
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” also applies because 
of his episodes of binge drinking.
4
 
 
 AG ¶ 22(e), “evaluation if alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” is implicated 
with regard to a diagnosis of alcohol abuse. After his April 2009 DWI, Applicant completed 
a court-mandated, week-long residential multiple offender program. Ten months of 
counseling was recommended, and Applicant attended 15 to 21 sessions with LADC #1 
starting in October 2009. Applicant testified at his hearing that this LADC indicated he was 
addicted to alcohol, and she advised him to abstain completely. Yet, the file does not 
include any progress notes or summary from LADC #1 about her sessions with Applicant. 
LADC #2, who evaluated Applicant for substance use in September 2011, diagnosed him 
with alcohol abuse. (GE 3.) In her professional opinion, Applicant fell just short of meeting 
the criteria for alcohol dependence, although she could not completely rule it out. LADC #3, 
who counseled Applicant from September 22, 2011, to January 12, 2012, discussed 
Applicant’s recovery in terms of his “plan for continued sobriety.” This LADC and his 
                                                 
4
Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted definition of binge 
drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours. This definition of binge 
drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) National Advisory 
Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 
No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.   
 
 9 
supervisor, a LCSW, referred to alcohol as being “problematic” in Applicant’s life (AE D), 
but did not elaborate about the nature of the problem. Applicant entered counseling with 
LADC #4, reportedly to help him “establish recovery supports and help understand his 
addiction.” This therapist may well be of the opinion that Applicant is addicted to alcohol. 
However, this opinion is insufficient to support a formal diagnosis of alcohol dependency 
without some discussion of the diagnostic criteria pertinent to substance abuse. 
 
 That being said, Applicant clearly has an abusive relationship with alcohol. He 
resumed drinking after 15 to 21 counseling sessions with LADC #1. What began as three 
beers twice a month eventually became 24-36 ounces twice a week. By September 2011, 
he was drinking up to five or six beers at times. This drinking was against LADC #1’s 
therapeutic advice, whether or not it triggers AG ¶ 22(f), “relapse after diagnosis of alcohol 
abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” LADC #2 
diagnosed Applicant with alcohol abuse in September 2011. He stopped drinking and 
maintained abstinence while pursuing recommended counseling with LADC #3 from 
September 2011 to January 2012. Yet, Applicant stopped going to AA in February 2012, 
and he resumed drinking shortly thereafter, in March 2012.
5
 Abstinence and AA during his 
counseling with LADC #3 was required [“He maintained his abstinence during treatment 
and has a believable plan for continued sobriety through identifying triggers, establishing a 
relapse prevention plan and adhering to it.”]. It is less clear whether LADC #3 advised 
Applicant to continue abstinence after his counseling ended. 
 
 Even so, it is difficult to fully mitigate his drinking history under the adjudicative 
guidelines. AG ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot 
reasonably apply. His April 2009 DWI was not an aberration, but rather another incident in 
a pattern of irresponsible drinking. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues 
of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome the problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol 
abuser),” Applicant successfully completed his counseling with LADC #3 with a favorable 
prognosis.
6
 Yet, this prognosis of a low risk for recidivism was on information that Applicant 
planned to continue attending self-help meetings. Applicant attended only two or three AA 
meetings thereafter. (Tr. 69.) Furthermore, Applicant’s plan for continued sobriety after this 
counseling included “identifying triggers, establishing a relapse prevention plan, and 
adhering to it.” Applicant resumed drinking around March 2012 not only at home, but also 
                                                 
5 
LADC #2 left it up to Applicant’s treating LADC to determine whether Applicant needed to abstain completely 
from alcohol. 
 
6 
Applicant testified that he did not believe LADC #3 recommended that he continue with AA. (Tr. 79.) LADC 
#3’s summary of Applicant’s progress (AE D) was not specific about aftercare plans. That being said, the 
Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security 
concerns unless there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 
06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). 
 
 10 
at the fraternal club with friends. When asked about the triggers that could lead him to 
consume alcohol to intoxication, Applicant admitted that being with friends at the fraternal 
club is “definitely a trigger.” He drank alcohol at the club once a week, to as recently as 
August 8, 2012. After months of counseling with LADC #1 and LADC #3, and reportedly 
having shown “improved insight and more accurate assessment to his relationship with 
alcohol” (AE D), Applicant testified that even if he tried to have a few drinks, there was no 
way that it was not going to trigger another incident or episode of abusive drinking. He 
began counseling with LADC #4 after his hearing because he hadn’t figured out his alcohol 
problem. (Tr. 74.) In the context of AG ¶ 23(b), responsible use must be for a sufficient 
period of time to establish that Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability are not subject to 
question. Despite the absence of intoxication, the circumstances of his drinking since 
February 2012 raise considerable doubts about his reform. 
 
 For the same reasons, I also cannot give full mitigating weight to AG ¶ 23(d), which 
provides as follows:   
 
The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling 
or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in 
meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has 
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
There is no evidence to contradict Applicant’s testimony that he is no longer driving after 
drinking. He expressed a desire not to drink alcohol in the future. However, as of his 
hearing on August 16, 2012, Applicant had not otherwise shown that he was adhering to a 
credible relapse prevention plan. 
 
 Applicant is credited with starting counseling on August 28, 2012, in a program 
designed for the client that needs education and support to make the changes necessary 
to maintain recovery. Treatment goals include helping Applicant understand his “addiction” 
and establishing supports for his recovery. (AE E.) Applicant was apparently motivated 
during his first counseling session with LADC #4. Yet, in September 2011, he 
acknowledged to LADC #2 that it would be best for him to give up drinking. After 16 group 
counseling sessions under the guidance of LADC #3 and six months of abstinence, he 
resumed drinking beer on “just a normal day,” under no special circumstances, when he 
knew or should have known that his abusive relationship with alcohol was of concern to the 
Department of Defense. It is too soon to conclude that his alcohol abuse is safely behind 
him. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
 
 11 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant falsified his June 2011 response to 
interrogatories by responding negatively to whether he had “ever received any medical 
treatment, counseling or supportive treatment from a drug or alcoholic rehabilitation center 
or other organization due to the use of alcohol.” The undisputed evidence is that Applicant 
responded “No” to the inquiry. However, he denies deliberate falsification. While the 
question is unambiguous, Applicant credibly explained at his hearing that he answered no 
because he had already given the information in previous statements. (Tr. 58.) The 
documentary evidence confirms that Applicant disclosed his April 2009 DWI and his 
counseling with LADC #1 on his e-QIP. During his interview with the OPM investigator, 
Applicant discussed his alcohol-related arrests, his participation in the court-ordered 
multiple offender program, and his then ongoing counseling with LADC #1. Applicant 
completed his interrogatory response before his evaluation with LADC #2 and his 
subsequent counseling with LADC #3. Applicant’s denial of intentional falsification is 
accepted. The evidence does not establish any of the Guideline E disqualifying conditions, 
including AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, 
or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
7
 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I 
cannot ignore that the April 2009 DWI is Applicant’s fourth alcohol-related offense, even 
though it is the only one alleged. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant is currently 
drinking to intoxication. He also showed some reform by no longer driving after drinking. 
                                                 
7
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 12 
The issue is whether this is enough to avoid a recurrence of alcohol abuse. Applicant 
recognizes that socializing at the fraternal club is definitely a trigger for him. As of August 
2012, he asserted that his job was more important to him than drinking with his friends. At 
the same time, he admitted that there was a risk of alcohol abuse as long as he continued 
this socialization. His new counselor is going to work with him to establish necessary 
supports, but it is too soon to conclude that his alcohol abuse is safely behind him. It is well 
settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. 
Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990.). Based on the facts before me and the 
adjudicative guidelines that I am bound to consider, for the aforesaid reasons, I am unable 
to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant
8
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
8 
Treatment is viewed favorably provided Applicant achieves compliance and successful completion. SOR 1.d 
is resolved against Applicant because of the abusive drinking that led to a diagnosis of alcohol abuse.  
