 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-05060
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his use of illegal drugs while
holding a security clearance. His request to renew his security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(eQIP) on February 15, 2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
interrogatories  to Applicant seeking to clarify or augment information obtained by1
investigators. Based on his responses to the interrogatories and the results of the
background investigation, adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information.   On2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 Tr. 19 - 24.4
2
January 11, 2012, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guideline (AG)  for3
drug involvement (Guideline H).
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on June 1, 2012, and I set this matter to be heard on July 19, 2012. The
parties appeared as scheduled. The Government presented four exhibits, which were
admitted without objection as Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified and
proffered one exhibit, admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A.  I left the4
record open after the hearing to receive from Applicant additional relevant information.
The record closed on August 9, 2012, when I received Applicant’s post-hearing
submission, which is admitted without objection as Ax. B. DOHA received a transcript
(Tr.) of the hearing on July 27, 2012.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana during
high school and, at times, weekly, until about 1999 (SOR 1.a); that he used marijuana in
December 2009 and January 2010, while holding a security clearance (SOR 1.b); and
that the drug use alleged in SOR 1.b was discovered when he tested positive for
marijuana in a workplace drug screening, after which he completed employer-directed
drug abuse counseling from January through April 2012 (SOR 1.c). Applicant admitted
all three allegations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having
reviewed the response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following
additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 31 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since
April 2006. He has held a security clearance for most of the time he has held his current
job. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Tr. 28 - 29)
Applicant has one child, now six years old. He and the child’s mother lived
together from 2007 until late 2009. (Gx. 1; Tr. 29)
In January 2010, Applicant tested positive for marijuana in a workplace drug test.
(Gx. 1; Gx. 2) He had used marijuana three times while on holiday leave in late
December 2009 and early January 2010. The test was administered on January 18,
2010. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 3) He had also used marijuana during his junior and senior
years of high school. Before his 2009 use, he had last used marijuana in the summer of
1999. (Gx. 2; Tr. 30 - 31)
Applicant’s recent marijuana use began when a cousin visited his house during a
family Christmas gathering. The cousin went outside to smoke marijuana and Applicant
joined him for a few puffs from the joint his cousin offered. Applicant saw his cousin two
3
more times while Applicant was on holiday leave and smoked marijuana with the cousin
both times. Applicant decided to use marijuana on those occasions to relieve stress he
was experiencing from his relationship with his child’s mother. Applicant is no longer in a
relationship with her and he no longer associates with his cousin. (Gx. 2; Tr. 29, 39 - 41,
46)
Applicant obtained a commercial driver’s license (CDL) in 2006 as a requirement
for his current job. He works as a shipping and transportation work leader, which
involves driving trucks and other large industrial vehicles. As a result, he has always
been subject to periodic workplace drug testing. Before January 2010, he had not
tested positive for any illegal substance. (Gx. 2) When Applicant returned from holiday
leave in January 2010, he was ordered to take a drug test. After the test, but before he
knew the results, he told his supervisor that he had used marijuana and would likely test
positive. (Gx. 2)
After the positive test results came back, Applicant was suspended from work for
10 days, and his CDL was suspended for three months. He was also directed to obtain
a drug abuse evaluation and to enroll in a drug counseling or treatment program,
depending on the results of the evaluation. Applicant promptly obtained a drug
evaluation, which did not indicate a problem with drug abuse or addiction. Thereafter,
he attended 12 weekly drug counseling sessions with a licensed mental health
counselor. Applicant successfully completed all employer-directed evaluation and
counseling requirements, and his CDL privileges were restored in April 2010. (Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Tr. 50)
Applicant’s drug evaluation contained a recommendation that he undergo drug
testing each month for two years. Applicant passed monthly drug tests from February
2010 through at least August 2011. Records provided by Applicant show that he has
been tested since then, but the results are not available. Since completing the monthly
testing requirement in early 2012, he is still subject to less frequent testing as a normal
requirement of his job. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Ax. A; Ax. B)
Applicant’s work performance, before and after his positive drug test, has been
excellent. He has received numerous awards, pay bonuses, and other forms of
recognition for his work. Several evaluations since January 2010 note that he has
performed well since his suspension, and that he continues to test negative for drugs.
Applicant does not consume alcohol and he leads a healthy lifestyle through outdoor
recreation and personal hobbies. He has not been exposed to marijuana since January
2010, but made clear that he would leave any situation in which drugs were produced
as occurred at his house in 2009. Applicant is currently taking college courses and
carries a 3.5 grade point average. (Ax. A; Ax. B; Tr. 41 - 46)
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies6
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. Department Counsel bears the initial burden
of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny
or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must
be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If that burden is met, it then falls
to the individual to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one
has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.8
5
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency while he was in high
school in 1998 and 1999. In December 2009 and January 2010, while holding a security
clearance he received in 2006 for the job he currently holds, he also used marijuana
three times while on holiday leave. These facts raise a security concern addressed in
AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug 
in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, the Government established applicability of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse...) and 25(g) (any illegal drug use after
being granted a security clearance). 
Available information also requires application of the following mitigating
conditions under AG ¶ 26:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence ... 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
6
Applicant has not used illegal drugs in more than two years. His drug use in high
school has little security significance given his presumed lack of maturity as a teenager,
and because it is remote in time. 
By contrast, his more recent drug use bears more directly on his suitability for
access to classified information. It occurred as an adult and while holding a security
clearance. Applicant knew that drug use was inconsistent with government policy and
with the safety requirements of his job. However, he immediately realized that his drug
use was a serious lapse in judgment that could cost him his job. He advised his
supervisor of his drug use before the January 2010 test results were known. He
completed all of the employer-directed evaluation and counseling requirements in April
2010, and numerous workplace drug tests over the past two years have been negative.
The relationship that caused the stress from which he sought relief through marijuana
use ended in December 2009. Since January 2010, Applicant has not associated with
the cousin who supplied the marijuana. Applicant also completed an employer-
mandated drug counseling program after the failed test. There is no indication that he is
a drug abuser or is dependent on drugs, and Applicant leads a sober, productive
lifestyle that does not include association with drugs or drug users. 
All of the foregoing supports application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶
26(a), 26(b) and 26(d). I further conclude Applicant presented sufficient information to
show that his recent drug use was an aberration and that he is not likely to use illegal
drugs again. He has mitigated the security concerns about his drug involvement.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I further note that Applicant is 31
years old, has been employed by the same company since 2006, and has held a
security clearance during that time. Drug testing showed that Applicant used marijuana
in December 2009 and January 2010. Available information also shows that he was and
is an excellent employee, that he is a successful student, and that he is exceedingly
remorseful of his drug use. Consideration of the record as a whole supports a
reasonable conclusion that Applicant is not likely to use illegal drugs again, and that the
adverse conduct in this record does not detract from his overall good judgment and
reliability.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
