 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07725 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Remand Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a U.S.-born citizen, requested her Mexican citizenship and passport at 
age 22. She was made aware that her actions indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States. She initially was unwilling to surrender her passport 
(valid until 2015), or to renounce her foreign citizenship, because she wanted to work 
and live in Mexico along with her Mexican family members and friends. In May 2012, 
she stated her willingness to renounce her foreign citizenship and to surrender her 
foreign passport. She failed to provide evidence that she is no longer in possession of a 
foreign passport. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 5, 2010. On 
October 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline C 
 
2 
 
 
(Foreign Preference).1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 6, 2012, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 19, 2012, was 
provided to her by transmittal letter dated April 19, 2012. Applicant acknowledged she 
received the FORM on April 30, 2012. She was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. The case 
was assigned to me on June 21, 2012.  
 
On June 26, 2012, I denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed and alleged that she submitted a document in response to the 
FORM that was not considered by me before my decision was issued. On August 17, 
2012, the Appeal Board remanded the case to allow for an equitable resolution of this 
case by granting Applicant the opportunity to present the omitted document.  
 
On August 21, 2012, Applicant emailed the missing document (a one-page 
statement, dated May 14, 2012, marked Appellate Exhibit 1).2 Applicant’s May 14, 2012 
letter was fully considered by me before writing this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, 
including her SCA, her answers to the SOR, her April 2010 statement to a government 
investigator, and her May 14, 2012 written statement, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has never been 
married, and she has no children. Applicant’s mother was born in Mexico, and she is a 
registered alien living in the United States. Applicant’s father is a U.S. citizen. Applicant 
was born and raised in the United States. She graduated from a U.S. high school in 
June 2005, and was awarded a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university in August 
2009. Applicant started working for her current employer, a government contractor, in 
February 2010. She is an accounting technician. 
 
In her March 2010 SCA, Applicant disclosed that she travelled to Mexico in 2006, 
2007 (twice), 2008, and 2009 (twice). The first six times she used her U.S. passport to 
travel to Mexico. She visited family members and friends who are citizens and residents 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Appellate Exhibit (App.E.) 1 also includes a one-page Order, dated August 21, 2012; and a two 
page sequence of emails between me, Department Counsel, and Applicant. 
 
3 
 
 
of Mexico, and toured the country. From July 2009 to January 2010, she worked in 
Mexico as an intern in the fashion industry. Applicant has close personal contact with 
nine relatives (her grandmother, an uncle, aunt, four cousins, and her godparents) who 
are citizens and residents of Mexico. She also has a close relationship with her 
boyfriend, a citizen and resident of Mexico. 
 
On an unspecified date, Applicant applied for Mexican citizenship. In May 2009, 
she visited the Mexican embassy in the United States, and she was granted her 
Mexican citizenship. She also was issued a Mexican passport that will expire in June 
2015. Applicant used her Mexican passport to travel to Mexico and live there from July 
2009 until January 2010. 
 
In April 2010, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator about her 
request for Mexican citizenship, and her possession of a valid Mexican passport. 
Applicant explained that she was born and raised in the United States, and that her 
loyalty and allegiance is to the United States. She requested the Mexican passport to 
travel to Mexico to visit with her relatives. She also has a boyfriend who is a student in a 
Mexican university. She became a Mexican citizen to be able to work and live in Mexico 
along with her Mexican family members. 
 
The government investigator explained to Applicant the security-related concerns 
raised by her having dual citizenship with the United States and Mexico, and 
possessing a Mexican passport. Applicant was asked whether she would be willing to 
renounce her Mexican citizenship and to surrender her Mexican passport. Applicant 
stated that she would not renounce her Mexican citizenship or surrender her Mexican 
passport even if she was asked to do so.  
 
In her May 2012 answer to the FORM, Applicant explained that she solicited her 
Mexican citizenship and passport for convenience and as a matter of expediency. At the 
time, she wanted to work and establish herself as a fashion designer in Mexico. To work 
in Mexico, she either needed to go through a lengthy process to obtain legal residence, 
or bypass the lengthy process by obtaining her Mexican citizenship and passport.  
 
After six months in Mexico, Applicant realized that her fashion design career was 
not viable. She returned permanently to the United States, and only travels to Mexico 
occasionally to visit relatives and friends. Applicant stated: “Because I hold allegiance 
only to the United States, I have decided to renounce Mexican citizenship and 
permanently surrender my Mexican passport.” Applicant considers herself to be a loyal 
U.S. citizen, and would like the opportunity to work in support of the federal government. 
She provided no documentary evidence to show that she renounced her Mexican 
citizenship and surrendered her passport, or when she intends to do so.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
 
5 
 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 10(a) and (b) are supported by 
the evidence. If these conditions are not mitigated they would disqualify Applicant from 
possessing a security clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for 
foreign preference: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 None of the foreign preference mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant, a U.S. 
citizen with a valid U.S. passport, was 22 years old when she acquired her Mexican 
citizenship and passport. Her Mexican passport is valid until June 2015. Applicant 
initially stated that she did not want to renounce her Mexican citizenship or to surrender 
her Mexican passport, because she wanted to work and live in Mexico along with her 
Mexican family members. 
 
 AG ¶ 11(b) applies partially, but does not fully mitigate the security concern. In 
May 2012, Applicant stated that she had decided to renounce her Mexican citizenship 
and permanently surrender her Mexican passport. However, Applicant presented no 
evidence to show that she is no longer in possession of a valid Mexican passport. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant is a 24-year-old accounting technician working with a 
defense contractor since February 2010. Her mother was born in Mexico, and she is a 
registered alien living in the United States. Applicant’s father is a U.S. citizen. Applicant 
was born and raised in the United States. She graduated from a U.S. high school, and 
was awarded a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university in 2009.  
 
Applicant was an adult when she requested her Mexican citizenship and 
passport. She was made aware that her actions may indicate her preference for a 
 
7 
 
 
foreign country over the United States. At that time, she indicated she was unwilling to 
surrender her passport or to renounce her foreign citizenship. In May 2012, she stated 
her willingness to renounce her foreign citizenship and to surrender her foreign 
passport. She failed to provide evidence that she is no longer in possession of a foreign 
passport. Considering her prior unwillingness to renounce her foreign citizenship, I gave 
her current willingness to do so less weight. She has failed to mitigate the foreign 
preference security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
