1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-08604
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 12, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
On January 10, 2012, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided by a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I
received the case assignment on February 27, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing
on February 29, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 27, 2012.
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 14, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted no exhibits at the time of hearing.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on April 9, 2012. I  granted Applicant’s
request to keep the record open until April 20, 2012, to submit additional documents,
2
and the additional documents were received, have been identified and entered into
evidence without objection as Exhibits A through S. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 55 years old. She is married and has two children. She received a
Bachelors of Arts Degree in Business Management. Applicant is employed by a defense
contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment
in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 26 allegations (1.a. through z.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be reviewed below in the same order as
they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $393. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant testified that this debt for
cable equipment has been satisfied since the equipment was picked up by the creditor,
although the creditor claimed Applicant still had possession of the equipment.  (Tr at 39-
42.) The record was left open to allow her to offer evidence to prove the debt had been
satisfied. I did not find sufficient evidence to establish that this debt had been paid. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $40. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 42.)
Exhibit K is a letter from this creditor showing that $833 was paid on this debt on April
13, 2012.  This payment is to the same creditor as listed in SOR allegations 1.c., 1.p.,
and 1.q. The amount paid would seem to indicate it would settle all of these accounts. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $30. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 43.)
This debt was paid. (See 1.b., above.)
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $336. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 43.)
Exhibit H is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was paid in full on April 11,
2012. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,446.  Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 43.)
3
Exhibit M is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was settled and paid in full
in the amount of $875 on April 11, 2012
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $754. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 44.)
Exhibit E is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was paid in full on April 11,
2012. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,146. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR, and she testified that she has paid this debt. (Tr at
44-45.) The record was left open to allow her to offer evidence to prove the debt had
been satisfied.  In her post hearing documents, Applicant wrote that this debt had been
paid since November 2008. (Exhibit D.) Exhibit J is a letter from this creditor showing
that this debt was paid in full on April 13, 2012. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,748. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 45.)
Exhibit G is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was paid in full on April 19,
2012. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,180. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is in dispute. She
conceded that she owed on a debt to this creditor, but she did not believe it was as
large as that stated on the credit report. (Tr at 45-46.)  
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgement entered in 2010 in the
amount of $250. Applicant denied this allegation in her RSOR. She testified that she
was not aware what was the basis of this debt or if a judgement had been entered
against her. (Tr at 47.) 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,494. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 47-
48.) This debt was for a student loan. (See 1.z., below.)
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,468. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 48.)
This debt was for a student loan. (See 1.z., below.)
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,494. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR. She testified that she had used this creditor as her
insurance carrier, but her coverage had lapsed. However, she did not believe she owed
this debt. She planned to contact this creditor after the hearing so the record was left
open to allow her to offer evidence as to the status of this debt. (Tr at 48-49.)  Exhibit I
is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was paid in the amount of $299 on
April 11, 2012, and the debt was settled. 
4
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,683. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 49.)
In her post-hearing documents, Applicant wrote that she had received an offer to settle
from this creditor. (Exhibit D.) Exhibit O is a letter from this creditor stating that they
would accept eight monthly payments of $105.19 to settle this debt. I cannot find that
this debt has been paid, but Applicant has begun the process of resolving the debt.  
1.o. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $100. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR. She testified that she believed this medical bill
should have been paid by her employer since it was work related and that she did not
owe it. (Tr at 49-50.) 
1.p. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $75. Applicant denied
this allegation in her RSOR, but she testified that this debt is from a co-payment due by
her on a medical bill. (Tr at 51.)  This debt was paid. (See 1.b., above.)
1.q. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $75. Applicant denied
this allegation in her RSOR, but she testified that this debt is from a co-payment due by
her on a medical bill. (Tr at 51.)  This debt was paid. (See 1.b., above.)
1.r. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $838. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 51.)
In her post hearing documents, Applicant wrote that this debt was paid on April 11,
2012. (Exhibit D.) However, no evidence was offered to prove that the debt had been
paid so I cannot find that this debt has been paid. 
1.s. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,911. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 52.)
Exhibit N is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was settled and paid in full
on April 11, 2012.
1.t. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $717. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 52.) 
1.u. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $325. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR, and she testified that she has paid this debt. (Tr at
52-53.) The record was left open to allow her to offer evidence to prove the debt had
been satisfied.  Exhibit L is a letter from this creditor showing that this debt was settled
and paid in full in the amount of $200 on September 26, 2011.
1.v. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $134. Applicant
denied this allegation in her RSOR, and she testified that she is unaware of the origin of
this debt. (Tr at 53-54.) The record was left open to allow her to offer evidence to prove
the debt had been satisfied. In her post hearing documents, Applicant wrote that this
debt was paid on April 11, 2012. (Exhibit D.) However, no evidence was offered to
prove that the debt had been paid so I cannot find that this debt has been paid.  
5
1.w. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,791. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 54.)
This debt was for a student loan. (See 1.z., below.)
1.x. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,319. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 54.)
This debt was for a student loan. (See 1.z., below.)
1.y. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,617. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 54.)
This debt was for a student loan. (See 1.z., below.)
1.z. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,296. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR and testified that this debt is still owing. (Tr at 54.)
This debt was for a student loan.
Applicant averred that the debts for her education loans, listed on the SOR as
1.k., l., w., x., y., and z., were deferred until April 2012, and that they were not overdue.
(Tr at 55-59.) This testimony contradicted her earlier testimony about these debts, in
which she admitted they were all due. The full credit report, dated June 18, 2010, shows
that all of these debts are in collection. (Exhibit 6. ) Exhibit R shows that a forbearance
was granted for at least some of her education loans, and that at least some of them
have been consolidated. The evidence has not established that all of Applicant’s six
education loans have been consolidated and deferred. 
On February 9, 2012, Department counsel drafted a proposed amendment to the
SOR, adding one allegation. Applicant responded to the allegation on March 6, 2012.
The proposed amendment has been added to the SOR as allegation 1.aa. It states:
1.aa. You were charged on or about October 29, 1998, with
Welfare Fraud, and three counts of perjury by false application. You plead
Nolo Contendere to count one, and you were found guilty of a
misdemeanor. You were sentenced to summary probation for three years,
to pay restitution, and to perform community service. The remaining
counts were dismissed due to plea negotiations. 
Applicant admitted this allegation in her written response to this amended
allegation and again at the hearing. (Tr at 55.)  She testified that she was collecting
welfare because neither she nor her husband were employed. When she got a weekend
job, she failed to inform the welfare agency that she was working part time. She did pay
the restitution, which she believed to be approximately $3,000. (Tr at 63-67.) Exhibit 1
establishes that the welfare fraud was committed in November 1994. 
Applicant testified that her debts accumulated over a number of years. Many of
the debts were incurred because her husband was unemployed or underemployed for
many years, and her sole income was not enough to support her family of four. She
estimated that she was laid off for a seven year period in the 1980s and she only
6
worked on a limited basis.  (Tr at 60-63.) Exhibit B shows Applicant was laid off from
February 1991 to August 1997. 
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a positive character letter from her relative and friend.
(Exhibit A.) She was described as someone who is “reliable, trustworthy and maintains
the utmost confidentiality among peers.” Applicant also submitted certificates of
appreciation from her employer, showing that in 2009 she was commended for giving
30 years of “dedicated service.” (Exhibit C.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
7
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant has accumulated significant delinquent debt. AG ¶ 19 (d) is also
applicable “deceptive or illegal financial practices” because of Applicant’s fraudulently
collecting welfare while she was employed, without giving notice of her employment. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: AG ¶  20 (a) is applicable regarding Applicant’s welfare fraud which occurred
in 1994, “because  the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent . . . that it is
unlikely to recur.”  
Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted above,
Applicant testified that her financial problems resulted from her long periods of
unemployment, as well as the unemployment of her husband.  I find that Applicant has
recently acted responsibly by paying of most of the debts listed on the SOR, and
making some arrangement or payment plans with the some of the other creditors to
resolve the additional debts. However, I am somewhat concerned that so many of these
8
debts have only been resolved as recently as after the hearing was held, although many
of them were overdue for many years. Therefore, I do not find that this mitigating
condition is a factor for consideration in this case. Applicant must continue the recent
responsible actions, by paying all of her current debts and continuing to resolve the not
yet paid overdue debts, especially her education loans, if she wants to have a security
clearance in the future. 
I find that this mitigating condition AG ¶  20(d), Applicant has “initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” is not yet applicable in
this case, again because of my concern that most of these long overdue debts have
only been resolved very recently, after the hearing was held. 
In summary, I conclude that Applicant has only very recently reduced her
overdue debts. Until she can resolve more of her overdue debts and establish financial
stability, she has not mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and the mitigating conditions do not apply, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.,i., j., k., l., n., o., r., t., v., w., x., y., z.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b., c., d., e., f., g., h., m., p., q., s., aa.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
