 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-11083  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Paula Phinney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 10, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 11, 2012, scheduling the hearing for August 8, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were 
 
2 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through V, which were admitted without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted 
documents that were marked AE W, X, and Y and admitted without objection. 
Correspondence about the additional exhibits is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 17, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She seeks to retain 
her security clearance, which she has held since 2008. She has a Master’s degree. She 
is married with a one-year-old child.1 
  
 Applicant attended college from 1998 to 2002 and graduate school from 2002 to 
2004. Her mother and stepfather initially helped pay for her education, and then they 
had financial difficulties, resulting in Applicant shouldering her education costs through 
student loans. She was strained financially and several debts became delinquent. She 
had an entry-level job after graduate school and was unable to pay her delinquent 
debts.2 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts. Individual debts are discussed below.  
 
 In May 2012, Applicant paid or settled the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a ($105), 1.b, ($175), and 1.c ($3,674).3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent student loan of $20,174. Applicant’s stepfather 
agreed to pay the loan, which was taken out by Applicant and her stepfather in 1999. 
Her stepfather and her mother were laid off from their jobs in 2005 and 2008 and were 
unable to make the student loan payments. Applicant made several attempts to settle 
the loan.4 In October 2009, she wrote: 
 
The above mentioned accounts were sent to collections and charged off 
by your company during a period when I was unemployed and unable to 
pay on the account. Since then, I have obtained meaningful employment 
and would like to negotiate a settlement on the account. 
 
I recently obtained a copy of my credit report and noted that your company 
has reported this account as: Charged-Off. Rather than let the Statu[t]e of 
Limitation[s] expire on this unsecured debt, I wish to bring this account or 
matter to a resolution that will be fair and beneficial for both of us. My 
credit report is showing $2613 as charged-off on both accounts and 
$20,174 as the amount reported as owed, although the original loan 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-25, 65-69, 89; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-27; GE 1, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 49-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE ; AE A, E, R, T. 
 
4 Tr. at 36-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE B, C. 
 
3 
 
amount was only $9980. As you are aware, [bank] was not the original 
lender of the loan when the loan originated in 1999, nor was involved in 
the shady loan practices, outrageous monthly interest, and fees which 
made the once manageable loan unmanageable to pay, especially during 
times of unemployment.5 (emphasis in original) 
 
Applicant offered a settlement of $3,613, payable in eight monthly payments of $451.6 
She also wrote: 
 
Due to the inequities of the system and predatory lending practices, I 
AM NOT agreeable to accepting a ‘PAID P & L’ or ‘CHARGE OFF’ for 
an additional amount of time on my credit report. It is my position that I 
have suffered enough as a result of this problem on my credit.7 (emphasis 
in original) 
 
 The bank did not respond to Applicant’s offer. She sent another settlement letter 
to the bank in February 2010. The letter had similar language, except the settlement 
offer was $3,000, payable in ten monthly payments of $300. The bank did not respond 
to her offer.8 
 
 Applicant sent another letter to the bank on May 3, 2012, asking the bank to 
validate the account, and threatening legal action against the bank if the defaulted loan 
was improperly listed on her credit report. On June 15, 2012, the bank accepted 
Applicant’s offer to settle the defaulted loan for four monthly payments of $1,008, with 
the first payment due by July 31, 2012. Applicant established that she made the first two 
required payments.9 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $6,082 charged-off credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e. In her response to the SOR, she wrote that the “account was paid in full and has 
since been removed from [her] credit report.” She testified that the debt was paid in 
2006. Experian reported the debt on the January 2008 combined credit report as 
opened in 2002, with a date of last action of 2005, and a $4,369 balance. The debt is 
reported by Equifax on the June 2010 combined credit report with a $6,082 balance. 
Applicant listed this debt on her Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
submitted in May 2010. She listed the status of the debt as “Closed Payment Status: 
Charge-Off as of 2003. Credit limit: $2000 Balance: 6019.”10 She provided the following 
additional comments: 
                                                          
5 GE 5; AE B. 
 
6 GE 5; AE B. 
 
7 GE 5: AE B. 
 
8 GE 5; AE C. 
 
9 Tr. at 40-49; AE F, S, W. 
 
10 Tr. at 28-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
4 
 
This account was for a credit card I had while in college. This debt is still 
reported monthly to all the bureaus as derogatory. This credit card was 
charged off in 2003 while I was attending graduate school and barely 
making $20K a year. I’ve attempted on several occasions to settle this 
debt but [credit card company] has not responded to any of my request[s], 
written or by phone. I recently mailed them settlement letters via certified 
mail July 2009, October 2009, January 2010 and March 2010 in attempt to 
negotiate with the creditor to have the item removed from the consumer’s 
credit reports in exchange for partial or full payment. However, I have yet 
to receive a response.11 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for her background investigation in August 2010. A 
signed statement was not taken, but the interview was summarized in a report of 
investigation (ROI).12 The investigator summarized the discussion of the SOR ¶ 1.e debt 
as follows: 
 
[Credit card company] $6082 – This bill was for a credit card. The 
maximum amount on this card was $2000. However with interest the 
amount increased to the final $6082. Subject has tried to negotiate a 
settlement of this bill, however [credit card company] has no record as it 
was charged off. The bill is over seven years old. Subject fell behind on 
her payments in graduate school.13 
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant verified the accuracy of the ROI.14 In 
response to a specific question about the status of this debt, she wrote: 
 
This is another debt I’ve tried on many occasions to resolve. This is from a 
credit card in college that was charged off in 2004. I was making 
payments until I lost my job. The limit was $2000. However fees and 
interest is still being applied. I’ve called [credit card company] and also 
wrote letters (please see Doc D). I will need to get legal help to resolve 
this.15 
 
Document D referenced in the above paragraph is a February 2010 letter Applicant 
wrote to the credit card company. Applicant wrote that the statute of limitations had 
expired on the debt, and she offered to settle the $5,593 balance reflected on her credit 
report for $300. There is nothing in the letter to indicate that the debt had been paid.16 
                                                          
11 GE 1. 
 
12 GE 5. 
 
13 GE 5. 
 
14 GE 5. 
 
15 GE 5. 
 
16 GE 5. 
 
5 
 
 Despite the above evidence and admissions, Applicant continued to assert that 
she paid the debt. She testified that she meant to convey in the SF 86 that she had paid 
the debt, but it was still being reported on her credit report. She stated that when she 
wrote that she was trying to “settle” the debt, she meant that she was attempting to 
have the paid debt removed from her credit report. She testified that she told the 
investigator that she paid the debt. She stated that she called the creditor and sent 
letters to the creditor and the credit reporting agencies disputing the debt. The debt is 
not listed on the January 2012 Equifax credit report or the combined credit reports from 
May 2012 and August 2012. She was given 30 days after the hearing to provide 
documentary proof that she paid the debt. She did not provide proof that the debt was 
paid. She submitted a copy of a letter she wrote to the credit card company on August 
14, 2012, requesting an accounting from the company showing the status of the debt.17 
I do not find Applicant’s evidence and testimony persuasive. I find the debt has not been 
paid or settled. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent debt of $2,792 owed to a bank. Applicant denied 
owing the debt. In her response to DOHA interrogatories, she stated that the debt was 
paid in April 2002. In her response to the SOR, she stated it was paid in 2003 or 2004. 
She testified that it was paid in 2006 or 2007. The debt is reported by TransUnion on 
the January 2008 and the June 2010 combined credit reports with an activity date of 
March 2005. Applicant had multiple accounts and student loans through this bank. The 
debt is not listed on the January 2012 Equifax credit report or the combined credit 
reports from May 2012 and August 2012.18 The exact status of this debt is unclear, but I 
accept that Applicant paid the debt or reasonably believes that she paid it. 
 
 Applicant has never received financial counseling, but she stated that her 
finances are currently in good shape. Her husband is on active duty in the U.S. military, 
and her current job pays a good salary. They have a budget. Their family income is 
sufficient to pay their bills, including her student loans, with enough remaining for 
savings and emergencies.19   
 
Applicant submitted a number of letters attesting to her character and her 
excellent job performance. She is praised for her responsibility, integrity, 
trustworthiness, leadership, confidence, resilience, loyalty, dedication, work ethic, 
professionalism, reliability, competence, and honesty. She is recommended for a 
security clearance. She also volunteers in her community.20 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 29-32, 73-75, 78-85; GE 4; AE H, R, Y. 
 
18 Tr. at 28-29, 32-34, 75; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5; AE H, R, Z. 
 
19 Tr. at 54-63, 66, 69-70, 85-86, 89-90; AE V. 
 
20 AE J-P. 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
8 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to a lack of income while she was 
attending college and graduate school. Costs associated with obtaining an education do 
not qualify as conditions that were beyond her control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
  Applicant paid or settled four of the debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(d) is 
applicable to those four debts. She provided sufficient information to make me question 
whether she continues to owe the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to 
that debt. She appears to have turned the corner financially. She has a huge student 
loan burden, but that is being addressed in her budget.  
 
  What remains a concern is Applicant’s complete refusal to accept any 
responsibility for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, when all the evidence, including her 
own admissions, indicates that the debt has not been paid. There is a paper trail when 
debts are paid. Applicant was given 30 days to find that paper trail if it existed. She did 
not. Her recalcitrance regarding this debt is baffling. In the face of that evidence, I am 
unable to determine that her finances are such that she should warrant a security 
clearance.  
 
I find that Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to 
determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are not 
applicable. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, her steadfast 
refusal to accept responsibility for a debt in the face of overwhelming evidence causes 
me to doubt her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
