1
  
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-04888
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on October 6, 2010. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 23, 2012, detailing
security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on
September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 5.2
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 3, 2012. He submitted a
notarized, written response to the SOR allegations dated May 23, 2012. He requested a
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on July 9, 2012. Applicant received the FORM on July 18,
2012. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit a response. DOHA assigned
this case to me on September 11, 2012. The Government submitted seven exhibits,
which have been marked as Items 1-7 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s
response to the SOR has been admitted as Item 4, and the SOR has been admitted as
Item 1.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and 2.a of the SOR.  He also provided additional1
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 52 years old, works as a technician for a Department of
Defense contractor. He began working with his employer in July 2001. In his 11 years of
employment, he has not been disciplined. Applicant has held a Department of Defense
security clearance since 2007. He graduated from high school in 1979 and has some
technical school training. He is not married, and he does not have any children.  2
In late June 2010, Applicant injured his back on the job. Physicians treated his
resulting back pain with the medications, Motrin and Skelaxin, which are muscle
relaxants. Even with these medications, Applicant continued to feel pain and discomfort
in his back. On Friday evening, July 2, 2010, Applicant attended a neighborhood house
party, where marijuana was being smoked. Because his back still hurt, Applicant
decided to try the marijuana to relieve his back pain. He took two to three puffs on a
marijuana joint, which dulled his back pain. Before he left the party, he purchased a
Item 6.3
Item 5 - Item 7.4
Item 4; Item 6.5
Item 4; Item 6.6
Item 6.7
3
small bag of marijuana for use over the weekend. When he woke up the next morning,
he smoked one-half of a marijuana joint.3
Around midday on July 3, 2010, Applicant left his residence and began driving
north, as he intended to camp over the weekend. The police stopped him for speeding.
As the police officer asked for his driver’s license and registration, she smelled
marijuana. She then asked permission to search his car, which he gave. He also
advised the police officer that there was marijuana in a backpack in the car. He told the
police officer that he held a security clearance, and this incident could cost him a job.
The police officer gave him a speeding citation with a $155 fine and a second citation
for misdemeanor possession of marijuana. Applicant reported the police stop and
citations to his security officer and on his e-QIP, 4
During his interview with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
investigator, Applicant advised the investigator that he appeared at court on July 22,
2010 for the marijuana citation. The court staff told him that the court did not have a
citation or other charging document on the docket in his name for that date or for any
other date and that he was free to leave. He has not received any other information
from the court about the marijuana citation nor does the court have a record of any
charges against him for use of marijuana. He paid the fine on the speeding ticket.5
Applicant told the OPM investigator that he made an error in judgment when he
decided to smoke the marijuana, which was his first time. He regretted his decision to
try marijuana. He has not used any marijuana since this time. Applicant stated to the
OPM investigator that he did not have an intent to use drugs in the future. In his sworn
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated, in writing, that he would not repeat
this behavior, that he had not had any further involvement with drugs, and that he had
stayed away from anyone involved with drugs.6
Appellant has never sold drugs. He has not received drug counseling nor has he
been diagnosed with a drug problem. He acknowledged that he held a security
clearance at the time he used marijuana.7
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
4
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
5
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Applicant acknowledged using marijuana twice in one weekend in July 2010,
while he held a security clearance. He also purchased one bag of marijuana that same
weekend. By smoking and purchasing the marijuana, he possessed it. Security
concerns are established under AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g).
The Drug Involvement guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 26(a) through
26(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
6
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Applicant’s use of marijuana was infrequent. He has not used marijuana in two
years. He distanced himself from his neighbor, who provided the marijuana at the party.
Applicant told the OPM investigator that he no future intent to use any illegal drugs and
reiterated his intent in his response to the interrogatories. His decision to use this illegal
drug showed bad judgment. While I am persuaded that Applicant is not likely to abuse
marijuana in the future, and favorable findings are returned as to SOR allegations 1.a.
and 1.b that does not end the inquiry in this case.
Although Applicant intends not to use drugs in the future, he breached a special
trust when he used marijuana, an illegal drug, while he held a security clearance. He
knew that marijuana was an illegal drug, and he knew that the use of an illegal drug
violated his security clearance requirements as shown by his statement to the police
officer. Despite this knowledge, he decided to smoke marijuana on two occasions, and
he purchased marijuana to use while he camped over the weekend. I find that his
breach of the trust given him outweighs the other mitigating factors regarding his drug
involvement and entitlement to a security clearance. Applicant has failed to fully mitigate
the security concern under Guideline H.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and
7
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, . . . .
Applicant’s drug use while holding a security clearance violates the rules for
holding a security clearance. His use of an illegal drug violates the criminal rules of
society. These disqualifying conditions are raised as to SOR allegation 2.a.
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 17(a) through
17(g), and the following is potentially applicable:
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(e) applies to Applicant’s drug
involvement as security officials are well aware of this conduct. Applicant has taken the
positive step of disclosure, eliminating any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or
duress. I do not believe Applicant would compromise national security to avoid public
disclosure of his past marijuana use. Any personal conduct security concerns
pertaining to his use of marijuana are dealt with more thoroughly under the specifically,
pertinent guidelines in this decision. He has mitigated the security concerns under
Guideline E.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
8
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
has worked for his employer for 11 years without any disciplinary problems. He pays his
bills and complies generally with the rules of society. After he injured his back at work in
June 2010, he accepted an offer to smoke a marijuana joint because he thought it
would help relieve his back pain. Because the marijuana dulled his back pain, he
purchased a small amount of it to use while he was camping during the weekend. The
next day, he smoked the marijuana shortly before he left on his camping trip. He held a
security clearance when he smoked the marijuana, and he knew that such illegal activity
was prohibited and could result in the loss of his job. He exercised poor judgment when
he decided to smoke marijuana and breached the Government’s trust in him when he
made this decision. While I find that he did not falsify his e-QIP, his breach of the
special trust given to him by the Government prevents me from granting him a security
clearance.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement
under Guideline H, but he has mitigated the personal conduct security concerns under
Guideline E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
