1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-06577
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Larry Loigman, Esquire
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On April 23, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In an undated response to the SOR, Applicant admitted with explanations the
two sub-allegations raised under Guideline B. He also requested a hearing. I was
assigned the case on July 18, 2012. The parties agreed to a hearing date of September
5, 2012, and a notice to that effect was issued on August 17, 2012. The hearing was
convened as scheduled. 
During the hearing, Applicant gave testimony, introduced two witnesses, and
offered eight documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as
exhibits (Exs.) A-H. Department Counsel introduced four exhibits, which were accepted
into the record without objection as Exs. 1-4. In addition, Department Counsel offered a
request for administrative notice regarding certain facts pertaining to the State of Israel.
 Tr. 11-13. At the hearing, the Government presented a summary of information regarding the country at1
issue, followed by citations to 12 official documents , which were provided to Applicant and, upon request, to
the adm inistrative judge. In light of Applicant’s objection to the summary, I requested copies of the cited
documents and, after the hearing, received no objection to my taking judicial notice of the State Department’s
Background Note: Israel, cited below. These documents were requested to provide me with a more balanced
description of the country pursuant to AG ¶ 6.
 The SOR contained in the Official Case File consists of one page, containing the Guideline B allegation and2
2 suballegations. It was confirmed that the second page (containing a signature and no additional allegations)
was missing.
 See HE-1, attachments 1-12.3
2
Against objection by Applicant, but with the understanding that the proffered
administrative notice documents would be given appropriate weight, the administrative
notice request and country-specific facts were accepted as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.  At1
the conclusion of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by
repeating SOR allegation ¶ 1.a under a second guideline, Guideline C (foreign
preference), as allegation ¶ 2.a. Noting no objection from Applicant, the SOR was so
amended.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 21, 2012, and the record2
was closed. Based upon a review of the exhibits and testimony, security clearance is
denied.
Administrative Notice
The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts and
materials regarding the State of Israel. It referenced materials issued by U.S.
Governmental entities, such as the U.S. Department of State, to support its request and
proffered summary.  Upon request, those materials were later provided for fuller3
consideration of the country at issue. Absent objection by the parties, I hereby take
additional notice of U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Israel, February 22,
2012. Based on those materials and summaries, I note the following facts:
A parliamentary democracy with a modern economy, the State of Israel achieved
independence in 1948. Since that time, it has faced numerous conflicts with its
neighbors. Several groups operating within Israel have been designated as Foreign
Terrorist Organizations (FTO). United States citizens have been injured or killed by
such terrorists in the past. Moreover, in 1985, a U.S. Naval Intelligence employee was
sentenced to life in prison for selling classified documents to Israel. Israel was cited as
an active collector of proprietary information in 2000. In 2009, a U.S. citizen pled guilty
to conspiracy to act as an unregistered agent of Israel after being arrested on suspicion
of giving classified documents concerning military equipment and systems to Israel
between 1979 and 1985. There have been other cases involving the illegal export or
attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual use, technology to Israel. In addition,
Israel has become a major global leader in arms exports, and has been known to sell
sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third party countries, most notably China.
 U.S. Department of States, Background Note: Israel, February 22, 2012. 4
 Id.5
 Id.6
 Applicant’s parents actively denounced any rights he might have as an Israeli citizen. Tr. 20.7
 Tr. 19.8
 Tr. 18-19.9
3
Despite these factors, commitment to Israel’s security and well-being has been a
cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East since Israel’s creation 1948.  The4
two share strong ties related to history, culture, and mutual interests. On a bilateral
level, relations between the United States and Israel are continually strengthening in
every field.  From 1983 to date, the two counties have maintained the Joint Political5
Military Group, which meets twice a year to discuss coordinated efforts. Other joint
efforts continue in regard to the war against terrorism, education, and economics.
Ongoing hostilities with its neighbors has created a volatile atmosphere in and
around Israel. Israel’s military is the Israel Defense Force (IDF). Conscription is
universal for all Israeli citizens over the age of 18, although exemptions do exist.   Male6
citizens are required to serve for at least three years. The Israeli 2009 defense budget
represented about 16.3% of total governmental expenditures. The United States
provides military aid to the IDF. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 22-year-old applicant for a security clearance. He is a U.S. citizen
who was born in Israel to American parents who have never sought Israeli citizenship.
At birth, he was registered solely as a U.S. citizen.  At 17, he graduated from high7
school and moved to the United States to attend college. During his freshman year,
Applicant turned 18. He met with a recruiter from the U.S. Navy on multiple occasions,
and began considering a naval career. When the recruiter came to his collegiate
residence, Applicant’s parents, who reside in Israel as non-citizens, were in the United
States visiting. When they learned of Applicant’s plans, they “freaked out.”  They noted8
that the IDF had a shorter period of commitment for non-citizen recruits (14 months).
They suggested that a tour in the IDF could let him experience military life and see if it
was the right career path for him before committing himself to a longer period in the
U.S. Navy. 
A “compromise” was struck under which Applicant “would go for a year and two
months to the Israeli army [because his parents] felt . . . if something should go wrong,
they would be close by.”  In September 2008, Applicant enlisted in the IDF as a non-9
citizen, where he worked in national defense and in areas related to policing terrorists
 Tr. 19-20.10
 Tr. 24. In contrast, Applicant’s visits to Israel have been infrequent.11
 Tr. 25-26.12
 Tr. 33.13
4
and their activity.  He never sought or was granted any form of security clearance. In10
December 2009, at the end of his term of commitment to the IDF, he was honorably
discharged.
Applicant returned to the United States in around January 2010. He completed
college over the next two years, earning a degree in psychology. No longer a student,
he concentrated on becoming an active U.S. citizen and resident. He was offered a
position by a defense contractor. His acceptance for a security position involves liaison
work with the IDF and requires a security clearance. 
Meanwhile, Applicant’s parents, two sisters, and brother remain U.S. citizens, but
reside in Israel in an apartment Applicant’s father purchased. Applicant’s family visits
the United States regularly. His father visits three to four times a year, usually to tend to
business; his mother visits for a month or longer about twice a year; his younger sisters
visit “whenever they can get a chance to go shopping,” including summers; his brother
visits when he can in order “to get away.”  Otherwise, Applicant speaks by telephone11
with his family a couple of times a month. His family’s visits to the United States are
facilitated by an automobile that Applicant’s father leases and maintains here. His
father’s business is based in the United States, but the nature of his work and research
demands he spend considerable time in Israel.  Applicant’s mother works for an12
American private school in Israel with no connection to the Israeli government.
Applicant’s elder sister is attending college in Israel, but derives no benefits from that
country. She chose an Israeli institution when she was not accepted to her first choice,
a leading U.S. university near Applicant. Applicant’s other siblings are in secondary
school. None have a connection with the government of Israel.     
Applicant has a U.S. passport. He has never had a passport issued by another
country. Applicant timely registered for the U.S. Selective Service. He bought a home in
the same state where he graduated from college, where he cares for a pet dog. He
maintains two domestic bank accounts. He does not maintain a bank account or any
significant holdings in Israel. In the United States, he owns a mutual fund account worth
nearly $400,000. Aside from his immediate family, Applicant’s family lives in the United
States; most of them have been settled in the same state for the past five generations. 
Over the years, Applicant has never been questioned about his time in the IDF,
and he has not encountered problems traveling to Israel. Applicant affirmatively stated
that he is and remains solely a U.S. citizen noting, “my core loyalty lies here. It’s the
only place I’ve ever really been connected to.”  While alluding to sympathies he has for13
 Tr. 33.14
 Tr. 37.15
 Tr.51.16
 Tr. 55.17
5
those men and women with whom he served in the IDF, Applicant stated that “if these
loyalties ever came to clash, my loyalty would tee over [to the United States], just
because I’ve always been an American ever since I was a kid.”  It is his intention to14
maintain the United States as his home. He has only infrequent contact with his former
colleagues from the IDF.  In his neighborhood, Applicant is considered a decent,15
honest fellow who is known for helping his neighbors, and he is thought to be a loyal
citizen.  A family friend who once studied with Applicant’s father noted that Applicant is16
a loyal American citizen first, but also loyal to Israel.   17
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to
classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead,
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and were considered in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).18
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).19
 Id.20
 Id.21
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.22
6
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a18
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  19
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access20
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily21
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the22
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. Consideration should be given to the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to,
7
such considerations as w   hether the foreign country is known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
At issue is the State of Israel. Israel is a longtime ally of the United States. The
two countries share significant cultural and historical ties, as well as mutual interests.
Although terrorist activity occurs in Israel, it is not conducted by the state, but rather by
FTOs. However, Israel has been cited as a collector of proprietary information and
illegal receipt of classified information. Consequently, close scrutiny is warranted.
Applicant’s parents and three siblings are U.S. citizens who reside in Israel the
majority of the year. Due to ongoing disputes with its neighbors, Israel is an often
volatile country. U.S. tourists have been killed in Israel due to terrorist activity in that
country. Israel is known as a collector of proprietary information from the United States.
In addition, Applicant voluntarily chose to serve in the IDF for 14 months, ending in
December 2009. Such facts are sufficient to give rise to Foreign Influence Disqualifying
Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion) and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, or
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information). With
disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to address how his
circumstances are sufficient to raise one or more of the mitigating conditions noted at
AG  ¶ 8(a)-(f).
Applicant and his family are close. He maintains monthly telephonic contact with
family. His family members visit Applicant when they return to the United States multiple
times each year. Their transit to and from Israel appears to be regular, easy, and
unhampered. They consider the United States to be their homeland. They have
specifically avoided obtaining Israeli citizenship. They reside in Israel a majority of each
year because of the nature of Applicant’s father’s research and academic business.
None of the family receives benefits from Israel or is otherwise associated with the
government of that country. His parents’ fear of conflict suggests that they would be
prepared to return to the United States should conditions in Israel worsen. The family
has lived the majority of each year in Israel since Applicant was born. They have never
faced undue scrutiny. It is unlikely Applicant would ever have to choose between his
family’s interests and those of the United States. Foreign Influence Mitigating
Conditions AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government
and the interests of the U.S.) and AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the  individual has such deep and longstanding
 AG ¶ 9.23
 AG ¶ 10(a). 24
8
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) apply with regard to Applicant’s
family members residing in Israel. 
With regard to Applicant’s IDF service, that service ended with his honorable
discharge in December 2009. Prior to that service, Applicant resided in the United
States for one academic year. Since his IDF service, he has lived in the United States
as a student for two years, then as an unemployed resident for nearly a year. Although
he has bought a house and made neighborhood friends, there is presently insufficient
demonstrable evidence that he has a superior sense of loyalty to the United States over
Israel, the country for which he served in its military for over a year. None of the
mitigating conditions are clearly applicable with regard to Applicant’s IDF service.
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he may be
prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the
U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include23
exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  Applicant admitted that24
despite an interest to serve in the U.S. Navy, he chose to serve in Israel’s IDF between
2008 and 2009. Therefore, Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(a)
(exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes, but is not
limited to (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country) applies.
With a foreign preference disqualifying condition raised, the burden shifts to Applicant
to mitigate security concerns.
Foreign preference mitigating conditions are provided under AG ¶ 11:
a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or
birth in a foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen
or when the individual was a minor;
9
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant
security authority; and
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
Here, neither dual citizenship nor a passport is at issue. This case involves
Applicant’s voluntary enlistment in a foreign military after turning 18. Therefore, none of
the available mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and
the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a credible, earnest, and affable 22-year-old man. He is well-educated, has
gained considerable life experience, and has already made plans for his future by
investing in a home and a mutual fund account. When he was 18 years old and in
college, he decided to join the U.S. Navy. With his parents concerned for his safety,
Applicant compromised and agreed to enlist in the IDF for a 14-month term of service.
There, he served in the areas of national defense and the policing of terrorists. He
ultimately determined that military life was not what he had expected. He completed his
commitment to the IDF with an honorable discharge, and then returned to college. 
Applicant credibly testified that his loyalties are with the United States. His loyalty
to the United States is not in question. Rather, the issue is whether his loyalties are
divided or whether his loyalty to Israel is superior to his loyalty to the United States. He
also termed his joining the IDF as being a compromise. It was, in fact, an adult decision
to enlist in a foreign military over enlistment in the U.S. military. In ISCR Case No. 10-
02902 (App. Bd. May 14, 2011), the Appeal Board noted:
From a security standpoint, voluntarily serving in the military of
a foreign country is a serious matter. The Board has noted that
a person who is willing to bear arms for a country demonstrates
a willingness to risk life and limb for that country. Such a
willingness is strong evidence of a profound, deeply personal
commitment to the interests and welfare of that country. See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-02902 at 3 (App. Bd. May 15, 2011);
10
ISCR Case No. 08-05869 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 24, 2009); ISCR
Case No. 00-0317 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002)
 In this situation, Applicant’s IDF service is not a permanent bar from being
granted a security clearance; it only fortifies the burden he has to face in mitigating
security concerns related to foreign preference. To that end, he has made some
progress. Applicant left Israel when he was 18 to live in the United States. After his
December 2009 discharge from the IDF and completing college in about December
2011, he stayed in the United States, making it his permanent, non-student, residence.
He began looking for a job here after completing college. He bought a home and a pet
last year. He has been developing friendships with neighbors in his community.
Applicant’s financial assets are in the United States, including two bank accounts and a
significant mutual fund balance. He only maintains a U.S. passport. For the most part,
Applicant’s family regularly visits him, rather than him regularly visiting them in Israel. 
In short, Applicant is in the process of defining himself both as an adult and as
an American with a demonstrably undivided preference for only the United States.
However, in contrast to an entire youth spent in Israel and 14 months serving in the
IDF, his subsequent time in the United States as a full-time resident has been too brief
for him to develop a demonstrably notable commitment to the United States that can
overcome the preference shown in enlisting in the IDF. While the facts tend to mitigate
foreign influence security concerns with regard to his family residing in Israel (allegation
¶ 1.b), foreign preference security concerns about his IDF service cannot be overcome
through the available mitigating conditions and, at present, do not overcome the
strength of present security concerns under a whole-person analysis. 
The ultimate burden of persuasion is put squarely on the Applicant in these
cases. Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. Here, Applicant failed to
mitigate such concerns. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
