 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01971 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 29, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 19, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 22, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 11, 2012, scheduling the hearing for August 9, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through M, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant’s counsel submitted an e-mail in 
which he commented on the evidence, but he did not submit any additional 
documentary evidence. The e-mail is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Department 
Counsel’s memorandum forwarding the e-mail is marked HE II. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 20, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1995, and he has worked in the defense industry since 1982. 
He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has held for almost 30 years. He 
has two master’s degrees. He is married with two children.1 
  
 Applicant and his wife operated a limited liability company (LLC).2 The LLC 
opened a retail business. In June 2006, the LLC borrowed $110,000 from a bank to 
finance the business. The loan was guaranteed by the U.S. Small Business 
Administration [SBA]. The interest rate for the loan was 10.25%, payable in 120 monthly 
payments of $1,478. Applicant and his wife signed a promissory note on behalf of the 
LLC. They also executed a personal commercial guaranty of the loan, making them 
personally liable for the loan. The business failed after about two years, and the LLC 
stopped paying the loan.3  
 
 In October 2008, the bank sued the LLC as well as Applicant and his wife 
personally. In September 2009, the court issued a default judgment for the principal 
sum of $94,087, with interest accruing at the rate of 13.25%, plus attorneys’ fees of 
$4,730 and costs of $449, with interest accruing at the rate of 10%. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges 
the underlying debt to the bank, and SOR ¶ 1.b alleges the judgment owed to the bank.4 
 
 Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
October 2010. He reported a $94,087 judgment obtained by the bank. He wrote that it 
                                                          
 
1 Tr. at 21-22, 73-74; GE 1, 2. 
2 A limited liability company is a business structure allowed by state statute. LLCs are popular because, 
similar to a corporation, owners have limited personal liability for the debts and actions of the LLC. Other 
features of LLCs are more like a partnership, providing management flexibility and the benefit of pass-
through taxation. . . .The federal government does not recognize an LLC as a classification for federal tax 
purposes. An LLC business entity must file as a corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship tax return. 
See www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=98277,00.html.  
3 Tr. at 29, 43-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6, 8, 9; AE A, B. 
 
4 Tr. at 23-27, 49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6, 8, 9; AE A, B. 
 
3 
 
was “an insured small business loan by the SBA.”5 He reported the status of the 
judgment as “unknown, however we believe that the SBA has satisfied this debt.”6  
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in November 2010. 
He told the investigator that the loan to the bank was insured by the SBA. He stated that 
he called the SBA, and he was told the loan was insured by the SBA and would be paid 
by the SBA. He stated that he received notice of the default judgment, but he believed 
the SBA was paying the loan, which would cover the judgment. He stated that if he 
discovers that he is legally responsible for the loan that he will contact the collection 
company handling the loan and make a monthly payment plan. Applicant responded to 
DOHA interrogatories in December 2011. He wrote that to his knowledge, the “loan was 
paid back to [the bank] by the SBA under the terms and conditions of the original loan.” 
He wrote that he had not had any communication with the bank in over two years.7  
 
 Applicant’s testimony was mostly consistent with his interview. He testified that 
the loan was insured by the SBA and that he thought the SBA would pay the loan. The 
bank wrote in February 2006 that the loan was approved subject to SBA approval. The 
bank wrote that Applicant could expect approximate fees of “SBA Guaranty Fee - 
$1,100 + $750 packaging fee.” He testified that he had been working to settle the debt 
and judgment for almost two years. That statement is inconsistent with his interview and 
his response to interrogatories. Applicant stated that he sent material to the creditor 
some time ago, but did not hear anything back from them. He paid $15,000 on July 25, 
2012, to settle the underlying debt to the bank and the judgment.8 
 
 Applicant and his wife invested heavily in real estate. He lived in a state where 
the real estate market was booming. It was also one of the hardest hit areas when the 
real estate market collapsed. He had funds from the sale of two properties in another 
state. Between 2004 and 2007, they bought 19 single-family properties for between 
$150,000 and $250,000. He used the money from the sale of the properties in the other 
state to put down payments of about 10% to 20% on the 19 properties. His plan was to 
use most of the properties as investment rental properties, and sell some of the 
properties. He had rent-to-own leases on some of the properties and sold several 
houses before the market collapsed. He estimates that he made about $60,000 on the 
sale of the properties. After the collapse, he lost most of his tenants. He was unable to 
sell the properties. He took out a $50,000 loan from his 401(k) retirement account and 
attempted to pay the mortgages and keep the houses. He was unable to do so, and he 
lost all but four houses to foreclosure. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege past-due home equity 
                                                          
5 The SBA does not “insure” loans; it guarantees loans. “If a guaranteed loan defaults, the lender may 
request SBA to purchase the guaranteed portion.” See http://www.sba.gov/category/lender-
navigation/working-with-sba/become-sba-lender. 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 GE 8. 
 
8 Tr. at 27, 29, 49-52, 74-75; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8; AE A, B. 
 
4 
 
line of credit accounts, and SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a past-due second mortgage loan. SOR 
¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i allege past-due mortgage loans.9 
 
 Applicant testified that he never refinanced or took out any second mortgage 
loans or home equity loans other than those used to purchase the properties. However, 
he told the investigator in November 2010 that he had a home equity credit card that he 
used to fix up and repair his rental properties. The credit card in question actually 
appears to be an unsecured credit card that was charged off for $9,494. Applicant 
settled that debt in 2011. Nonetheless, the state where Applicant’s investment 
properties are located has strong anti-deficiency statutes. Applicant asserts that the 
lenders are precluded from obtaining a judgment against him on any deficiencies owed 
on the secured loans alleged in the SOR.10  
 
 The company holding the $6,000 past-due second mortgage loan alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.f issued a letter on May 22, 2012, stating the company had closed the loan.11 
 
 The holder of the foreclosed mortgage loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h 
issued an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form 1099-A (Acquisition or Abandonment of 
Secured Property) for tax year 2010 for both loans. The first form indicated that the 
lender acquired the property alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g on December 29, 2010. The balance 
of the principal on the mortgage at that time was listed as $178,565, and the fair market 
value of the property was listed as $139,900. The second form indicated that the lender 
acquired the property alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h on December 30, 2010. The balance of the 
principal on the mortgage at that time was listed as $168,011, and the fair market value 
of the property was listed as $96,050.12 
 
 The holder of the foreclosed mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i issued an IRS 
form 1099-A for tax year 2009. The form indicated that the lender acquired the property 
on July 28, 2009. The balance of the principal on the mortgage at that time was listed as 
$179,020, and the fair market value of the property was listed as $127,500.13 
 
 Applicant does not intend to pay any of his secured loans, relying on his state’s 
strong anti-deficiency statute. He stated that at least one of the mortgage holders would 
not discuss a settlement with him and told him the loan was uncollectable under state 
law. He stated that he lost his down payments when the houses were foreclosed. He 
assumed some of the banks also lost money. However, he stated that the loans “were 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 30-41, 46-48, 52-64, 94; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6, 8, 9; AE D-I, K, L. 
 
10 Tr. at 40, 94; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6, 8, 9; AE M. 
 
11 Tr. at 38; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE F. 
 
12 Tr. at 38-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE G, H. 
 
13 Tr. at 41-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE I. 
 
 
5 
 
investment loans. [He] paid higher interest rates to compensate them for the risk that 
they took.”14 
 
 Applicant stopped paying his properties’ homeowners association (HOA) dues 
when he stopped paying the mortgages. One HOA obtained a judgment of $817 against 
Applicant and his wife in October 2008. This judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He listed 
the $817 judgment on his SF 86 in October 2010. He wrote that the judgment was 
“paid.” He listed another judgment of $3,502 awarded to the same HOA. He wrote that 
the “property value” was $3,502 and that he and his wife “believed that this debt was 
satisfied when the bank took over the investment property.” He wrote that, “Payment is 
being made and will be satisfied in 10/2010.” When he was interviewed in November 
2010, he explained that he was sued by two HOAs who were represented by the same 
law firm, but he was only sued once by the HOA alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The judgment to 
the second HOA is not alleged in the SOR. He stated that he mistakenly consolidated 
both judgments on his SF 86. He told the investigator that he settled both judgments 
with the law firm at the same time. The judgment was listed on the interrogatories sent 
to Applicant in November 2011. Applicant testified that he did not find out about the 
judgment until he received the SOR. He testified that he paid a different judgment in 
2010 and he must have confused the two judgments. He submitted proof that he 
satisfied the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c on March 30, 2012.15 
 
 Applicant and his wife owed $1,249 to a third HOA, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. 
Applicant listed this debt on his SF 86 in October 2010. He wrote that the status of the 
debt was “[u]nknown, investment property was taken back by bank.” When he 
responded to DOHA interrogatories in December 2011, Applicant wrote that “[t]his 
collection does not show up on our recent credit reports and no known requests for 
payment has been made since the property was returned to the bank.” Applicant 
submitted proof that he paid the debt in March 2012.16 
 
 Applicant has not received formal financial counseling, but his real estate 
purchases were made upon the advice of the real estate investment firm that he worked 
with on the purchase of his houses. He still owns four investment properties. He has 
stable tenants in each property. He does not plan to buy any additional properties. He 
has about $480,000 in his retirement accounts and about $60,000 in stocks, bonds, and 
savings. He is saving to maintain an emergency fund to be used in case he loses any of 
his tenants.17 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 69-72, 84-85. 
 
15 Tr. at 30, 76-83; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5-8, 9; AE C. 
 
16 Tr. at 42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5, 6, 8, 9; AE J. 
 
17 Tr. at 58, 66-69, 87. 
 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant lived in a state where the real estate market was booming. He and his 
wife bought 19 properties within a three-year period. They also opened a retail business 
 
8 
 
financed through a $110,000 SBA-guaranteed loan. The economy went into a 
recession, and the housing market collapsed. He lost most of his tenants and his 
properties to foreclosure, and he closed the business and defaulted on the $110,000 
loan. The recession and the collapse of the real estate market were beyond Applicant’s 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant has not paid any deficiencies owed on his secured loans, relying on his 
state’s strong anti-deficiency statute. He did not pay the HOAs until March 2012. He did 
not pay the SBA-guaranteed loan or the judgment awarded the bank until he settled the 
judgment for $15,000 on July 25, 2012. I am concerned that Applicant overextended 
himself in his retail business and investments without paying heed to the risks involved, 
apparently because most of the risks were borne by the lenders. He stated that the 
loans “were investment loans. [He] paid higher interest rates to compensate [the 
lenders] for the risk that they took.” I am also concerned about the inconsistent 
statements Applicant made about several of the debts.  
 
  Applicant resolved his unsecured debts, and he is protected from enforcement of 
his secured debts by his state’s anti-deficiency statute.18 However, I find that Applicant 
has a history of making questionable financial decisions. I am unable to find that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay all 
his debts.19 His financial issues are recent. I am unable to determine that they are 
unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are 
partially applicable. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 10-07393 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun.12, 2012): 
 
Even if a delinquent debt is unenforceable under state law, a Judge must consider the 
facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to 
satisfy the debt in a timely manner.  
 
19 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or an anti-deficiency statute]) in order to claim the benefit of [good-faith 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s stable work record and his long history working in the 
defense industry. He is educated and accomplished. He resolved his unsecured debts, 
and he is protected from enforcement of his secured debts by his state’s anti-deficiency 
statute. However, I remain concerned by his history of questionable financial decisions, 
his inconsistent statements about his debts, and the timing of the resolution of his 
unsecured debts.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
