 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 11-05502 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: pro se. 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
personal conduct and financial considerations. His request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on November 8, 2010 to request a security clearance required as part of 
his employment with a defense contractor. On May 9, 2012, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DoD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed security concerns addressed in the 
 
 
 
 
2 
Directive under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant signed his notarized Answer on June 6, 2012, in which he 
denied one of the two allegations under Guideline E, and one of the eight allegations 
under Guideline F. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 28, 2012. The case was 
assigned to me on July 2, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 5, 2012, 
setting the hearing for July 31, 2012. The Government offered five exhibits, which I 
admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and offered three exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. 
DOHA received the transcript on August 7, 2012. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Applicant attached three documents to his Answer to the SOR. At the hearing, I 
severed these attachments, and admitted them as AE A through C. 
 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant is a 46-year-old acquisition analyst lead. He has worked for his current 
employer since 2009. He married in 1988 and divorced in 2007. He has two children, 17 
and 23 years of age. He received an associate’s degree in contract management in 
2004. Applicant was an enlisted member of the Air Force from 1985 to 2006. His first 
specialty was air crew life support; he later retrained in the acquisition field in 1994. (GE 
1; Tr. 24-29) 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
For several months in 2003, Applicant was stationed in a middle-eastern country, 
working as a contingency contracting officer. His team let contracts to obtain items 
needed for basic needs, such as ablution units and food preparation. In the course of 
dealing with companies bidding on contracts, Applicant had frequent contact with X, 
who represented a company that was bidding on several contracts. He was approached 
several times by X, who promised him a payment if he would ensure that X’s company 
received a certain large contract. Applicant resisted X’s initial overtures. Eventually, he 
agreed to accept a percentage of the award amount in exchange for guaranteeing that 
X’s company would get the contract. X brought to the base an initial payment of $6,500, 
and promised Applicant that he would receive the contract percentage once X’s 
company was awarded the contract. Applicant ensured that the contract was awarded 
to X’s company. (GE 2; Tr. 29-34) 
 
 
3 
In October 2003, Applicant returned to his U.S. duty station. X contacted him and 
told him when and where to rendezvous with X’s contact in another state. Applicant flew 
there, met the contact, and received a shoebox containing $45,000. He decided not to 
return by airplane with the cash, so he rented a car and drove from the state where he 
received the payment to his home base. He was stopped for speeding, and police 
discovered the cash. Applicant was arrested and, during questioning, he disclosed his 
actions. Police contacted his commanding officer and released Applicant to return to 
base. (GE 2; Tr. 34-37) 
Following an investigation by the Office of Special Investigations (OSI), Applicant 
was charged under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), Article 134, Bribery 
and Graft: Asking, Accepting, or Receiving. On July 22, 2004, he appeared at a general 
court martial and pled guilty. He was convicted, sentenced to 18 months confinement, 
and his pay and allowances were forfeited. He was fined $6,500, received a formal 
letter of reprimand, and was reduced in grade from E-6 to E-1. Applicant was confined 
in the brig and served 14 months. He was released for good behavior in September 
2005. He returned to duty as an E-1, and worked in dorm management support from 
September 2005 to December 2006. His security clearance was revoked in November 
2006. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 37-41) 
Applicant worked under a review commander after his release from the brig. The 
commander initiated processing to have Applicant administratively discharged. 
Applicant testified that the commander did not trust him because he had not had a 
chance to work with Applicant in the past. Applicant went before an administrative 
discharge board, which granted the discharge. Applicant was administratively 
discharged, with a characterization of Under Other than Honorable Conditions, in 
December 2006. (GE 2; Tr. 41-42) 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant noted that his decision to accept a bribe was 
a “bad choice in the spur of the moment.” He “forfeited over 20 years of my life due to 
this one lapse.” He had never been in trouble up to that point or since then. Finally, he 
stated that “…I was locked up for 14 months, in the brig at [base] and although I made it 
through without the need for additional disciplinary actions, I would never, ever put 
myself in that situation again.” (AE A) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant has had financial difficulties in the past. In 1999, he filed a chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. The petition lists 18 creditors, with claims totaling $45,057. 
Applicant explained that the debts resulted from the loss of his wife’s income when 
they were transferred overseas while he was on active duty. After Applicant complied 
with the established payment plan, the petition was discharged in March 2003. 
Applicant incurred debts when he lost significant income after being reduced in rank 
from E-6 to E-1 as a result of his 2004 court-martial conviction. After his discharge from 
the Air Force in December 2006, Applicant moved in with his brother and his family. He 
 
 
4 
worked as a car salesman, but was unable to both meet his expenses and pay past-
due debts. (GE 2, 4, 5; AE A Tr. 19-20) 
 
 Before working for his current employer, Applicant was employed by Company 
B from September 2007 to February 2009. He worked in Iraq, earning $176,000 
annually. His son had medical problems that required him to leave his job in Iraq and 
return to the United States. He was unemployed for about eight months. In October 
2009, he began his current position, with a starting salary of $95,000; he now earns 
$102,742 annually. His monthly net income is $5,114, with monthly expenses and debt 
payments of $4,062. He pays $519 per month in child support. He bought an SUV in 
February 2011 for $38,000, with payments of about $700 monthly. In April 2012, he 
traded it in and leased a Cadillac, with payments of $672 per month. As of April 2012, 
his monthly net remainder was $166. However, he estimated that, as of the hearing 
date, his net remainder is about $800, and it would decrease to approximately $600 in 
about September 2012. (GE 1; Tr. 25-28, 55-58, 62-65) 
 
 The SOR debts appear in Applicant's credit reports of November 2010 and 
March 26, 2012. The debts, as listed in the SOR, total $60,800. He provided 
documentation showing he has paid two debts totaling $2,105. After deducting these 
two debts, and the taxes which Applicant is paying, the unresolved SOR debt is 
$47,349. The status of the SOR debts follows. (GE 2, 5) 
 
 Timeshare ($9,009) - In September 2007, Applicant started his job with 
Company B in Iraq. He expected to be employed by Company B for several years. In 
November 2008, while traveling in Mexico, he purchased a timeshare there. He admits 
this was not a sound financial decision. In February 2009, he resigned from Company 
B because of his son’s medical issues. He was unemployed, and was unable to pay 
the timeshare debt. It remains unresolved. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 45-46) 
 
 Rent ($500; $1605) - After returning from in Iraq in 2009, he rented an 
apartment in State A. When he obtained employment in another state, he broke his 
lease in State A. Applicant provided documentation showing that on June 5, 2010, he 
paid both debts, which together total $2,105. (GE 2; AE B, C; Tr. 46-48) 
 
 Credit card ($23,363) - Applicant used this credit card to pay for his expenses 
after he lost income when he was reduced from E-6 to E-1. His ex-wife also charged to 
the account for living expenses for herself and the children. After his discharge, he 
could not afford the payments. Applicant has not taken any steps toward resolving this 
debt. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 48-49) 
 
 Medical ($14,977) - Applicant did not have health insurance while he was 
unemployed in 2009. During that period, he was hospitalized twice. Since then, he has 
paid several smaller medical debts that amount to approximately $400. During his 
January 2011 security interview, he stated that, because he was employed, he would 
 
 
5 
contact the hospital to set up a payment plan. The debt remains unpaid. (GE 2; AE A; 
Tr. 49-50) 
 
 State income taxes ($11,346) - Applicant owes back taxes to the State A 
department of revenue for tax year 2008. He received erroneous information from his 
tax advisor. He was informed that he did not have to pay state income tax because he 
did not reside in the state while he was employed in Iraq from 2008 to 2009. His 
original liability was $6,000, but with interest and penalties, he owed back taxes of 
$11,346, as of September 8, 2011. He paid $1,500 in September 2011, and then set 
up a payment plan of $400 per month to be automatically deducted from his checking 
account starting in October 2011. Applicant testified that he does not owe back taxes to 
the federal government. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 50-55) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent adjudication policy in the AG.1 Decisions must also 
consider the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented require consideration of the security 
concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest2 for an applicant to either receive or 
have continued access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, then the 
applicant must refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one 
has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.3 
A person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
                                                 
1 
Directive at § 6.3. 
2
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
3
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
6 
trustworthiness to protect the national interests. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
While serving as an enlisted member of the Air Force, Applicant accepted a bribe 
of $50,000 to ensure that a certain company was awarded a contract. Applicant 
characterizes his action as a one-time lapse of judgment. However, his actions took 
place over a period of months—from the moment he agreed to the plan, to the time 
when he was arrested. There is no record evidence that Applicant reconsidered his 
decision, alerted authorized personnel or security about the situation, or ended the 
crime at any point before his arrest. During this time period, Applicant was vulnerable to 
coercion because of the damage to his career, reputation, and security clearance if the 
crime were discovered. He was convicted of bribery, spent 14 months in confinement, 
and was ultimately discharged under Other than Honorable conditions. His actions cast 
serious doubt on his judgment, trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with the law. 
AG ¶ 16(c) and (e) apply. 
 
 
7 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's involvement in bribery, and his subsequent court-martial, occurred 
eight to nine years ago. Distance in time can provide some mitigation. Although 
Applicant was vulnerable to coercion while the bribery was hidden, it is not a current 
security concern because, once his command became aware of the true facts, his 
secret was no longer a source of exploitation. 
 
 However, the nature of Applicant's conduct outweighs this mitigation. Over a 
period of several months, Applicant hid the fact that he made an agreement with X, 
accepted an initial payment, ensured the award to X’s company, and accepted cash 
from X’s contact in the United States. Moreover, his crime was revealed not through his 
own positive steps, but because police accidently discovered the cash. Applicant's 
conduct showed not only a lack of good judgment, but a blatant disregard for the trust 
that the Government had placed in him. Passage of time and the current lack of 
vulnerability do not outweigh his willingness to engage in criminal conduct that 
breached the Government’s trust. AG ¶ 17(c) and (e) do not apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the overall security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds....  
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19, and 
especially the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
 
8 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties. He filed a chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition in 1998, which was successfully discharged in 2003. Subsequently, he 
accumulated additional debts, and as of the hearing date, owed more than $58,000 in 
delinquent debt. For several years, he failed to take substantive steps to resolve his 
financial obligations. In addition, Applicant engaged in illegal activity by accepting 
$50,000 to ensure that a contract was awarded to a particular company. The evidence 
supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19(a), (c), and (d). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in 1997, under which he was 
required to repay his legitimate obligations to his creditors. The bankruptcy is old, and it 
was successfully discharged in 2003. However, Applicant has accrued more recent 
debts for the last several years, and a substantial debt load of more than $47,000 
remains unpaid. Applicant's inattention to his debts, despite his substantial salaries 
since 2007, indicates that delinquencies may continue in the future. His willingness to 
accept money in exchange for a benefit to a company, as well as his ongoing debts, 
raise serious doubts about his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on situations where conditions beyond an applicant’s control 
affect his ability to meet his financial obligations. Applicant stated that his loss of 
income when he was reduced from E-6 to E-1 affected his ability to meet his 
 
 
9 
obligations. However, that event was not beyond his control; it resulted from his own 
deliberate choice to accept a bribe. Moreover, it occurred in 2004, eight years ago. 
Since 2006, he has had only eight months of unemployment. Despite earning high 
salaries, he has not taken steps to resolve most of his past-due debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does 
not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) and (d) require evidence that an applicant's debts are under control, 
and a demonstration of good-faith efforts to resolve them. Applicant has paid two 
debts, which total $2,105. He also set up a payment plan with State A for his back 
taxes. However, he failed to deal with this tax debt until September 2011, more than 
two years after the taxes became delinquent. Since 2009, he has earned between 
$95,000 and $107,000 per year, and he has a monthly remainder of between $600 and 
$800. Yet he has taken no documented steps to resolve delinquent debts that total 
more than $47,000. He has made poor financial decisions. While owing the $23,000 
credit card debt, he purchased a $9,000 timeshare, and bought a $38,000 SUV with a 
$700 monthly payment, which he traded for a Cadillac with monthly payments of $672. 
During his 2011 security interview, he stated he would set up a payment plan for his 
hospital debt of almost $15,000, but as of the hearing date, he had not done so. AG ¶ 
20(c) cannot be applied because his debts are not under control. However, Applicant 
receives partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) for resolving two debts, and initiating a 
payment plan for his State A income taxes. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
 
10 
 Applicant did not provide character references or performance evaluations. 
However, in evaluating the whole person, I considered that he was married for almost 
20 years, and placed strong emphasis on his son’s well-being by returning from his 
overseas job to help with his son’s difficulties in school. He provided 19 years’ service 
to the Air Force, and before 2003, showed no evidence of problems. I found his 
testimony that he sincerely regrets his crime to be credible.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant engaged in a serious violation of trust when he 
deliberately chose to place his own desire for financial gain above the Government’s 
need for honest dealing. His actions resulted in a conviction at general court-martial, 
and his administrative separation from the Air Force. Engaging in criminal activity 
demonstrates extremely poor judgment and willingness to break the law. Applicant  
also failed to demonstrate any concrete plan to deal with his substantial delinquent 
debt, despite apparently having the funds to do so. Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns about financial considerations and personal conduct. Overall, his 
conduct raises doubts about his suitability for access to classified information. Such 
doubts must be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b   For Applicant4 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.d  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.e – 2.f  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.g – 2.h  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
4 The two allegations under Guideline E describe two Air Force’s actions in response to the same 
criminal act. Because subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b stem from the same conduct, it is redundant to find 
against Applicant on both subparagraphs.  
