 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04492   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant is indebted to eight creditors for approximately $37,500 in unresolved 
delinquent debt. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on March 16, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concern under the financial considerations 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
guideline. DOHA recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 31, 2012. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on June 19, 2012, and 
chose not to submit a response. Accordingly, the documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. The case was assigned to me 
on August 9, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, has worked for a federal contractor since 1995.2  
 
 The SOR alleges that he owes eight delinquent accounts, totaling approximately 
$37,500. Applicant admits the debts, with qualifications, blaming the debts on the illegal 
and unfair practices of his creditors. He also faults his creditors for failing to accept 
payment plans or settlements that are to his liking. Applicant asserts that his problems 
began in June 2009 when he lost his car to satisfy a mechanics lien. No longer in 
possession of the car, he decided to stop paying the car loan and insurance. He did not 
explain how this event caused him to accumulate over $37,000 in delinquent debt. 
Contrary to Applicant’s claims, his December 2010 and January 2012 credit reports 
show that the accounts in the SOR started to enter delinquent status as early as April 
2006. He claims to have received financial counseling from a debt consolidation 
company, a credit counseling service, and the financial ministry of a church, but none 
was able to guide him toward resolution of his debts. All of the debts alleged in the SOR 
remain unresolved.3  
 
Applicant intends to pay his debts, but needs to earn more money to do so. He 
believes obtaining a higher level security clearance will give him access to jobs that will 
increase his income.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
2 Items 3-4. 
  
3 Item 3, 5-8. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Two of the disqualifying conditions under ¶ AG 19 apply: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a long and ongoing history of not paying his debts. As a result, he 
has accumulated over $37,000 in delinquent debt, which remains unresolved. None of 
the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 205 apply. Applicant has been gainfully 
                                                          
5 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
4 
 
employed for the past 17 years. He has not offered any plausible explanation for the 
genesis of his financial problems. Applicant has not made any effort to resolve his 
delinquent debt nor has he articulated a reasonable plan for doing so. Although 
Applicant receives some credit for receiving financial counseling, any mitigation is 
undercut by the fact that his finances are not under control.  Accordingly, Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent, ongoing, and continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan6 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this 
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, 
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. This case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
6 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
