KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial
evidence.  A Judge is not required to make an explicit credibility determination.  It is not
inconsistent for a Judge to find an applicant credible yet nevertheless conclude that he had not
met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-04287.a1
DATE: 09/11/2012
DATE: September 11, 2012
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-04287
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Richard L. Morris, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 5, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 26, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his application
of the mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant served in the U.S. Navy
from 1992 until 2007.  He was first granted a clearance in 1997 and maintained one until his
discharge from active duty.  
Applicant began drinking alcohol in his early teens and had several alcohol-related incidents
before joining the Navy, such as shoplifting beer, driving while impaired, and underage possession.
He was sentenced to a 14 week “adolescent chemical user” course as a consequence of the
shoplifting.  
Applicant’s duty performance while in the Navy was “exemplary.”  Decision at 2.  However,
he had some alcohol-related infractions during his service.  He was arrested for, and convicted of,
DUI, subsequently attending outpatient alcohol counseling from the Navy.  He was diagnosed as
alcohol dependent.
Even so, he continued to drink alcohol.  While overseas, he got into an altercation with a
fellow sailor after having consumed alcohol.  He received non-judicial punishment and was required
to attend inpatient alcohol treatment.  He completed the program successfully, receiving a favorable
prognosis along with advice to abstain from future alcohol consumption.  
However, he began drinking again and consumed alcohol in an overseas location in which
such conduct was prohibited.  He received non-judicial punishment and was subsequently
discharged from the Navy with a general discharge under honorable conditions “for a pattern of
alcohol-related misconduct.”  Id. at 3.
After his discharge Applicant began working for his current employer.  His supervisor finds
him to be trustworthy.  Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for his duty performance.
Applicant’s wife is a military officer who holds a bachelor’s degree in counseling.  She describes
Applicant as trustworthy and a dedicated father.  She says that she has seen him drunk two or three
times during the last six months.  She defined drunk as “more than four or six beers, four or six
drinks.”  Id. at 4.  
Applicant has admitted to consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication two to four times
a month.  During a security clearance interview, he said that he consumed four to six beers and two
to three shots twice a week on weekends.  He also said that he will go out on his boat about once a
month and have ten beers and five shots.  At DOHA’s request a clinical social worker evaluated
Applicant, diagnosing him with “alcohol abuse.”  Id.  At the hearing, Applicant testified that he
drinks responsibly now, does not drink to the point at which he loses control, and stays away from
situations that could lead to trouble.  The Judge characterized this testimony as an attempt to
“backtrack” from Applicant’s previous admissions as to the extent of his alcohol consumption.  Id.
3
In the Analysis, the Judge noted that Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident occurred five
years ago.  However, he also noted Applicant’s long history of alcohol abuse, his continued
consumption of alcohol after having been diagnosed as alcohol dependent, and evidence that
Applicant’s military career was cut short due to his problems with drinking.  He stated that
Applicant was not currently participating in a treatment program or in Alcoholics Anonymous, and
he concluded that Applicant “will not or cannot stop or moderate his use of alcohol, even when his
career or clearance is at stake.”  Id. at 7.    
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that he was discharged from the Navy for
a pattern of alcohol-related misconduct.  He states that there is no such type of discharge and that
Applicant was, in fact, discharged for minor disciplinary infractions.  However, Applicant’s
response to the SOR and record evidence, such as his DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or
Discharge From Active Duty, stated that Applicant was discharged for a “pattern of misconduct.”
Moreover, the record is replete with evidence that his misconduct was related to alcohol.  The Judge
was not citing the regulatory provision for Applicant’s discharge; rather, he was describing the
factual reasons for it.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based on substantial
record evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from
the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-00970 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  
Applicant cites to favorable evidence, such as his (and his wife’s) testimony about his current
drinking habits.  He believes that the Judge did not consider this evidence or that he mis-weighed
it.  However, the Judge made findings on this evidence and discussed it in the Analysis.  Applicant
has failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence.  Neither has
he demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06775 at
3 (App. Bd. Aug. 30, 2011).  Applicant also cites to his having held a clearance while in the Navy
without incident or concern.  This was evidence that the Judge was required to consider, along with
all the other evidence in the record.  However, prior favorable adjudications or a good security
record are not dispositive of an applicant’s security concerns.  In this case, the Judge reasonably
explained why Applicant’s long history of security significant alcohol consumption and misconduct
outweighed the positive aspects of the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd.
Mar. 20, 2012).
Applicant states that the Judge did not make a determination that Applicant was lacking in
credibility.  He argues that, as a consequence, the Judge should have extended more weight to
Applicant’s testimony and to that of his other witnesses to the effect that his drinking is under
control and that he is trustworthy.  However, the Directive does not require a Judge to make an
explicit credibility determination.  It is not inconsistent for a Judge to consider an applicant’s
presentation at the hearing to be believable as far as it goes, but nevertheless to find the presentation
insufficient to meet the applicant’s burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  See ISCR Case No. 11-
02087, supra, at 2.  Moreover, the Judge’s comment that Applicant’s testimony appeared to
backtrack from previous statements about his alcohol use implies a conclusion that the testimony
was at least somewhat lacking in credibility.  The Judge’s detailed findings, considered alongside
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR, support his conclusion that Applicant had not demonstrated
mitigation.
4
 The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
