                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  11-04176           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Paula Phinney, Esq.
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On February 17, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA was unable to find
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him a security clearance,
and DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 13, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on May 14, 2012. The case was scheduled for hearing on
June 25, 2012, and rescheduled for August 2, 2012. The hearing was convened on that
date. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of eight exhibits (GEs 1-8). Applicant
relied on four witnesses (including himself) and 21 exhibits (AEs A-U). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on August 9, 2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his payments
to identified creditors and clarification of his prepared budget. There being no objection
from Department Counsel, and for good cause shown, I granted Applicant three weeks
to supplement the record and the Government two days to respond. I also granted
Applicant’s request for a 30-day extension. Within the time permitted, Applicant
supplemented the record with copies of letters to several of his creditors (creditors 1.b
through 1.j,1.l , 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.s), and his clarified personal financial budget, dated
August 23, 2012. I admitted his submissions as AEs V through FF. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief
in February 2002 (discharged in May 2002) and subsequently accumulated 18
additional debts totaling exceeding $431,000, inclusive of a $416,000 mortgage
foreclosure.   In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations (i.e.,
those covered by paragraphs 1.a through 1.e, 1.g through 1.k, and 1.o through 1.q), but
denied the remaining six allegations. He provided no explanations. 
                
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old production supervisor for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his wife in October 2001 and has three children from this
marriage. (GE 4; Tr. 57, 74) He attended a local community college between June 1984
and January 1987. (GE 4) He claims no degree or diploma. 
Applicant enlisted in the Air National Guard in March 1989 and served on active
duty with his Guard unit for only a short time. For most of his 22 years with the Air
National Guard of his state he worked as a full-time civilian and part-time military
enlistee. (GEs 4 and 2; Tr.  53-54, 74)
3
Applicant’s Finances
In March 1993, Applicant and his wife purchased a home and financed it with a
fixed-rate first mortgage of about $123,000. (GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 85) Records reveal that
they refinanced their mortgage with another lender in July 1997 for $152,000 and
financed their purchase of a 1997 Dodge Ram truck in 1999 for $15,000. (GEs 1 and 2)
They accumulated numerous credit cards as well (13 in all) between 1993 and 2000.
(GEs 1 and 2). With their limited income, they struggled to cover their monthly bills and
filed jointly for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in February 2002. (GEs 2, 4, and 6) 
In their joint bankruptcy petition, Applicant and his wife scheduled $167,000 in
secured debts: a first mortgage on their home ($152,000) and a collateralized auto loan
in the amount of $15,000. (GE 1) Additionally, Applicant and his wife scheduled $50,052
in unsecured claims, most of which comprised their credit card debts. (GE 1) They
reported combined net annual income of $55,000. (GE 1; Tr. 55) Records show that
Applicant and his wife were able to complete satisfactory agreements with their secured
creditors that enabled them to retain their home and vehicle and continue with their
mortgage and car payments. (GE 1) They received their  bankruptcy discharge in May
2002. (GE 1) 
Following their bankruptcy discharge, Applicant and his wife opened new
accounts and refinanced their home mortgage. (GEs 2-8) With their same mortgage
lender, they refinanced their home in October 2006 with an adjustable-rate first
mortgage in the amount of $350,000. (GE 5; Tr. 85) They used the additional loan
proceeds to cover their future expenses and debts. (Tr. 86) Some of the proceeds were
used to purchase late-model vehicles. (Tr. 87-88) Less than clear is how they applied
the balance of their loan proceeds. Records show that the mortgage was sold or
assigned to another lender (creditor 1.m) in June 2007.
In the Fall of 2008, Applicant and his wife encountered problems with their bills
and mortgage due to Applicant’s pay reduction with his new National Guard unit (GE 6;
Tr. 56, 66),  and sought a loan remodification. (AE U) They completed a remodification
plan in 2009 that consolidated their late payments with the newly calculated loan
payments.  The new terms increased their monthly loan payments by $400 (to $1,700 a
month), and provided no grace period. Unable to meet their August 2009 mortgage
payment by the due date, they assumed their modification agreement was in default and
made no further attempts to catch up with their monthly payment obligations. (GEs 3 and
6 and AE U) By the time they learned they were not automatically defaulted, creditor 1.m
had commenced foreclosure proceedings. Applicant and his wife tried to cure the
defaults with their lender and avert foreclosure, but were unsuccessful. (Tr. 63-64) When
creditor 1.m initiated foreclosure proceedings in late 2009, Applicant’s loan balance had
increased to $416,000. (GEs 5 and 7) Creditor 1.m completed its foreclosure of
Applicant’s home mortgage in March 2010. (GEs’ 5 and 6)
Records show that Applicant fell behind with many of his other debts after
November 2007. (GEs 5 and 7) Between November 2007 and September 2010,
4
Applicant accrued reported delinquent debts with creditors 1.b ($3,202), 1.c ($202), 1.d
($1,035), 1.e ($1,099), 1.f ($2,023), 1.g ($731), 1.h ($452), 1.I ($3,177), 1.j ($1,691), 1.k
($131), 1.l ($93), 1.n ($371), 1.o ($139), 1.p ($1,133), 1.q ($436), 1.r ($2,694), and 1.s
($1,109). (GEs 5 and 7) These reported delinquent debts exceed $19,000 and remain
unsatisfied. Asked about his spending habits, Applicant admitted to the possibility of a
spending problem. (Tr. 83)
 In August 2010, Applicant changed jobs. He resigned his Air National Guard post,
where he was grossing about $70,000, and accepted a new civilian position with his
current employer where he grosses close to $65,000. (Tr. 90) He attributes his interest in
his new position to his long-term advancement goals. (Tr.  91) 
Unable to make any payment progress with his listed creditors, Applicant
consulted with a debt consolidation firm in July 2012. (AEs A and B; Tr. 78-79)  With this
firm, he completed a client action plan that included a budget assessment. In the budget
summary prepared by the firm, Applicant reported net monthly income of $4,158,
minimum living expenses of $3,082, private debts of $714, and a monthly remainder of
$362. (AE B) Under his proposed budget, Applicant’s net monthly remainder would be
reduced to $327. (AE B)  
Applicant’s completed June 2012 monthly budget assessment with his debt
consolidation firm listed current net income of $4,158 and essential monthly living
expenses of $3,175; he also listed monthly loan payments of $900 and a net remainder
of $83. (AE B; Tr. 58-59, 67-68, 79-80) This assessment contrasts somewhat with the
figures supplied in his submitted July 2012 personal financial statement. (AE P) 
Afforded an opportunity to reconcile his furnished budget figures, Applicant
provided slightly revised net monthly income figures of $4,292, monthly net expenses of
$3,097, and a net monthly remainder of $455. (AE V; Tr. 77) The adjustments reflect the
elimination of the $750 monthly debt consolidation payment he had factored in to his
budget. (AE V; Tr. 81) 
With his current budget, Applicant shows promise in addressing his accumulated
debts. Payment documentation, though, is still lacking. Following several hours of
counseling from Applicant’s debt consolidation firm, firm personnel advised him that his
accrued debts would be paid within four years. (Tr. 81)
Upon further consideration with his wife, Applicant elected to terminate his debt
consolidation efforts and work with his creditors directly. (AE V) He supplied copies of
letters from the creditors he contacted, but no proofs of payments or payment
arrangements with any of his listed creditors.
To date, Applicant has made no documented payment progress with any of his
listed consumer creditors. Because his state has no recourse for creditors who incur
deficiencies on the mortgages they foreclose, Applicant has no potential deficiency
liability on his foreclosed residence. (Tr. 63-64)
5
Endorsements
Applicant earned numerous medals and awards as a military and civilian member
of his Air National Guard unit. (AE R). His awards include Air Force Commendation and
Achievement Medals, an Air Force Outstanding Unit Award, an Air Reserve Forces
Meritorious Service Medal, a National Defense Service Medal, an Armed Forces
Expeditionary Medal, a Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, an Air Force Longevity
Medal, an Armed Services Reserve Medal with 3 ‘M’ Devices, a USAF NCO PME
Graduate Ribbon, an Air Force Training Ribbon, and other awards. (AE R; Tr. 75-76)
Applicant is highly regarded by members of his Air National Guard command that
he served with over the course of his 22-year military career. (AE’s D through L, N, O,
and U; Tr. 23-25, 35-37, and 44-45)  His supervisors and co-workers uniformly credit him
with integrity and security conscientiousness. (Tr. 23-25, 35-37, and 44-45) They
consistently characterize him as a top performer who is respected and admired by his
contemporaries and supervisors alike. They stress his familiarity with Air Force
leadership and force development and find him to be a team player who can be trusted
in times of stress. Since joining his current employer’s work force, Applicant has
impressed his National Guard superiors with his displayed pride, moral sincerity, good
leadership, and total dedication to his company’s defense goals. His superiors noted the
two foreign deployments he has made as a deployment team leader with his unit. (AE U;
Tr. 76) 
Applicant furnished solid performance evaluations for the 2010-2011 rating period.
(AE Q). His evaluations include an overall performance rating of “meets job
requirements.” (AE Q) He is credited with demonstrating excellent customer relations
skills, a can-do attitude, and a willingness to accept new responsibilities and challenges.
Because few of Applicant’s character witnesses expressed any detailed knowledge of his
financial issues, his employer impressions become more difficult to assess in the context
of evaluating Applicant’s financial condition. (Tr. 25, 37, 45)
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
6
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
7
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a well-regarded production supervisor for a defense contractor with a
considerable history of indebtedness over a number of years. After accumulating over
$50,000 in delinquent credit card and other consumer-related debts, he petitioned for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in February 2002 and received his discharge the same year.
Within several years of his bankruptcy discharge, he refinanced his home and used his
significant loan proceeds to finance future purchases and debts. When Applicant and his
wife encountered payment problems with their bills in 2008, they turned to their mortgage
lender to modify their loan payments. This provided a modicum of temporary payment
relief. When they fell behind again with their bills in 2009, they could not forestall lender
foreclosure, and lost their home to non-judicial foreclosure in early 2010. To date, they
have not been able to repay or pay down their old creditors with the income resources
available to them. 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts since his Chapter 7 bankruptcy
discharge in 2002, and his past inability to resolve these debts, raise potential security
concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in managing his finances.
8
His actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines ¶ DC 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶ 19(c) “a history
of not meeting financial obligations.”
      
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Insufficient income and failure to manage his finances prudently with the limited
resources available to him account for most of Applicant’s financial setbacks.  Together,
they warrant partial application of three of the mitigating conditions for financial
considerations: ¶ MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” and MC ¶
20(c), “the person has received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” Most of the time under
consideration, Applicant and his wife struggled with controlling their spending and debt
accruals and were considerably overextended. And Applicant’s counseling from his debt
consolidation firm was brief and ultimately replaced by direct client contacts. 
In circumstances similar to the present case, the Appeal Board has said that an
applicant need not have paid or resolved every one of his proven debts or addressed all
of his debts simultaneously. What Applicant needs is a credible plan to resolve his
financial problems, accompanied by implementing actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-06488
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008) By the proofs presented, Applicant has achieved few of his cited
objectives. His creditor contacts are recent and have not materialized into any concrete
payment plans. 
Applicant assures he is addressing his listed creditors individually and is prepared
to resolve his debts with payments and payment plans. While his objectives show
promise, they have not produced any payment progress to date. Based on his developed
track record, safe predictions cannot be made as to if and when he will be able to repay
his creditors, in full or through negotiated payment plans.
While Applicant’s choice to cancel his consolidated payment arrangements and
work with his creditors individually offers promise and hope, his election without more
proofs of documented payment progress does not meet the good-faith requirements of
the financial considerations guideline. When presented with similar good-faith repayment
challenges, the Appeal Board has circumscribed “good-faith” repayment efforts to entail
actions aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts in ways that show “reasonableness,
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” See ISCR Case No. 02-30304
9
at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004 (quoting ISCR Case No., 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4,
2001). This means that an applicant must generally do more to resolve his debts than
offer promises. See id.
Consideration of Applicant’s military and educational background, his prior
bankruptcy discharge in 2002, his meritorious military and civilian service, income
deficiencies surrounding his post-bankruptcy debt accumulations, his current income and
expense levels, and the lack of any documented payment initiatives with his listed
creditors, preclude a favorable assessment at this time of his overall judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. Applicant’s proofs fail to provide sufficient credible indicators of  his
ability to be trusted in times of financial stress and preclude him from meeting his
evidentiary burden of mitigating the covered debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is substantial that Applicant has
performed well during his 22-year tour of military and civilian service and is entitled to
considerable credit for his military and civilian contributions. While economic
circumstances played a pivotal role in his inability to address his accumulated debts, his
efforts to date to resolve his listed debt delinquencies are insufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the AGs governing his finances. 
Formal Fin d  i n gs
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:            Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
10
