Consisting of the transcript (Tr.) and Government exhibits (GE) 1-3.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxx Xxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 11-04187
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I grant Applicant’s clearance.1
On 7 May 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing. DOHA2
assigned the case to me 20 July 2012, and I convened a hearing 21 August 2012.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 29 August 2012.
Specifically, Applicant answered “yes” to a question asking him if he had “received a written warning, been3
officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace?” He described the violation
as “discredit to the armed services,” and provided the details of the reprimand he received at NJP.
Applicant disclosed that he had been subject to “other disciplinary proceedings under the Uniform Code of4
Military Justice” for “discredit to the armed services.”
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted receiving the non-judicial punishment (NJP) alleged in SOR
1.a. He denied the falsification allegations of SOR 1.b and 1.c. He is a 26-year-old lead
security officer employed by a Government contractor since March 2010. He seeks
reinstatement of the security clearance he held while in the military.
Applicant served in the U.S. military from March 2005 to March 2010. He held a
clearance without incident as necessary during his military service and was honorably
discharged in March 2010. 
In September 2009, Applicant was referred to squadron-level NJP on three
charges under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) as alleged in SOR 1.a and
documented in GE 3. The charges were not intended for referral to court-martial. The
specifications were inartfully drawn, and jurisdictionally deficient for referral to court-
martial. Further, Applicant received his rights advisement from a lawyer simultaneously
with 10-12 other military members being referred to NJP—an acceptable procedure in
an administrative setting, but legally deficient for charges intended for court-martial.
Finally, because Applicant was assigned to a land-based command, he had the right to
demand trial by court-martial, which he declined.
In September 2009, Applicant accepted punishment at squadron-level NJP for
violating UCMJ, Article 134-General Article (Conduct was of a Nature to bring Discredit
Upon the Armed Forces). He was reduced in rank one paygrade and received other
punishments consistent with squadron-level NJP. Unit records reflect that he received
punishment only for the third of the alleged charges, not the first two charges, which
alleged more serious misconduct. He was released from active duty into reserve status
in March 2010, subject to recall per the terms of his enlistment agreement. He is eligible
for re-enlistment.
In his August 2010 clearance application (GE 1), Applicant disclosed his NJP and
the circumstances leading to his punishment in response to Section 13C: Employment
Record  and Section 15: Military History.  He provided essentially the same information3 4
to a government investigator in August 2010. Because of his military experience,
Applicant knew that his NJP would be in military record systems, and thus retrievable as
part of his background investigation. Under his work history, Applicant reported in detail
the several military duty stations where he had been assigned. The SOR alleges that
Applicant falsified his clearance application and provided misleading information to the
investigator because he did not provide the details of the two more-serious charges.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
The sole support for the allegations in SOR 1.a is the charge sheet appended to
Applicant’s NJP record. There is no police report or report of investigation covering any
of the allegations referred to NJP. These allegations lack proof. Applicant admitted the
lesser charge of “conduct to bring discredit,” and that is what his commanding officer
punished him for. The Applicant’s admission documents the “conduct to bring discredit,”
but the Applicant’s denial of the two more serious charges put the burden on the
Government to substantiate those charges. Mere allegation cannot substantiate those
charges. The commanding officer recorded no formal disposition of the two more
serious charges, but none is required because the proceeding is non-judicial. SOR 1.a
alleges only that Applicant went to NJP on the three charges listed and that Applicant
accepted punishment as listed. His admission to that allegation does not admit that he
received punishment for all three offenses, and the Government’s own evidence shows
that he was only punished for the third offense.
 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E.
Applicant’s October 2009 NJP revealed conduct demonstrating poor judgment.
¶ 16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse6
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information;
4
However, only in a military setting does the conduct constitute a violation of the UCMJ.
And in this instance, Applicant’s Commanding Officer chose to resolve the charges
through NJP.  Although the conduct demonstrated poor judgment, it occurred in6
October 2009, has not been repeated, and Applicant completed his enlistment without
further incident. Nothing in the record suggests that this conduct is likely to recur, and is
sufficiently known to not present any potential for undue influence.
Notwithstanding the NJP, the Government did not establish its case for
falsification of Applicant’s clearance application or for misrepresentation during his
August 2010 subject interview. Applicant disclosed his NJP both as an employment-
related disciplinary action because he was reprimanded, and under his military history
because he was subject to NJP under the UCMJ. Applicant disclosed the misconduct
for which he was punished, and was aware that military records contained the details of
his NJP. The idea that his failure to list the two other charges (for which he was not
punished) constitutes a deliberate falsification or misrepresentation is a quibble, based
on a stretched reading of the question. Applicant was subjected to discipline under the
UCMJ only for “conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.” Only a
hyper-technical interpretation of the question argues that he was also subjected to
discipline under the UCMJ for the other two offenses, neither of which resulted in any
punishment and neither of which has any evidence to support them. Further, there is
nothing in the wording of the question allegedly falsified to suggest that Applicant should
have provided more information than he did, or that the information he provided was
otherwise insufficient to put the Government on notice of Applicant’s misconduct. I
resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-c: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.   
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
