1
                                                              
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-05027
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On February 9, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD
on September 1, 2006. 
In a response dated April 10, 2012, Applicant admitted eight of the 10 allegations
raised under Guideline J and all five allegations set forth in the SOR under Guideline E.
He also requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me on July 16, 2012. The
parties proposed a hearing date of August 14, 2012. A notice setting that date for the
hearing was issued on July 26, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant
testified. Department Counsel offered 17 documents, which were admitted as Exs. 1-17
without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on August 22,
2012, and the record was closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions,
and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden of mitigating security concerns
related to personal conduct. Clearance is denied.
 Tr. 19-21. The record shows that the arrest occurred in 1985, not 1986, as reflected in the SOR.      1
 Tr. 23. Applicant stated that the case was ultimately dismissed by the judge, who “got tired of looking at”      2
the matter.
 Tr. 24-26.      3
 But see Tr. 31.      4
 Tr. 33.      5
 Tr. 41.      6
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old field service representative for a defense contractor.
He has a high school diploma and has received some post-secondary education
through the U.S. military. Applicant is married. He and his wife have two children. They
are expecting a third child within the month. 
Over the years, Applicant has faced several criminal charges. As a teenager in
1985, he was charged with 2  degree assault (a felony) after an argument with annd
acquaintance turned into a physical skirmish.  The charge was reduced to 3  degree1 rd
assault and Applicant was placed on Adjournment in Contemplation of Dismissal until
July 1989.  In October 1993, Applicant was charged with criminal mischief, resisting2
arrest, and disorderly conduct. He does not recall the incidents underlying the charges.
In August 1994, Applicant was arrested for impaired driving and he refused to undergo
either a field sobriety or breathalyzer test.  He pled guilty to the charge of operating a3
motor vehicle under the influence (OUI), was ordered to attend some meetings of
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and was placed on two years of probation.
In October 1996, Applicant was working at a facility where he handled isopropyl
alcohol. On his way home from work one morning after a lengthy shift, he stopped to
have three beers. He felt tired, but not intoxicated. As he continued his way home, he
was stopped by police, who smelled alcohol. Applicant refused to take a field sobriety
test.  He assumed that the isopropyl alcohol with which he worked would be in his4
system and impact a blood alcohol reading. Ultimately, Applicant was found guilty of
operating with defective equipment.
In January 1998, Applicant had been drinking before he “passed out” in a van on
the side of a road.  A police officer saw multiple uncapped gas cans in the vehicle. The5
officer then saw Applicant and knocked on the vehicle. The next thing Applicant
remembers is an officer shaking him and using pepper spray. He was charged with and
eventually found guilty of disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. In September 1998,
Applicant’s girlfriend saw Applicant’s car and deduced he was in a bar drinking with
friends. The couple had a volatile relationship and the girlfriend needed to take
antidepressants “to keep her calm.”  She entered the bar and struck him on the side of6
the head. They went out to their vehicles. She again struck Applicant, who pushed her
 Tr. 48.      7
 Tr. 61.       8
 Tr. 62.      9
 Tr. 65-66.      10
 Tr. 62.      11
 Tr. 54-55.      12
 Tr. 55. Applicant stated that he knew the form was important, just not “super, super important.”      13
3
away. As a result of the push, she stumbled and hit the car door. Applicant was found
guilty of assault and battery with a dangerous weapon, a felony.
After another altercation with his volatile girlfriend, Applicant was charged with
assault and battery on an unspecified date between December 2000 and January 2001.
Applicant was found guilty. Imposed jail time was suspended and he was placed on
probation for 18 months. In May 2001, Applicant’s girlfriend became abusive at a party.
She threw a candle at him, covering his face in hot wax. He threw a beer bottle at her.
He was arrested for assault and battery with a dangerous weapon. As he was being
driven to the police station, he decided to end his relationship with this girlfriend.
Ultimately, the case against him was dismissed.
By July 2004, Applicant was living with a different girlfriend. While his girlfriend
was away one weekend, Applicant drove to a local mountaintop and drank beer. He
started to drive home and apparently fell asleep. His truck was found in the middle of
the road with the vehicle running and the brake lights on. He was arrested and charged
with OUI and marked lanes violations. He was found guilty of OUI, placed on probation
for two years, and ordered to attend a 14-day inpatient alcohol treatment program.
Applicant was thankful to take the treatment program and took it seriously.“    7
By 2006, Applicant had quit abusing alcohol, acknowledging that he “and alcohol
don’t mix.”   He met his current wife in 2007. She is a “hard line Buddhist” with no8
tolerance for alcohol; she helps him maintain his sobriety.  Now married and expecting9
a third child, Applicant is happy in his new life. At most, he enjoys an occasional beer.10
They have their own home and Applicant has found a new direction in his life.11
Becoming a family man has brought stability to his life.
On November 23, 2009, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Public Trust
Position (QPTP). On October 24, 2010, he signed an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). He was encouraged by his company to complete the
e-QIP quickly.  He testified that he did not read the questions carefully, and that he did12
not know that the application and his answers were “a big deal.”  In response to13
Section 22b (Have you been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or any
other type of law enforcement officer?), he answered “No.” At the hearing, Applicant
 Tr. 53, 55.      14
 Tr. 57.      15
 Tr. 58.      16
 Tr. 58-59.      17
 Tr. 60-61.      18
4
stated that he must have believed that the question was limited to events within the
preceding seven years, a limitation applicable in the preceding question (Section 22a). 
In response to Section 20 on his November 2009 QPTP, Applicant denied
having been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses in the preceding
seven years. In his 2010 e-QIP, there were similar questions, but they lacked the seven
year qualification. There, he answered “No” in response to Section 22c (Have you
EVER been charged with any felony offense, emphasis in the original) and Section 22e
(Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?,
emphasis in the original). Despite the inclusion of the term “EVER” set forth all in capital
letters in Sections 22c and 22e of the 2010 e-QIP, Applicant believed the questions
were restricted to events in the preceding seven years.14
In response to Section 24b of the e-QIP, Applicant answered “No” (In the past
seven years, have you been ordered, advised, or asked to seek counseling or
treatment as a result of your use of alcohol?). In so doing, he neglected to note that he
was court-ordered to attend a 14-day inpatient alcohol treatment program in 2004. He
testified that he had thought the incident was outside the seven-year time frame
contemplated in the question, and that he had forgotten the incident occurred in 2004.15
Finally, in response to Section 13c (Has any of the following happened to you in
the last 7 years? (1) Fired from a job, (2) Quit a job after being told you would be fired,
(3) Left a job by mutual agreement. . . . (4)Left a job for other reasons under
unfavorable circumstances, and (6) Laid off from job by employer) of the 2010 e-QIP,
Applicant answered “No.” However, in response to an inquiry as to past employment
under Section 13 of the e-QIP, Applicant wrote that he was “laid off” from the welding
position he had maintained until 2005. In addition, there is some evidence that he was
actually fired or otherwise told that he was to be let go from that position.  Applicant16
admits that he intentionally provided a false answer because it was “embarrassing to be
fired.”  He does not believe anyone at his current place of employment knows that he17
was fired from that job.18
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised AG. In addition to brief introductory
explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead,
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      19
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      20
 Id.      21
 Id.      22
5
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. The Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is19
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  20
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information). The clearly consistent standard indicates
that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.21
Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.22
 AG ¶ 30.      23
6
Analysis
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
The concern under this guideline is that criminal activity creates doubt about a
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  In23
this case, Applicant admits he was charged with about eight criminal acts between 1985
and 2004. Several of those arrests resulted in convictions. In addition, he admitted that
he provided a false answer on his October 2010, e-QIP, thus acting in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 1001. This is sufficient to raise both Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition
AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c)
(allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). Consequently, it is Applicant’s
burden to mitigate the security concerns raised.
The 1985 incident occurred when Applicant was a teen, and he no longer recalls
the 1993 criminal mischief, resisting arrest, and disorderly conduct charges. He admits
that he was found guilty of operating a motor vehicle under the influence in 1994 and in
2004. He admits that he was found guilty of operating with defective equipment in 1996,
both disorderly conduct and resisting arrest in 1998, and for domestic assault and
battery charges between 1998 and 2001 while in a volatile relationship. That
relationship ended years ago, and Applicant is now happily married to another woman.
He successfully completed an intensive in-house alcohol treatment program. He no
longer abuses alcohol. Rather, his use of alcohol currently is minimal, responsible, and
under the watchful eye of his wife, whose faith eschews the use of alcohol. 
Applicant has completed all requirements related to his past criminal charges
and convictions. However, his recurrent criminal conduct did not end in 2004. Applicant
admits that he intentionally failed to disclose that he had been let go from a job on his
2010 e-QIP. This admission makes Applicant’s string of criminal violations more recent,
obviating application of Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time
has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). At most, his expressed contrition, reset
goals, nearly two years without further criminal behavior, and his commitment to being a
role model for his wife and children raise AG ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement).
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
 AG ¶ 15.      24
 Id.      25
7
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  In addition, any failure to24
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process is of special interest.  25
Less than two years ago, in October 2010, Applicant completed the e-QIP at
issue. He admits that he intentionally denied having been laid off from a job, having
been fired from a position, or having left a job for other reasons under unfavorable
circumstances. He explained that he did so because it would have been embarrassing
to reveal that he had been fired from a job in 2005. In addition, he inaccurately denied
having been arrested by any type of law enforcement officer, ever having been charged
with any felony offense, and ever being charged with any offense related to alcohol.
Furthermore, he also incorrectly denied having been ordered, advised, or asked to seek
counseling or treatment as a result of his alcohol use in the preceding seven years.
Under these circumstances, there is sufficient evidence to give rise to Personal
Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) and AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct or
concealment of information about one’s conduct that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. . . .)  Consequently, the burden shifts to Applicant
to mitigate the security concerns.
Applicant admitted that he falsified his 2010 e-QIP answer regarding having
been laid off or fired in 2005. As to the other incorrect answers at issue, he alternatively
argues that he completed the e-QIP in haste, misread or misunderstood the questions,
or failed to recall the dates or other specifics regarding some of the incidents at issue.
In light of his credible testimony, and giving Applicant the benefit of the doubt, I find that
Applicant did not intend to falsify or mislead when he provided his answers to Sections
22b, 22c, 22e, ad 24b, but only in his response to Section 13c. Taking the e-QIP as a
whole, however, intentional falsification occurred, obviating application of the available
mitigating conditions found at AG ¶ 17(a)-(g). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
8
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a credible and forthright middle-aged man who was involved in a
string of crimes from his teen years until his early 40s.  In the past few years, he has
redirected his life. Through marriage, fatherhood, domestic stability, and job
satisfaction, he no longer succumbs to reckless temptations or immature impulses. He
is now a mature and responsible married man and father. He has not been arrested or
charged with criminal conduct since July 2004, over eight years ago. There is no
evidence that he has been involved with criminal activity since he signed his October
2010 e-QIP. I find it highly unlikely he will again be involved in the types of criminal
conduct at issue between 1985 and 2004. 
What remains troubling is Applicant’s acknowledged October 2010 e-QIP
falsification (Section 13c). Less than two years is insufficient time to amend the breach
of trust caused by Applicant’s admittedly false e-QIP answer from late October 2010.
As noted above, this process demands that any questions regarding an applicant’s
reliability should be decided in favor of the protection of classified information.
Therefore, while I find that Applicant mitigated criminal conduct security concerns, I also
find that he failed to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance denied.
__________________________
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
