 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12235 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 3, 2012, and initially requested a decision 
without a hearing. Government Counsel requested a hearing on July 20, 2012. The 
case was assigned to me on July 25, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 
26, 2012, setting the hearing for August 13, 2012. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objections. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, offered 
one witness, and offered exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 23, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old and is seeking a security clearance for the first time. He 
is the chief executive officer (CEO) of a government contractor. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He is divorced and has two adult children He is an avid aviation enthusiast and 
owns several airplanes. Before assuming his current position, he spent 30 years in the 
real estate business.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on 13 accounts for various 
government-filed tax liens and four collection accounts. The liens and collection 
accounts were listed on a credit report dated June 8, 2011. Applicant admitted 12 of the 
liens, but indicated that he paid them all. He denied one lien account. He admitted two 
collection accounts, but indicated that he paid both of them. He denied two of the 
collection accounts.2  
 
 The liens on Applicant’s property were for delinquent property taxes owed in two 
different counties of a particular state (not the state where he resides). The property 
taxes were assessed on airplane hangars and airplanes that Applicant owned from 
about 1985 to present. The reason for his non-payment was that the hangars were 
leased to other individuals, they failed to pay the tax, and he became responsible. He 
presented documentary evidence showing payment and or release for 12 of the lien 
accounts. Those payments and releases were made and obtained between January 
and June 2012.3   
 
 He disputed that he owed the underlying tax on the one remaining lien (SOR ¶ 
1.m for $3,442). Applicant stated that the disputed tax lien is for an aircraft that he 
moved out of the county trying to tax it in 1996. He believes that since the aircraft was 
not physically located there during the tax year, he is not obligated to pay the tax on it at 
that location. He did pay the tax in the county and state where the aircraft was actually 
located. The chief financial officer (CFO) of Applicant’s company testified and 
corroborated Applicant’s position regarding the disputed lien liability and that Applicant 
pays the property tax where the airplane is located.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 19, 60; GE 1; Answer to SOR (Ans). 
 
2 Ans. 
 
3 Tr. at 22; GE 3; AE A; Ans. 
 
4 Tr. at 22, 33; GE 4; AE G. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant presented documentary evidence that the four collection accounts have 
been paid. For two of the accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o), he supplied receipts showing 
the debts were paid and deleted from his credit report in April and June 2012. The two 
remaining collection accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q), arose from a commercial rental 
property Applicant owned in another state. He believes these were assessed fees and 
fines from the local housing authority related to the rental property. Applicant sold the 
property in question in September 2011. The closing statement from that transaction is 
in the record. Applicant understood, and this understanding was corroborated by the 
CFO’s testimony, that those two obligations were paid out of the proceeds of the sale. A 
credit report generated by the Government after the sale does not list either of the 
debts. It appears that these collection accounts were resolved through the sale of the 
property.5    
 
 Applicant is current on all his other financial obligations. He does not owe on any 
federal or state income taxes.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31-33, 40-41, 51-55; GE 3; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 59. 
 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple liens placed upon his property for property tax debt and 
was delinquent on four collection accounts that he owed. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The liens and collection accounts attributed to Applicant were recent and 
numerous. He has paid all the accounts except for the disputed lien concerning the 
airplane. Since he has no other delinquent debts in other areas of his life, it is 
reasonable to conclude that these type of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on 
his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s tax lien assessments for his airplane hangars and debts related to his 
commercial rental property were within his control to make timely payments. He failed to 
do so. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Although there is no evidence Applicant sought financial counseling, there are 
clear indications that all the debts and liens have been resolved through payment, 
except for the disputed airplane lien. He made good-faith efforts to resolve all the debts 
listed on the SOR except for the debt that he disputed. He supplied documentary 
evidence showing payment for all those debts. In particular, SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q were 
paid by the proceeds of the rental property sale and do not appear on the post-sale 
credit report submitted by the Government.7 AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
 Applicant has a reasonable basis to dispute the tax assessment made 
concerning his airplane that is not located in the taxing authority’s state. He provided 
                                                          
7 See GE 5. 
 
 
6 
 
appropriate documented proof of the dispute through the testimony of the company’s 
CFO. The CFO substantiated that the airplane is located in another state, which is 
taxing it for property tax purposes, and that it should not be taxed elsewhere. AG ¶ 
20(e) applies. Applicant met his burden to establish sufficient mitigation evidence under 
AG ¶ 20 on the liens and debts listed in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his 
debt and lien liability. He paid all the debts and liens except for one. He has a legitimate 
argument as to why he is not responsible for the property tax on his airplane by a state 
where it is not located. I found nothing to indicate a likelihood that Applicant would find 
himself in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
