 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11736 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has three unresolved collection accounts, which total approximately 
$35,500. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 4, 2012, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
  
 On May 5, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 9, 2012. The FORM contained 11 
attachments. On July 18, 2012, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. He was instructed to file any objections 
or provide any supplementary information by August 18, 2012. As of August 20, 2012, 
no response had been received. On August 24, 2012, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted three accounts were placed for 
collection (SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c). He denied two other collection accounts. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old manager who worked for a defense contractor from 
February 1996 through November 2008, at which time he took a voluntary, unpaid leave 
of absence2 until November 2009. In November 2009, he was terminated when he 
refused to return to work following his leave of absence. He had requested an extension 
of his leave of absence, but his request was not approved. He was rehired in February 
2011. He had started seeking employment in mid-2010.  
 
Prior to November 2008, Applicant asserts he had always been current on his 
accounts. While unemployed, he lived on his savings, credit card accounts, and money 
borrowed from his mother. In July 2008, his wife filed for divorce. In January 2009, their 
former marital residence was sold for $783,000. The net prceeds were used to pay 
attorney fees and the balance was equally distibuted. As of July 2011, he and his 
spouse were separated and the divorce was proceeding.  
 
 On Applicant’s April 2009 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) (Ex. 4) He indicated his wages had been garnished. On his April 2011 e-QIP, 
(Ex. 6) he indicated he had had debts turned over to a collection agency, that he had 
accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed, that his 
wages had been garnished, that he had been more than 180 days delinquent on a debt, 
and that he was currently more than 90 days delinquent on debts. He indicated he had 
debts totaling $170,000, that he had settled $117,000 of that debt, and was in the 
process of setting the remaining debt.  
 
 During interviews in July 2011 and September 2011, Applicant acknowledged 
owing 12 accounts. He acknowledged owing $17,497 on a bank debt (SOR 1.a). (Ex. 8) 
                                                          
2
 Applicant lived on one coast and was making repeated trips to care for his elderly parents on the other 
coast. When he was missing more work than his project could afford for him to be gone, he chose to take 
the unpaid leave of absence.  
 
3 
 
The creditor took the matter to court. Applicant’s attorney appeared at the hearing, but 
the creditor failed to appear. An April 2012 letter from his attorney states the creditor 
has dismissed the case and was no longer pursuing collection of this debt. (Ex. 3, SOR 
Answer Attachment A) Applicant had previously challenged the debt as a fraudulent 
transfer put on his account by his spouse. (Ex. 8)  
 
 Applicant acknowledged the $21,747 account (SOR 1.b) placed for collection. 
(Ex. 8) In his SOR Answer (Ex. 3) he acknowledged owing the debt and indicated he 
intended to settle the debt when his financial position improved. Applcant incurred a 
$7,103 debt (SOR 1.c) for attorney fees. He was disputing the debt asserting his 
attorney made errors in handling his divorce. Applicant asserted he was attempting to 
resolve this dispute.  
 
 Applicant asserts the $5,656 credit card debt (SOR 1.d) was incurred by his 
spouse and would be part of the allocation of debts in his divorce decree. He provided 
documentation asserting his former spouse used the credit card to incur debt, but 
provided no documentation establishing the matter was settled in the divorce decree. 
He paid the $199 telephone bill (SOR 1.e).(SOR Answer Attachment C) 
 
 In January 2012, Applicant provided a personal financial statement indicating his 
net montly income was $9,332, his expenses were $7,426, and his monthly payments 
on his debts was $1,521, which left a net remainder of $375.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion of obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
 
5 
 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant had five accounts placed for collection, which totaled in excess of 
$52,000. When he completed his April 2011 e-QIP, he indicated he had had debts 
turned over to a collection agency; that he had accounts suspended; charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; that his wages had been garnished; that he had 
been more than 180 days delinquent on a debt; and that he was currently more than 90 
days delinquent on debts. The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Between July 2011 and September 2011, Applicant was questioned about his 
finances. At that time, he acknowledged he had 14 delinquent accounts which totaled in 
excess of $155,000. Applicant disputed two of the accounts that together totaled 
approximately $16,500. One of the two challenged accounts was legally paid in full for 
less than the full amount. Of the 14 delinquent accounts, only five accounts placed for 
collection are alleged in the SOR. The creditor in SOR 1.a ($17,334) is no longer 
 
6 
 
pursuing payment. Applicant paid the telephone bill ($199) listed in SOR 1.e. The other 
three account placed for collections, which total approximately $35,500, remain unpaid.  
  
Under AG ¶ 20(a), it is assumed Applicant=s financial problems were apparently 
caused by his separation from his wife and his on-going divorce proceeding. However, 
Applicant has failed to show the extent to which the divorce impacted his finances other 
than the challenged attorney fees (SOR 1.c, $7,103). AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
because three debts remain unpaid and were not incurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced both a separation and divorce process 
along with the financial burden associated with each, but he has failed to document the 
financial impact of those events. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Under AG &20(c), there is no indication Applicant has attended financial 
counseling or that his financial problems are under control. AG &20(d) applies to the 
SOR 1.e ($199) debt, but to none of the remaining SOR debts.  
 
Although Applicant disputes the $7,000 debt for attorney fees (SOR 1.c) and 
asserts his spouse incurred the debt on a joint account listed in SOR 1.d ($5,656), AG & 
20(e) does not apply to either of these debts. For AG & 20(e) to apply, he must have a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt. Stating his attorney 
made errors during his divorce falls short of establishing a reasonable basis of dispute. 
The other account was a joint account and as such, barring any legal action, each party 
is liable to the creditor for the entire amount. Applicant has provided no documentation 
to substantiate the basis of either dispute.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has three charged-off 
accounts totaling in excess of $35,000, which remain unpaid. He asserts he would like 
to settle or resolve his financial delinquencies. Because Applicant chose to have this 
matter handled administratively, I am unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or 
credibility as to his truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant intends 
to pay these debts or will be able to address them in the immediate future.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He 
failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his remaining delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on only a scant explanation provided in his SOR answer, the 
accounts placed for collection remain a security concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E 3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:  Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
