KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Error in Judge’s findings is harmless.  Judge’s material findings are sustainable.  The
Government met its burden of producing substantial evidence of security concerns.    
CASE NO: 11-10988.a1
DATE: 09/11/2012
DATE: September 11, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-10988
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 24, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 27, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Robert Robinson
Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings were
in error; whether the Government met its burden of production; whether the Judge conducted a
2
proper whole-person analysis; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an employee of a
Defense contractor.  He served in the inactive reserve of the Army from 1987 to 2002.  He received
a security clearance in 1988 and again in 2004.  
Applicant was married in 1998.  He and his wife separated in 2000 and divorced two years
before the close of the record.  For many years he led his family to believe he was divorced.  He has
a girlfriend with whom he has a son.  
Applicant attended a university off and on from 1994 to 1998.  He never received a degree.
In 2003, he completed a SF 86, in which he stated that he had received a bachelor’s degree in 1996.
This statement was false.  Applicant attributed the falsification not to imply receipt of a degree “but
to support the timeline of [his] having left the University on a full-time basis and [his] reentering
the workforce.”  He also stated that he answered the SF 86 as he did in order to show that “I’m going
to school, identify a period of time and I identify the degree that I’m pursuing, not that I had
completed the degree.”  Decision at 4. 
The Judge also found that, in an interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant had stated
that he had obtained a bachelor’s degree in computer science in 1996.  The Judge found this
statement to be false.  
In 2009, Applicant was fired by a previous employer for “mischarging.”  Applicant was not
able to verify that he had worked on official business during a one-month period.  In response to his
employer’s request for copies of his work product, he claimed first that it was on a thumb drive that
he had lost.  He later submitted some materials which his employer determined was old work and
not sufficient to justify Applicant’s claim.  He filed a claim with the state office of unemployment
insurance, which found that his conduct was “either a deliberate and willful disregard of the
standards of behavior which the employer has a right to expect or a series of repeated violations of
employment rules[.]” Applicant appealed, and the Appeal Division found Applicant’s testimony and
documentary evidence to be not credible.  The Appeal Division found that Applicant had engaged
in “deliberate and willful disregard” of his employer’s standards.  Decision at 5.
Applicant’s employer has rated his work performance as either “meets expectations” or
“exceeds expectations.”  He was periodically promoted and/or given increased salary.
As stated above, the Judge found that Applicant had falsely stated to the OPM investigator
that he had received a degree in computer science in 1996.  Applicant contends that this finding is
in error.  He notes that, in certifying the accuracy of his interview summary, he stated that he had
told the investigator that he was not certain of his undergraduate status and that he had since
determined that he had additional credit hours to complete before receiving his degree.  Government
Exhibit (GE) 3, Interrogatories.  We agree with Applicant that the Judge erred in citing to this
portion of the interview summary without taking into account Applicant’s qualifying language.  On
3
the other hand, the Judge made this erroneous finding in support of his conclusion that Applicant’s
had deliberately falsified his SF 86.  Even without the erroneous finding concerning the OPM
interview, the record supports the Judge’s conclusion as to the deliberate nature of Applicant’s SF
86 claim to have received a bachelor’s degree in 1996.  Therefore, the Judge’s error in harmless.
The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-10045 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 17, 2012). 
Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in stating that the hearing had been conducted
by video teleconference when, in fact, he had appeared before the Judge in person.  Applicant is
correct that this statement by the Judge was in error.  However, considering the Decision in light of
the record as a whole, we conclude that this error resulted from mere inadvertence and did not
impair the Judge’s findings or his analysis of Applicant’s circumstances.   
Applicant contends that the Government had failed to meet its burden of production.  He
contends that the record does not demonstrate any security-significant conduct.  In a DOHA case,
the Government must produce witnesses and other evidence to establish controverted facts in the
SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  We have previously stated that the Government’s burden is to produce
“substantial evidence” regarding any controverted allegation.  Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the record.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-10045 at 3, supra, quoting Directive
¶ E3.1.32.1.  
In the case before us, we have already concluded that the record supports a finding that
Applicant deliberately falsified his SF 86.  Failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the
security clearance process is of “special interest” in evaluating an Applicant’s security worthiness
under Guideline E.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.  The SOR also alleged Applicant’s having been
fired for charging for work not performed.  The record contains a document from Applicant’s
employer setting forth the pertinent facts.  It contains a document from the state department of labor
establishing that Applicant had been fired for misconduct.  Applicant himself submitted a copy of
the appeal decision, which asserted that he had falsely charged for thirty-eight hours of work.  All
in all, the record contains substantial evidence of Guideline E security concerns.
Applicant cites to other aspects of the record which he believes support his case for a security
clearance.  He claims, for example, that the SF 86 submitted by the Government is not authentic.
He also argues that the Government submitted a time sheet which was not signed, which renders it
invalid.  Applicant has raised the authenticity of his SF 86 for the first time on appeal.  There is
nothing in the record to lead to a conclusion that the SF 86 in question is not authentic.  The copy
of the time sheet is attached to a letter from Applicant’s former employer describing in detail their
reasons for concluding that he had falsified his work hours.  The letter refers to the time sheet in
question.  Applicant has not provided a reason to discount this time sheet as evidence of his security
significant conduct.  To the extent that Applicant is contending that the Judge did not consider
aspects of the case which he believes are favorable to him, he has failed to rebut the presumption
that the Judge considered all of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-02671 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jun. 19, 2012).   
4
Considering the Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole, we conclude that his
whole-person analysis complied with the requirements of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2.2.1, in that the
Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct in reaching his decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 04-12678 at 4 (App. Bd. May 7, 2007).  The record supports a conclusion that the Judge
examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a
‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of
the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington
Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
