 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01224 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 17, 2012, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on June 27, 2012. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
he received it on July 17, 2012. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide any 
additional material. The case was assigned to me on September 7, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted every SOR allegation. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He is married and has two adult children and four adult 
stepchildren. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 
December 2007. Before that, he worked as a consultant for a defense contractor from 
December 2000 to June 2006. He had periods of unemployment from July 2006 to April 
2007, and from October 2007 to November 2007. He is a reliability engineer. He is a 
high school graduate with some college courses completed. He retired from the Navy 
after serving honorably from October 1975 to September 1997.1  
  
 The three Chapter 13 bankruptcies and debts listed in the SOR are supported by 
a credit report dated October 11, 2011, and bankruptcy records. The debts alleged in 
the SOR are debts that were outstanding at the time his Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petitions were dismissed in 2008 and 2011. Those debts total $44,917 (from the 2008 
dismissal) and $30,524 (from the 2011 dismissal). Additionally, there is a second 
mortgage loan that was charged off in the amount of $53,973. Applicant presented no 
proof of payment for any of these debts. These debts remain unresolved.2 
  
 Applicant began having financial difficulties in June 2006 when he was laid off 
from his full-time position. He could only find work doing part-time jobs. His wife was 
also laid off in 2010 from a job she held for 15 years. There is no additional information 
in the record about what his wife was doing. Applicant filed his first Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition in February 1998. In April 2005, Applicant was discharged from all 
his listed debts. In September 2007, he filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. In 
December 2008, this petition was dismissed for failure to make payments under the 
bankruptcy plan. He paid about $4,276 on obligations totaling $73,729. In September 
2009, he filed a third Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. In February 2011, this petition was 
dismissed for failure to make the bankruptcy plan payments. He paid about $9,974 on 
obligations totaling about $90,911.3 
 
 Applicant bought a home in November 2003 and at some point he could not 
make the mortgage payments. He sought a loan modification several times, but was 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 7-10. 
 
3 Items 6, 8-10. 
 
 
3 
 
 
refused. Finally in October 2011, his loan modification was approved for his first 
mortgage. He is currently trying to get a loan modification on his second mortgage 
(SOR ¶ 1.d). Once that is approved, he then plans to re-file his Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition. Applicant’s personal financial statement indicated a net monthly income of 
about $3,650 and monthly expenses of about $3,260. The expenses do not include 
payments on any SOR debts or the debts not discharged in the dismissed bankruptcy 
cases. Applicant received financial counseling through the bankruptcy process.4   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
4 Items 4, 6, 8-10. 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for Financial Considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He has also 
filed three Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions since 1998. I find both disqualifying 
conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant provided no evidence that he paid or resolved his delinquent debts. 
Therefore, his behavior is recent and remains a concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. Applicant provided 
evidence that he and his wife experienced periods of unemployment, which were due to 
circumstances beyond his control. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully 
apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. 
He failed to produce evidence of his responsible behavior other than seeking a loan 
modification and filing for bankruptcy protection. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
Although Applicant presented evidence of financial counseling by complying with the 
bankruptcy counseling requirement, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being resolved or under control. There was no documented evidence that 
he has made a good-faith effort to pay or has attempted to resolve any of the debts. 
Although he made some payments under the last two Chapter 13 bankruptcy plans, he 
ultimately stopped making payments and the petitions were dismissed with the debts 
still unresolved. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 21 years of 
honorable service to his country. However, he has not shown a track record of financial 
 
6 
 
 
stability; quite the opposite is the case. He was discharged from all his debts by a 
bankruptcy court in 2005, yet found himself filing bankruptcy petitions again in 2007 and 
2009. Both were dismissed and all the underlying obligations remain unpaid. The record 
lacks evidence that Applicant has made significant of good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns alleged in the SOR.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
