FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline K; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings of fact are sustainable..  Applicant’s attorney waived any
objection to the Judge taking notice of US statutes.  The Judge was obliged to consider all the
record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 05-14135.a1
DATE: 12/07/2007
DATE: December 7, 2007
In Re:
-------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-14135
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Joyce E. Peters, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 21, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Security Violations),
2
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June
26, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30. 
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings that Applicant
had deliberately transported classified material to his private residence and stored it there are based
upon substantial record evidence; whether the Judge’s adverse conclusion under Guideline E was
arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law; whether Applicant was denied due process of law; and
whether the Judge’s adverse conclusions under Guidelines K and E are arbitrary and capricious in
that the Judge did not establish employer policies or NISPOM applicability during the times alleged
in the SOR and in absence of evidence that Applicant stored classified material at his residence.
Finding no harmful error we affirm.
 Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is employed by a defense
contractor.  From 1978 until 1989 he served as an officer in the U.S. Navy.  One of his Naval
assignments was that of Engineer Officer for a nuclear submarine.  In October 1989, Applicant
received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for
having failed to take prescribed actions in response to a valve problem on the submarine.  His
punishment consisted of a punitive letter of admonition.  Applicant appealed the punishment, which
was denied.  His appeal was classified “CONFIDENTIAL” and was not included in the report of
nonjudicial punishment.  Applicant was subsequently detached for cause from the submarine for
misconduct and unsatisfactory performance.  Applicant resigned his commission and began working
for the defense contractor who is his current employer.  
In 2001 Applicant spoke with a polygraph examiner as part of an investigation for Sensitive
Compartmented Information (SCI) access.  He stated to the examiner that, during his NJP hearing,
he took notes and made photocopies of submarine operating procedures and that the information
contained in these documents was classified.  He told the polygrapher that he took the documents
home with him after the hearing and that he had maintained them at his residence ever since.  He
further stated that he was unhappy with the Navy for having administered what he believed to be
unjust punishment and that he kept the classified documents at his home due to having a “vendetta”
against the Navy.  He stated that he had never compromised the information in any fashion.
Applicant was subsequently denied access to SCI.  The Judge found that Applicant’s statements to
the polygrapher were credible and that Applicant did knowingly transport classified documents from
his duty section to his private residence, maintaining them there from 1989 until 2001. 
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
Fed. Rule Evid. 803(6).  The Federal Rules of Evidence serve as a guide in DOHA hearings.  Directive ¶1
E3.1.19.  
Article 133, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), Conduct Unbecoming an Officer.2
3
¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
Applicant contends that the Government failed to present substantial evidence that he had
knowingly transported and stored classified information at his private residence.  We have examined
the Judge’s findings and compared them with the record evidence.  The Judge based his findings in
large measure on documents supplied by the Government, consisting of Applicant’s NJP record; the
detachment for cause record; and the SCI denial record.  These documents are detailed, internally
consistent, and consistent with one another.  Furthermore, they constitute records of a regularly
conducted activity, an exception to the hearsay rule.   Applicant has not met his burden of1
demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings do not reflect a reasonable or plausible
interpretation of the record evidence.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s
material findings of security concern are sustainable.  See ISCR Case No. 06-21025 at 2 (App. Bd.
Oct. 9, 2007).          
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
 A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
Once there has been a concern articulated regarding an applicant’s security clearance
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.
See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).th
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant
to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of
disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding
that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
Applicant contends that he was denied due process in that the Judge concluded that his
improper storage of classified material at his residence violated 18 U.S.C. § 793(f) and 10 U.S.C.
§ 933.   Appellant argues that he did not have adequate notice that the Government intended to rely2
See ISCR Case No. 02-24965 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2003) (An applicant has a right under the Directive and3
Executive Order to have a reasonable opportunity to respond to adverse evidence.  However, this right is subject to
waiver through failure to take “reasonable timely steps to exercise it.”)
SOR ¶ 2(b).  There are three allegations under Guideline E.  The other two will be discussed below.4
See ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006); ISCR Case No. 05-00488 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct.5
1, 2007) (“[A] judge’s application of mitigating factors must be conducted in light of the record as a whole.”)  See also
U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F. 2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966), cert. denied 385 U.S. 974 (1966) (“The trier is entitled, in fact bound,
to consider the evidence as a whole. . .”)  
4
upon these statutes, insofar as they are not referenced in the SOR, nor were they provided to
Applicant as part of the pre-hearing discovery process.  However, at the beginning of the hearing,
Department Counsel requested that the Judge take official notice of 18 U.S.C. § 793, in response to
which Applicant’s attorney stated that she had no objection.  Department Counsel did not request
official notice of 10 U.S.C. § 933.  After considering the briefs of the parties and the record, we
conclude that, by lodging no objection to the Judge’s consideration of 18 U.S.C. § 793, Applicant
waived the opportunity to seek a continuance or some other form of relief if, in fact, at the time, he
viewed Department Counsel’s request for official notice as an infringement upon his procedural
rights.   Regarding the Judge’s references to Article 133 of the UCMJ, concluding, sua sponte, that3
Applicant’s conduct violated the UCMJ, such error is harmless in that it clearly did not affect the
outcome of the case.  ISCR Case No. 03-09915 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2004); ISCR Case No. 01-
11192 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2002).  While the Board believes that the better course of action under
Guideline J would be for the SOR to cite the specific criminal statutes which an applicant is alleged
to have violated, under the facts of this case we find no merit in Applicant’s assertion that Applicant
was prejudiced by a denial of procedural due process rights.
Applicant asserts that the Judge’s adverse decision under Guidelines E and K is arbitrary,
capricious, and contrary to law.  He argues first of all that he had successfully mitigated the
Guideline E security concern pertaining to his NJP action.   Were this the only concern listed in the4
SOR Applicant would have a point, the incident having occurred a relatively long time in the past.
However, the Judge was required to examine this allegation not in a piecemeal fashion but  in light
of the record evidence as a whole.   Viewed in this context, the Judge’s decision on this allegation5
is sustainable.  
Applicant also contends that the Judge’s decision under Guidelines K and E is arbitrary and
capricious in that he had made no findings (1) that Applicant had stored classified information at his
residence; (2) that Applicant violated his employer’s policies concerning the storage of classified
information; and (3) and that Applicant had violated the NISPOM.  On this last point, Applicant
contends that he was not provided copies of all the various NISPOM provisions referenced in the
SOR.  
The sole Guideline K allegation reads as follows: “You deliberately stored classified
information at your private residence from about 1989 to at least July 6, 2001, without authorization,
in violation of your employer’s policies and procedures and in violation of paragraph 14(5) of DoD
5220.22-M, Industrial Security Manual for Safeguarding Classified Information, March 1989;
paragraphs 5-106, 5-300 and 5-306 of Department of Defense 5220.22-M, National Industrial
Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), January 1991 and paragraphs 5-100 and 5-304 of
5
Department of Defense 5220.22-M, National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual
(NISPOM), January 1995, while employed at [federal contractor].”  The SOR incorporates this
paragraph in toto as a Guideline E security concern, in addition to the NJP allegation discussed
above.  It also includes under Guideline E the following allegation: “You deliberately transported
classified information to your private residence in about 1989 after serving on [a submarine].”     
  
We conclude that the first of the three alleged errors is without merit, in light of our previous
discussion of the sufficiency of the Judge’s factual findings.  As regards the second, Applicant is
correct, in that the allegation alleged a violation of the policies of his current employer, yet there is
no evidence in the record, and therefore no finding by the Judge, as to what these policies are.  
Concerning the third claim of error it is true that the Judge made no explicit factual finding
regarding which portion of the NISPOM Applicant’s conduct violated.  However, the Judge properly
took official notice of that portion of 1995 version of the NISPOM which includes the paragraphs
cited in the SOR.  Applicant did not object. These paragraphs describe procedures for storing
classified information and permit a reasonable conclusion that Applicant’s conduct was in violation
of those procedures.  Furthermore, the Judge stated on the record that he would compare the 1995
version with earlier ones cited in the SOR to ensure that the provisions were similar.  Applicant did
not object to this course of action, forfeiting any claim of error as to inadequate notice.  The Judge’s
formal findings against Applicant under both Guidelines, at least as regards the NISPOM, are
sustainable, viewed in light of the record as a whole.  Therefore, the error regarding the employer’s
policies is harmless.  We hold that the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is neither
arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.      
  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple              
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
6
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
