FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline J
DIGEST: The Board concludes that the Judge received and considered the exhibits that
Applicant alleges were not considered by the Judge.  Applicant has not demonstrated that the
Judge erred in concluding that Applicant had failed to mitigate the security concerns arising
under Guideline J.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 06-14166.a1
DATE: 12/31/2007
DATE: December 31, 2007
In Re:
--------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-14166
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
D. Daniel Kleckley, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
Tr. at 32.1
Decision at 4.2
2
clearance.  On December 28, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On August 6, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred by failing to admit
and consider Applicant’s Exhibits A and B; whether the Judge erred by concluding that the security
concerns raised under Guideline J had not been mitigated.
Applicant argues that the Judge erred by failing to admit and consider Applicant’s Exhibits
A and B.  The Board does not find this argument persuasive.
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence unless
he specifically states otherwise. See, e.g., DOHA Case No. 96-0228 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 1997).
The Judge is not required to cite or discuss every piece of record evidence.  See, e.g., DISCR Case
No. 90-1596 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 1992).  A review of the record indicates that the Judge received
Applicant’s Exhibits A and B for identification during the hearing, but withheld ruling on their
admissibility until Department Counsel had an opportunity to examine them and make any
objections.   On June 29, 2007, Department Counsel filed a written Response to Applicant’s1
Submission of Exhibits A and B which stated that she had no objection to their admission into
evidence.  In his Decision, the Judge explicitly referenced Exhibit A twice.   Based on the foregoing,2
the Board concludes that the Judge received and considered Applicant’s Exhibits A and B, and
Applicant’s argument to the contrary is without merit.
Applicant also argues that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns raised
under Guideline J had not been mitigated, because the criminal conduct is not recent, not likely to
recur, and there is clear evidence of rehabilitation.  Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that
the Judge erred.
Once there has been a concern articulated regarding an applicant’s security clearance
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance. See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Afterth
the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating
conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply
to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion
in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10950 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul.
25, 2007).  “Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to
make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the
evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence,
or vice versa.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11134 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2007).  “An applicant’s
3
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.”  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 05-07183 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 26, 2007).
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the criminal conduct allegations had not been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly disagrees
with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had been arrested on four
occasions between 2000 and 2006, had three misdemeanor convictions, and was on probation until
April 2009.  The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the recency
and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and reasonably explained why the evidence which the
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by
Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  Given the record that was
before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision under Guideline J is
sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
