FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: Even if the challenged finding was changed it would not have undermined the Judge’s
conclusions.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanations but was not bound by them.  The
Judge’s findings of deliberate falsification are sustainable Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-23112.a1
DATE: 12/31/2007
DATE: December 31, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23112
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 12, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
The Judge found in favor of Applicant under Guideline F.  That favorable finding is not at issue on appeal.1
2
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On August
30, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his findings;
whether the Judge erred in concluding Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application
was deliberate; whether the Judge erred by concluding that the security concerns raised under
Guidelines E and J had not been mitigated.1
(1) Applicant asserts that the Judge erred in findings that Applicant had served in the U.S.
Navy from 1980 through 1986 and had resigned when his shoulder was broken, when in fact
Applicant had served from 1980 to 1997 and had medically retired because of the injury.  Applicant
has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings with respect to
Applicant’s conduct of security concern do not reflect a reasonable or plausible interpretation of the
record evidence.  
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).  In this instance, even if the challenged finding was changed to reflect Applicant’s
interpretation of the record evidence, it would not have undermined the Judge’s conclusions.
Therefore, any such error would be at most harmless.  See ISCR Case No. 05-08459 at 2, n.1 (App.
Bd. Nov. 16, 2006).  Considering the record as a whole, the Judge’s material findings with respect
to Applicant’s conduct of security concern reflect a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence
and are supported by substantial evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-21933 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug.
18, 2006).
(2) Applicant also contends that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance
application by failing to disclose unfavorable information of security concern in response to four
different questions.  In support of this contention, he argues that the omission of the information was
due to a misreading of the questions or a lack of information on his part.  Applicant has not
demonstrated that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s findings of deliberate falsification are
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).
 
3
(3) Finally, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns
raised by his falsifications had not been mitigated, based upon the favorable record evidence,
particularly his lengthy, honorable military service.  Again, Applicant has not demonstrated that the
Judge erred.
Once there has been a concern articulated regarding an applicant’s security clearance
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.
See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).th
After the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant
to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not
alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17691 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul.19,
2003).  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue
for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
recency and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole person factors.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant
under Guideline F.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the evidence which the Applicant
had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s other security concerns.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guidelines E and J is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett    
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
