DATE:  December 20, 2007
In Re:
-----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25839
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MATTHEW E. MALONE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Between 2002
and 2005, he resolved all of his debts through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, except for a $20,000
tax delinquency not legally dischargable through bankruptcy. He has since paid his tax debts using
funds from his retirement savings. His delinquent debts were due, in part, to circumstances beyond
his control. His current finances are sound, his circumstances have changed, and he is not likely to
incur such delinquencies in the future. Clearance is granted.
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending official
revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after
September 1, 2006.
 In a notarized statement on June 6, 2007, Applicant stated, “I do not wish to have a hearing but if a hearing3
is needed, I will be happy to provide any documentation or answer any questions you may deemed (sic) necessary.”
 Ax. A.4
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On December 7, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance needed for his current employment with a defense
contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to give Applicant a security clearance.1
On March 30, 2007, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines  under Guideline F2
(financial considerations).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR. His response was interpreted as a request for a
decision without a hearing,  and Department Counsel submitted the government’s case in a File of3
Relevant Materials (FORM). Applicant responded to the FORM on August 12, 2007, and explained
that he did not understand the need to affirmatively request a hearing and made clear it was his intent
all along to have a hearing in this matter.  The case was subsequently assigned to me on October 2,4
2007, and I convened a hearing on November 15, 2007, at which the parties appeared as scheduled.
Without objection, I admitted six exhibits offered by the government (Gx. 1 - 6). Applicant testified
in his own behalf, and offered seven exhibits, which were admitted without objection as Applicant’s
Exhibits (Ax.) A - G. He also presented two witnesses. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on
November 29, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant had filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition
on December 2, 2002, and the petition was discharged on December 7, 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.a); and that
he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) a debt of approximately $20,000, which was not fully
repaid as of January 14, 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.b). In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted with
explanation both allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as facts. After a thorough
review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 44 years old and works as a computer operator for a defense contractor. He has
held that job since November 2005. In October 2002, he was hired as a security guard by a different
defense contractor and applied for a security clearance in 2003. However, the investigation
 Gx. 1.5
 Tr., 68.6
 Answer; Ax. A.7
 Id.8
 Tr., 54.9
 Tr., 58 - 60.10
3
underlying this case is based on a request for clearance sponsored for his computer operator position
in December 2005.5
Applicant graduated from college in 1986 with a degree in agriculture business. From
September 1987 until March 1999, he worked as a nuclear electrician for a U.S. Navy shipyard.
Applicant and his wife were married in August 1986 and have two teenage children. They separated
in December 2006 and a divorce is pending.  While Applicant worked at the shipyard, his wife6
worked as a Department of the Navy employee at a Space and Naval Warfare (SPAWAR) command.
In 1998, they were told her job would be relocated to another state. Applicant decided to leave his
shipyard job and move his family to accommodate his wife’s change of location, but he was also told
he would be given assistance to find another Navy job at their new residence. Applicant received
little or no help in his job search, and had to take a job paying half what he was making before the
move.7
Applicant and his wife had bought a house at their previous location in 1995. They used a
loan from his 401k retirement account for the down payment and costs of the purchase. When they
moved in 1998, they lost significant income and had to incur the costs of their move. As a result, he
was unable to repay the 401k loan and the remainder of those proceeds were declared as income for
which he had to pay taxes for the 1998 and 1999 tax years. He did not have the money to pay those
taxes.8
Applicant’s relocation resulted in extensive costs incurred through the actual move and
through the fact their house did not sell before they moved. At their new location, Applicant and his
wife were paying their previous mortgage and paying rent, but had only her full time income.  It was9
not until March 1999 that Applicant found full-time work as an electrician. By that time, Applicant
and his wife had fallen behind on their bills. In addition to over use of their credit cards, they each
claimed the same exemptions from tax withholding to maximize their take home pay. They filed
their tax returns as required each year, but found they owed taxes in addition to what had been
deducted from their pay. Their taxes for from tax years 1998 through 2006 went unpaid. Applicant’s
wife had set up a $200 monthly payroll allotment to pay their back taxes, but it was cancelled by her
employer without explanation.10
In 1993, Applicant’s wife’s youngest sister died. They paid for her funeral and helped support
the sister’s 11-year-old daughter until she graduated from high school. Additionally, unbeknownst
to Applicant, around the time they had to relocate, his wife started financially supporting her mother,
 Tr., 53 - 54.11
 Answer; Ax. A; Ax. B.12
 Tr., 59 - 60, 77.13
 Tr., 47 - 53; Ax. C.14
 Directive. 6.3.15
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness16
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.
4
who had become disabled. Applicant’s wife paid for her mother’s food, utilities, transportation, and
medical bills. She also made a down payment on a new trailer for her mother.11
On December 3, 2002, Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition.
Through that action, they entered into a repayment plan whereby they paid $1,252 each month for
three years and were able to satisfy all their dischargeable debts. However, their past due taxes could
not be discharged through bankruptcy. On completion of the payment plan in 2005, Applicant and
his wife owed a tax bill that had grown to about $29,464 with interest and penalties. After an offer
in compromise was rejected by the IRS in 2006, Applicant withdrew funds from his retirement
savings and paid off the debt in March 2007.12
Applicant did not change the number of his claimed exemptions from withholdings until this
year. As a result, he and his wife are each paying half of an $8,000 tax bill from the 2006 tax year.13
Applicant works 40 hours weekly at his primary job as a computer operator. He also works
nearly as many hours at his other job as a security guard. He requires a security clearance for both
jobs. His supervisor at the security guard job regards Applicant as a superb worker, who is extremely
reliable and trustworthy. Several friends and co-workers echoed his supervisor’s opinion of
Applicant.14
POLICIES AND BURDEN OF PROOF
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense determination
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and consideration of the
pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines.  Decisions must15
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or16
absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against
an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to
classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties at
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).17
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.18
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).19
 Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.20
 “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” 21
 “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;”22
 “consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant23
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;”
5
hearing require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed in Revised
Adjudicative Guideline F (financial considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to have access to classified17
information. The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on which
it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant.
Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the
government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary18
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The government, therefore, has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.19
CONCLUSIONS
Financial Consideration. Under Guideline F, “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”  The20
government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in the SOR. Available
information shows Applicant still owes about $4,000 in taxes from 2006 after having resolved nearly
$30,000 in unpaid taxes, interest and penalties. He and his wife also resolved their debts through a
Chapter 13 petition, whereby they resolved their dischargeable obligations through a  36-month
repayment plan. The record requires consideration of Guideline F disqualifying conditions 19(a),21
19(c),  and 19(e).22 23
 “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of24
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances;”
  “ the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that25
the problem is being resolved or is under control;” (emphasis added)
 See footnote 16, supra.26
 See footnote 15, supra. 27
6
The record also requires consideration of Guideline F mitigating conditions 20(b)  and24
20(c).  Applicant’s loss of income was due to his wife’s job being relocated. The associated costs25
could not be controlled, and his wife’s decision to financially support her mother further stressed
their finances. To compound matters, their claimed exemptions left them with taxes they could not
pay, and Applicant’s use of his retirement savings caused further tax liabilities. Although bankruptcy
is not a desirable means (as opposed to full payment) of resolving one’s debts, Chapter 13 provides
the debtor a way of at least partially satisfying his obligations. Applicant and his wife chose this
route and repaid more than $45,000 through their petition. Additionally, Applicant used nearly
$30,000 of his retirement savings to pay outright his tax debts through 2005. He is now paying a
remaining tax debt of about $4,000, and has adjusted his withholdings so enough taxes will be taken
from his pay up front. 
The presence or absence of delinquent debts does not end the inquiry into whether one’s
financial problems present an unacceptable security risk. The issue is whether Applicant’s unpaid
debts put him at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds to pay his debts, or whether his
financial problems reflect adversely on his judgment, reliability, self-control, or willingness to follow
rules and regulations. Applicant has not tried to evade his responsibility in this matter, and he
continues to work two full-time jobs to ensure he has enough money to resolve his financial
problems and support his family. On balance, I conclude he has mitigated the security concerns about
his finances.
Whole Person. I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in Section 2(a) of the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines.  Applicant did not invite the facts and circumstances about which the26
government is concerned. Nonetheless, rehabilitation and positive changes in his financial condition
are evident. He made necessary financial adjustments, took action to repay his debts as soon as he
could, and no longer is subject to his wife’s unreasonable use of their income for the benefit of
others. He continues to work two jobs to support his family and ensure he has sufficient income to
avoid such problems in the future. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available27
information, particularly the facts bearing on the underlying causes of his financial problems and his
response thereto, shows that the Applicant’s finances do not present an unacceptable risk should he
be granted access to classified information.
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings regarding each SOR allegation are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant. Clearance is granted.
Matthew E. Malone
Administrative Judge
