DATE:  December 21, 2007
In Re:
-------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24337
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHARLES D. ABLARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Nichole Noel, Esq. , Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant, an employee of a government contractor, encountered financial difficulties when
he moved from one state to another to take his employment  only to have limited work available for
him much of the time. His wife was unemployed after the birth of a child. Although they are now
both employed and are in credit counseling to resolve their delinquent debts, not enough time has
elapsed to take sufficient action to justify the grant of a clearance at this time. Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF CASE
On or about March 6, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
2
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, as amended and
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified, and
subject to the revised Adjudicative Guidelines effective September 1, 2006, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for Applicant. DOHA recommended the case be referred to an
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked.
On March 29, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and did not request a
hearing. He later made a request for a hearing. The matter was assigned to me on August 21, 2007.
A notice of hearing was issued on August 30, 2007, for a hearing on September 13, 2007, and held
that day. The government offered four exhibits and Applicant offered two exhibits. The record was
left open for 30 days and extended another 15 days for additional information to be supplied. The
transcript was received on September 24, 2007. Applicant provided post-hearing submissions on
October 15, 2007, and October 29, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted all of the eleven SOR allegations totaling $132,000 relating to delinquent
debts. After a complete review of the record, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor working as a senior network
engineer since October 2005.
The allegations alleged in the SOR indicates the following from testimony and documentary
evidence submitted in the record:
1. Par. 1.a.: Real estate mortgage foreclosure  before 2006 on a former home in another state
valued at $110,000. 
2. Par. 1.b.: Real estate second mortgage foreclosure of $12,700 regarding same home. 
3. Par. 1.c.: Credit card debt for household expenses of $6,285 charged off.
4. Par. 1.d.: Credit card debt for $1,042 charged off. Applicant promised in his interrogatory
(Exh. 2) to pay $50 per month but was unable to do so. 
5. Par. 1.e.: Credit card debt of $961.
6. Par. 1.f.: Credit card debt of $362 charged off. 
7. Par. 1.g.: Credit card debt of $577 for household expenses being collected by a collection
agency. 
3
8. Par. 1.h.: Collection account of $495 for a medical device ordered by Applicant which he
attempted to return but he held it too long. 
9. Par. 1.i.: Back child support totaling $800 for a six-year-old child from his former
marriage which is being paid through bi-weekly garnishment of wages when he is working.
Applicant started having financial problems arising from a move from one state to another
in June 2005 when he took his present position. He was unemployed and under-employed for periods
beginning in 2006 (Tr. 23). At the time of the hearing he had been on leave without pay since May
2007 and had an hourly job at a store. Since then he has been brought back on the payroll with his
company. He has never held a security clearance, but works for a company that primarily does
classified work. He is able to do unclassified work but it is often not full time. He is now on a project
which lasts until August 2008 (Exh. D p. 2). His wife was unemployed in 2001 for approximately
18 months after the birth of their child (Tr. 25) and did not return to work until 2003. In 2004 their
debts had accumulated to the point that they could not resolve them and stopped paying on them (Tr.
25). She is now employed and her monthly take home pay is approximately $2,000. They have had
credit counseling and are working with the counselor to schedule payment of  their delinquent debts
that accumulated during the periods of unemployment (Exh. A). Most of this activity has occurred
since the hearing. In addition to the delinquent debts cited in the SOR, at the time of the hearing he
was behind one to two months on his current bills such as cell phone, utilities, and auto insurance
(Tr. 34-36). 
Since the conclusion of the hearing, Applicant has submitted information in his first post-
hearing submission (Exh. C) showing that he continues the credit counseling and is making direct
deposits of $169 each month to them to resolve the accounts listed in Exh. A. In his second post-
hearing submission (Exh. D) he submitted further information indicating that he and his credit
counselor are working with the mortgage holders on the home foreclosure and some progress is
being made to resolve those debts. He also submitted information from his employer showing that
his monthly take home pay is approximately $3,000 but he may earn as much as  $4,500. 
Applicant is well regarded in his company by his supervisor for his commitment to his job
and his skills in performing them (Exh. B). 
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to control access to
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently
trustworthy to occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” Id. at 527.
An evaluation of whether the applicant meets the security guidelines includes consideration of the
following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG ¶ 2 a). Security clearances are
4
granted only when “it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Executive Order No.
10865 § 2. See Executive Order No. 12968 § 3.1(b).
Initially, the Government must establish, by something less than a preponderance of the
evidence, that conditions exist in the personal or professional history of the applicant which
disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. The applicant then bears the burden of demonstrating it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance. “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved
in favor of the national security.” (AG ¶ 2 b) “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See Executive Order No. 12968 § 3.1(b).
CONCLUSIONS
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate
adjudicative factors under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) and factors in the Directive, I
conclude the following with respect to all allegations set forth in the SOR:
Applicant’s delinquent debts prompted the allegation of security concern under Guideline
F because an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts
to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying
include a history of not meeting financial obligations (AG ¶ 19 c) and evidence of inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts. (AG ¶ 19 a) 
Mitigating Conditions (MC) that might apply include the fact that the behavior happened so
long ago or under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability , trustworthiness, or good judgment (AG ¶ 20 a), or the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control and that the person acted
responsibly (AG ¶ 20 b), or the person has received counseling for financial problems and there are
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control (AG ¶ 20 c).
The fact that Applicant was unemployed and underemployed for two years was partially the
cause of his delinquent debts. His salary is being withheld to pay one creditor for child support but
that is the only delinquent debt that now is being resolved. He is working to resolve other debts and
both he and his wife are now employed which may resolve the delinquent debt issues for them.
However, it is too soon to conclude that they are fully on the path to financial stability. Thus, I
conclude that neither mitigating condition is applicable at this time. 
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Persons
who have access to classified information have an overriding responsibility for the security concerns
of the nation. The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information. 
The “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of his acts
and omissions. Each case must be judged on its own merits taking into consideration all relevant
5
circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis. Applicant did
not take action as soon as he might have. He acknowledged his slowness to take corrective action
at the hearing. However, he seems now to be on the right track to effectively resolve the issues with
the help of their counselor. Although he has taken the appropriate initial steps to resolve the
delinquent debts, that process  is still in the early stages so it is premature to grant a clearance based
on the information submitted.  
After considering all the evidence in its totality, and as an integrated whole to focus on the
whole person of Applicant, I conclude that it is premature to grant a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS 
Formal findings as required by the Directive are as follows:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
 
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge
