DATE:  December 20, 2007
In re:
--------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Public Trust Position.
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-26594
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROGER C. WESLEY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that stem from periods of unemployment and
burdensome student loan obligations.  Unable to make any payment progress with her debts with her
limited resources, she has petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Based on her absence of any
payment progress or favorable prospects for being able to do so in the foreseeable future, she is left
to rely on a successful bankruptcy outcome to stabilize her finances.  Her progress to date with her
bankruptcy and the trust she inspires with her friends and colleagues make possible predictions that
she will successfully complete the bankruptcy petition she has initiated.  Applicant mitigates
financial concerns associated with her accumulation of delinquent debts.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
2
On June 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, and Department of
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of Applicant
eligibility for occupying an ADP I/II/III position, and recommended referral to an administrative
judge to determine whether a trustworthiness determination clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 6, 2007, and requested a hearing.  The case was
assigned to me on October 10, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on November 1, 2007.  A
hearing was convened on November 1, 2007, for the purpose of considering whether it would be
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s
application for a trustworthiness determination.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of five
exhibits.  Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and three exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was
received on November 9, 2007.
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have incurred numerous delinquent debts: She is
alleged to have incurred 16 delinquent debts altogether, which exceed $24,000.00 in total.  
For her response to the SOR,  Applicant admitted each of her debt-related allegations, and
provided no explanations of the circumstances that contributed to her debt difficulties.  Nor did she
indicate any plans to resolve her debts.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 25-year-old customer service representative of a defense contractor who seeks
a trustworthiness determination.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional
findings follow.
Applicant has worked for her current employer since 2003 and has supplemented her work
with college courses at a local community college (R.T., at 21-23, 41-42).   She accumulated a
number of delinquent debts during periods of unemployment in 2000 (while still in high school) and
2002 (see ex. 1; R.T., at 34).  Altogether, she accumulated some 16 delinquent debts that exceed
$24,000.00 in aggregate indebtedness.  Of these debts, her deficiency debt with creditor 1.e on a car
repossessed by the creditor in September 2006 is by far her largest debt.  She purchased a Chevrolet
Malibu in May 2004 for $16,682.00 and made payments of $380.00 a month for two plus years
before defaulting in her loan (R.T., at 24-25).  Creditor 1.e repossessed the vehicle and resold it at
public auction.  Applicant was later advised that a $10,652.00 deficiency balance remained following
public sale of the vehicle (R.T., at 23).  Creditor 1.e offered to settle the deficiency for $5,000.00 in
2007, but Applicant did not have available funds to accept the offer (R.T., at 24).
3
Another sizeable debt is for back rent for $2,784.00 that was placed for collection by the
landlord (creditor 1.f) in September 2005.  Applicant attributes the debt to her alleged failure to give
the required 30 days notice to terminate (R.T., at 25).  Applicant disputes this claim (assuring she
gave the requisite 30 days notice) and found out much later that the rent claim was still reflected in
her credit report (see ex. 5; R.T., at 25).  Once she learned of the rent claim in her credit report, she
contacted the lessor’s new management company.  Neither the new company nor the credit reporting
agency were of any help in reversing the rent charges for Applicant (R.T., at 26-27).  Without any
documentation to evaluate the credibility of her notice assurances, the accuracy of her notice claims
cannot be validated. 
Besides her major debts with creditors 1.e and 1.f, Applicant remains indebted to creditor 1.m
in the amount of $3,653.00.  This debt represents a defaulted school loan.  She initially had a
payment arrangement with Sally Mae (the original lender) in 2005-2006 but could no longer meet
her monthly payment obligations.  Her other student loans with Sally Mae are now in default as well
(R.T., at 27-30).  She is indebted, too, with creditor 1.n in the amount of $2,379.00 for towing
services rendered after her car was accidentally totaled in April 2000.  She had no insurance at the
time to cover the towing expenses.  Her only other major debt in collection is with creditor 1.o in
the amount of $1,275.00 .   This is a credit card debt, and Applicant has had no contact with this
creditor.
Applicant’s remaining debts in collection comprise 10 separate debts that collectively total
less than $3,400.00.  Her monthly take home pay is around $1,800.00 (R.T., at 35).  She has  current
monthly expenses in excess of $1,900.00 and consequently has not been able to develop any
repayment plans (R.T., at 40).  She is looking for a second job to supplement her income (R.T., at
40-42), and has considered debt consolidation, but has not pursued it (R.T., at 51).  She petitioned
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in September 2007 and awaits her first hearing, which is scheduled
for November 2007 (see ex. C; R.T., at 51-52).   The docket sheet covering the petition notes that
all of the required documents were not filed with the petition (ex. C).  Documented debtor credit
counseling and current income and means testing were not provided either by Applicant.  Whether
she has filed the required statements covering counseling and income/means testing with the
bankruptcy court is unknown at this time.  Without such documentation, though, no predictable
assessment can be made as to her likelihood of a successful discharge.
Applicant is highly regarded by coworkers who are familiar with her work.   She is described
as a caring single parent who has demonstrated consistent honesty and integrity at work and in her
personal life (see ex. A).  She has received certificates of recognition for her quality work with her
employer (see ex. B).
POLICIES
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Program Office (CHCSPO), the Defense Office
of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control,
Communication and Intelligence (ASDC31), entered into a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA),
which gave DOHA responsibility to provide trustworthiness determinations for contractor personnel
working on unclassified Information Systems Positions as defined in DoD Regulation 5200.2-R.
4
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of the
"Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying
Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge
to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and
mitigation set forth in E2.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy factors
are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: An individual who is financially overextended is at risk at having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds.  Unexplained influence is often linked to proceeds from financially profitable
criminal acts.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's application for a trustworthiness determination may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position depends, in large
part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge
may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s] alleged
in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a material bearing
to the applicant's eligibility to obtain an ADP I/II/III position.  The required showing of material
bearing, however, does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant
has actually abused a trust relationship before it can deny or revoke a trustworthiness determination.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to adhere to principles of trust.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant to establish his or her
trustworthiness  through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the Government's case.
CONCLUSIONS
5
Applicant is a highly regarded customer service representative for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts during periods of financial set backs primarily attributable
to periods of unemployment, and insufficient income from her jobs to cover her living expenses and
student loans. With the limited resources available to her, she has barely been able to keep up with
her current household expenses and debts and has not been able to pay on any of her old debts.
While at least one of  her old debts may be barred by relevant statutes of limitation, most are not.
She  acknowledges the listed debts, save for one disputed one, and has recently petitioned for
Chapter 7 relief.  Whether she can achieve a successful discharge is not entirely predictable, but
promising.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the Adjudicative
Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially overextended that he or she is at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts,
which heretofore she has not been in a position to address, warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Adjudicative Guidelines for financial considerations: and DC
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and .DC 19(c)  (a history of not meeting financial
obligations).
Extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s lack of sufficient income to cover
her living expenses and student loan obligations.   Due to her periods of unemployment between
2000 and 2002 and her relatively low levels of compensation returned from her current work, she
has barely been able to keep up with her current expenses.  Her available income sources have not
been enough to address her older debts, some of which are quite large   Her three major debt
delinquencies alone exceed $19,000.00 and are simply too large to permit any kind of effective debt
consolidation.   MC 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline  (the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibility) has some applicability to Applicant’ situation.  Her purchase of a new or almost
new Malibu automobile in 2004 raises some questions about her living beyond her means, given her
financial circumstances at the time.  For the most part, though, her financial history reflects a young
single parent struggling to better herself with enhanced educational skills.
Because of the limited income available to Applicant over the past six years, Applicant has
not heretofore been in a position to address her old debts.  Several of Applicant’s listed debts were
placed in collection before 2004, but only one before 2002.  The remaining debts have been charged
off since January 2004. None of Applicant’s listed debts reflect any collection action by the
individual creditors involved.  Based on this record, only one of Applicant’s debts (i.e., creditor 1.n)
appear to be barred from collection by the pertinent six-year statute of limitation in Arizona.  See
§12-548 of A.R.S. (2007).  While statutes of limitation in general are considered important policy
tools for discouraging plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation, they
have never been equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case
No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020, at 5-6 (App. Bd. June
2001).  Still, there are no indications that any of these listed creditors still have any collection interest
in Applicant.
To be sure, Applicant does not assert relevant statutes of limitation in Arizona in her defense.
She fully acknowledges most of her debts and disputes the legitimacy of just one of her debts: her
6
landlord debt (creditor 1.f).  With her limited income and relatively high expenses as a single parent,
she is simply not in a position to make either individual or collective progress (such as use of debt
consolidation) on her listed debts.  Faced with no viable alternatives, she petitioned for Chapter 7
bankruptcy relief following her receipt of the SOR.  While she has not been able to document her
compliance with bankruptcy petition requirements covering counseling and income/means testing,
it is likely that the bankruptcy court will afford her some latitude, in this, a no-asset case, when she
appears for her first creditors meeting.  Her achievement certificates from her employer place her in
high regard and attest to her integrity and trustworthiness.  Considering the extenuating circumstances
of Applicant's accumulated debts, the trust she inspires in her work, and  her efforts to discharge her
debts with the only realistic program available to her at this time, risks of her  not completing the
bankruptcy she has initiated appear to be minimal and manageable.
Applicant's documented Chapter 7 petition is enough to justify application of one of the
mitigating conditions to her financial situation.  MC 20(d) of the guidelines for financial
considerations (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts) has some beneficial application for Applicant.  Her failure to document any
bankruptcy-related counseling, however, precludes her reliance on MC 20(d) (the person has received
or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) of the guidelines.
Holding a favorable trustworthiness determination involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.   Financial stability
in a person cleared to access information covered by privacy rights is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the trustworthiness determination. 
Based on her documented initiation of Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief to discharge her old debts
and the whole person level of trust she has demonstrated in fulfilling her responsibilities at work,
gaining college credits, and caring for her family as a single parent, Applicant is able to demonstrate
the level of overall personal accountability and responsibility necessary to mitigate  the Government's
trust concerns.
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
debt accumulations, the positive judgment and trustworthiness impressions she has made on her
friends and colleagues, and her current bankruptcy initiatives, she mitigates trustworthiness concerns
related to her debts.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the
financial considerations guideline.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each of the E2.2
factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact, conclusions and
guidelines listed above, this Administrative Judge makes the following formal findings:
7
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras . 1.a through 1.o: FOR APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position.
Eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted. 
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
  
