KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The revised adjudicative guideline B specifically cites the country involved as a factor
to be considered.  The Judge’s decision failed to take into consideration in a meaningful way
record evidence regarding the nature of the PRC.  The Judge’s conclusion regarding Applicant’s
citizenship and its impact on his vulnerability is unsupported by the record.  Applicant’s
testimony regarding his relationship with his parents, had to be considered in light of other record
evidence.  The Judge’s conclusion did not do that.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 07-00029.a1
DATE: 12/07/2007
DATE: December 7, 2007
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00029
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 25, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 30, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Jacqueline T.
Williams granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raises the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge’s application
of the Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions is unsupported by the record evidence and is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law because the whole-person considerations relied upon are unsupported
by the record evidence.
Whether the Record Evidence Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact.:
Applicant was born in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and came to the United States
for further graduate-level education in 1986.  He became an American citizen in 2002.  He is single
and has never married.  His parents and two brothers are citizens and residents of the PRC.  His
parents are retired textile engineers.  Between 2002 and 2005, Applicant sent his parents $17,500.
Applicant speaks to his mother five to six times a year.  One brother is a high school principal and
teacher, and the other is an electrical engineer at a broadcasting company.  Applicant speaks to one
brother four or five times a year, and the other about twice a year.  Applicant traveled to the PRC in
1995, 2003, and 2006.  The 2006 trip was for his mother’s 70  birthday.  Applicant has had casualth
contact with  Chinese Embassy employees and professors visiting the United States from the PRC.
“The PRC is a repressive, totalitarian government with foreign policy goals antithetical to
the U.S. . . .  It has an active, effective intelligence service that targets U.S. intelligence and
economic information, and operates against its citizens in the U.S.  However, under PRC law,
citizens who become naturalized citizens of other countries lose their PRC citizenship.”  Decision
at 5.
B. Discussion
The appeal involves the Judge’s conclusions.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
An Administrative Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a
satisfactory explanation for” the decision “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security
clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  Our scope of review
under this standard is narrow, and we may not substitute our judgment for that of the Judge.  We
review matters of law  de novo.
3
Department Counsel contends that the Judge’s application of the Foreign Influence
Mitigating Conditions is unsupported by the record evidence and is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  Department Counsel’s argument has merit.  
It is undisputed that Applicant’s father, mother, and two brothers are citizens and residents
of the PRC.  Thus, a prima facie case under Guideline B had been established, and the burden had
shifted to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns raised.  
The validity of Appeal Board precedent issued under earlier editions of the Adjudicative
Guidelines is an issue in this case.  The Board has previously held “. . . a Judge cannot rely on
language from an earlier version of the Directive to justify the Judge’s decision and that an
applicant’s security eligibility must be adjudicated under current DoD policies and standards, not
past ones. Similarly, the precedential value of Board decisions is affected to the extent those
decisions involve the interpretation of a provision of the Directive that is later revised or changed.
Statements made by the Board in earlier decisions that are predicated on then-existing language in
the Directive cannot be simply assumed —by a Judge or a party— to be applicable in later cases after
the pertinent provision(s) of the Directive have been revised or changed.” See ISCR Case No. 02-
17369 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2006); and ISCR Case No. 02-24254 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jun. 29,
2004) (footnotes omitted).  Of course, some precedent remains completely valid in the face of
changes to the guidelines, because it is not dependent on the language of any specific guideline.
Other precedent remains valid where the applicable language of the guideline is unchanged or the
changes are not of sufficient magnitude to vitiate or overrule the substance of the precedent.
However, Board decisions cannot be relied on or followed to the extent they involve precedent
predicated on law or DoD policy that changed after the issuance of those decisions.  Quasi-judicial
adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and agency policy, not without
regard to them. See, e.g., Croplife America v. Environmental Protection Agency, 329 F.3d 876, 882
(D.C. Cir. 2003) (administrative law judges cannot ignore agency policy in making rulings); Nash
v. Bowen, 869 F.2d 675, 680 (2d Cir. 1989)(administrative law judge is subordinate to head of
agency or department in matters of policy); Mullen v. Bowen, 800 F.2d 535, 540 n. 5 (6th Cir. 1986)
(decisional independence does not relieve administrative law judge of the obligation to apply agency
policy).  See  ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at  3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003)(security clearance decisions
must be based on current DoD policy and standards). Accordingly, no Board decision should be
construed or interpreted without regard to the law and DoD policy applicable at the time the Board
decision was issued.
Here, Guideline B is at issue.  Guideline B was subject to extensive revisions in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines.  However, those prior Board decisions which are consistent with the
revised guidelines are still applicable.  For example, the new guidelines specify in paragraphs 6 and
8(a) that the country matters.  It follows that prior Board precedent which states that when the foreign
country involved is hostile to the United States, an applicant bears a “very heavy burden” to show
that neither he nor his family members in that country are subject to influence by that country is still
valid under the new guidelines.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 8 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002).
Here, the Judge concluded that the case was mitigated under Foreign Influence Mitigating
Conditions 8(a) and (b); without citing it, she also applied Mitigating Condition 8(c).  The Judge’s
conclusions as to mitigation are unsupported by the record evidence.  
Transcript at 34-35.1
4
 The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines Mitigating Condition 8(a) specifically lists the country
involved as a factor to be considered as it relates to mitigation.  Here, the record evidence includes
information on the nature of the PRC, but the Judge failed to take that information into consideration
in a meaningful way in her decision.  Although a Judge is not required to discuss every piece of
evidence, he or she cannot ignore, disregard, or fail to discuss significant record evidence that a
reasonable person could expect to be taken into account.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-19479 at 6
(App. Bd. Jun. 22, 2004).  In the past, the Board has found harmful error when a Judge has failed
to discuss the nature of the foreign government involved in a Guideline B case when that government
is hostile to the United States and the hostility is a critical factor in the analysis of the case.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-00318 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 2004).  Such precedent is still valid under the new
guidelines’ specific references to the country.  
As Department Counsel points out, the Judge based her decision in part on her conclusion
that Applicant is no longer a target for espionage by the PRC because he has lost his Chinese
citizenship and is now an American citizen.  That conclusion is  unsupported by the record evidence.
While the Judge mentioned the PRC’s use of Chinese citizens within the United States as espionage
agents, record evidence indicates that its use of espionage agents in the United States is not limited
to Chinese citizens.  (See Report of the Select Committee on U.S. National Committee and
Military/Commercial Concerns with the People’s Republic of China at 21.)  Furthermore, in light
of record evidence concerning Chinese espionage, Applicant’s contact with visiting Chinese
scientists and professors is a significant security concern to be taken into account.          
Applicant testified that he does not have a close relationship with his family members in the
PRC.  The Judge based her conclusion of mitigation in part on that testimony.  However, the record
contains testimony and other evidence of Applicant’s close relationship with his family.  There is
evidence that:  Applicant sent $17,500 to his parents between 2002 and 2005; Applicant traveled to
the PRC and visited his family on three occasions; and one of those trips was for his mother’s 70th
birthday celebration.  There is evidence that Applicant calls his mother about six or seven times a
year, and his older brother four or five times a year.   Given the record evidence regarding1
Applicant’s close relationship with his family and the PRC’s human rights record, the Judge’s
statement that “[t]he fact that his parents are citizens and residents of PRC does not constitute an
unacceptable security risk” is  arbitrary and capricious.   
In her decision, the Judge relied on Applicant’s testimony that his ties are with the United
States and that he would not compromise U.S. security interests.  That testimony was record
evidence for the Judge to consider, but it is of limited significance.  An applicant’s stated intention
of what he might do in the future in a hypothetical situation is merely a statement of intention that
is entitled to limited weight, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar
manner in the past in comparable circumstances.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-09053 at 5 (App. Bd.
Mar. 29, 2006).  
Department Counsel also contends that the Judge’s whole-person analysis is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law because the whole-person considerations relied upon are unsupported
by the record evidence.  Department Counsel’s contention has merit.  The Judge’s whole-person
analysis is largely a restatement of her discussion under mitigation.  As discussed above, the Judge’s
5
conclusions regarding mitigation are not supported by the record evidence.  To the extent that there
is some evidence indicative of mitigation, the Judge does not explain why it outweighs the
significant security concerns raised in the case.  See, e.g., 04-12435 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2007).
Moreover, the Judge’s decision does not sufficiently address the nature of the Chinese government.
In light of the foregoing, the Judge’s whole-person analysis is unsustainable in that it fails
to consider an important aspect of the case, fails to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its
conclusions, and offers an explanation for the decision that runs contrary to the record evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-02511 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007) (citing Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of
the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)).
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
