DATE:  December 13, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance 
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00685
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
NOREEN A. LYNCH
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant incurred approximately $8,000 in delinquent debt, including  charged off collection
accounts from medical providers. She provided documentation concerning her payments in her
repayment plan to her creditors, and thus mitigated the security concerns raised under the financial
considerations guideline. Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
GX 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated March 31, 1999).2
Applicant’s answer to SOR, dated, August 10, 2007.3
Id.4
Tr. 21.5
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On May 2, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance.  The SOR, which is in essence the1
administrative complaint, alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the
Department of Defense effective September 1, 2006. The revised guidelines were provided to
Applicant when the SOR was issued.
On August 10, 2007, Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR, and elected to
have her case decided at a hearing. On October 18, 2007, the case was assigned to me. A Notice of
Hearing was issued on October 30, 2007. At the scheduled hearing on November 16, 2007, the
Government introduced eleven exhibits (GX 1-11) into evidence without objections. Applicant
testified and introduced Applicant Exhibits (AX) A into evidence without objection from
Department Counsel.  I left the record open until December 2, 2007, for Applicant to submit
additional information. She submitted such documentation, which is marked as AX B and entered
into the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 26, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted  allegations in subparagraphs  1.a through 1. j in her SOR response under
Guideline F. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a complete review of the
evidence in the record and upon due consideration, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She left high school and married
at age 18. Her husband died in 1983 and she was left a widow. Her husband was the sole support of
the family. As a result, when he died, she had a son to support. On March 31, 1999, she completed
her security clearance (SF 86) application.  Applicant has  held a secret level security clearance for2
ten years.  She has worked for her current employer since 2002.3 4
Applicant worked at minimum wage jobs and began taking college courses in 1988 to
improve her work skills. She could not support herself and her son on her earnings. She had no
choice but to file for bankruptcy in 1989. She filed Chapter 13 rather than Chapter 7 so that she could
pay her creditors. She satisfied the debts in the mid 1990's.5
Tr. 22.6
Tr. 24.7
Tr. 56.8
Tr. 25.9
Id.; Tr. 45.10
Tr. 54.11
3
In 1993, Applicant remarried. She accepted the financial responsibility in the marriage for
14 years. Her husband did not work nor accept responsibility for the household debts. In fact, he
squandered the household money.  In 1994, Applicant’s daughter was born with a congenital birth
defect which required extensive medical care, including several surgeries. Some of the medical bills
involved hospitalizations of two months or longer. Applicant paid what she could but the health
insurance did not cover the remainder of the various bills to specialists and other providers.6
In 1996, Applicant started to work on line for various companies located in different states.
She worked but did not receive W-2s or 1099s from the companies.  She tried to contact the7
companies but they did not respond. She filed her taxes despite not having the correct forms. The
IRS contacted her about the back taxes. She elected a lien on her house. She has now started to pay
the back taxes after an arrangement with the IRS.8
In 2003, Applicant’s husband was diagnosed with HIV. Applicant was also diagnosed three
months later. In six months she was diagnosed with Hepatitis C. She contracted the conditions from
her husband. She had chemotherapy for 50 weeks. She traveled 150 miles for that treatment. She did
not miss work and paid her bills. She used her credit cards to help pay for some bills.9
She lived with her parents during the separation before her divorce because her husband
would not leave the marital home although Applicant paid the monthly mortgage.  Her husband had10
a drug problem. They finally divorced in July 2007.  After the divorce, her ex-husband stole some
checks from Applicant. Her husband also had not paid the utility bills and Applicant found herself
responsible for another $400 of debt.
Applicant is now living in her home with her youngest daughter who is 12 years old. She has
$25,000 left on the mortgage and approximately $60,000 in equity. She does not receive regular
child support payments, although she is entitled to it by court order, because her ex-husband does
not work.  
Applicant’s debts in the SOR total approximately $8,000. She earns approximately $3,100
net per month working a regular schedule. She has a net remainder per month of approximately
$800.  She is current on her monthly bills and owns her automobile.11
The File contains a letter from Applicant dated June 29, 2007 explaining the medical bills and a garnishment12
from wages for most of them. Her daughter had so many medical bills that some of them were unknown to Applicant.
AX B (Letter from Employer)13
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  14
4
The current status of Applicant’s alleged debts listed in the SOR is as follows:
SOR ¶ Type of Account/Amount Status Evidence
1.a Tax Lien                     $6,054 Payment plan  $248 AX B
1.b Medical account       $54 Unknown Tr. 57
1.c Medical account       $474 Settlement plan AX B
1.d Collection account    $233 PAID AX B, Tr. 52
1.e Collection account    $503 Plan for Repayment AX A 
1.f Collection account    $756 Unknown Tr. 64.
1.g Medical account        $1,936 Duplicate Letter 6/29/0712
1.h Credit account           $1608 Plan for Repayment AX B; Tr. 64
1.I Cell phone                  $198 PAID AX B
1.j Bankruptcy 1989 Discharged 1994 GX 3
Applicant is highly regarded by her employer. The President of the contractor company
highlights the ethical and moral behavior of Applicant, as well as impressive skills. She manages five
employees and is responsible for direct deposit of a  payroll which averages $200,000 biweekly. The
president is aware of Applicant’s financial difficulties. He attests to her capability with additional
responsibilities in his absence. She has a stellar attendance record despite her medical and personal
issues.13
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position … that
will give that person access to such information.”   In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding14
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information and determining trustworthiness within the
executive branch. 
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.1.15
 Directive, Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)¶2 (a)(1)-(9).16
 Id.17
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14.18
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).20
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.21
5
To be eligible for a security clearance or access to sensitive information, an applicant must
meet the security guidelines contained in the Directive.  The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth
potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline.
Additionally, each security decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative
process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive, and AG ¶ 2(a).
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”    An administrative15
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available, reliable
information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider the following factors: (1)16
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.   17
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR that
disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.18
Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the facts.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent19
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”  Any doubt as to whether20
access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor
of the national security.  The same rules apply to trustworthiness determinations for access to21
sensitive positions.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. The government
has established a prima facie case for disqualification under Guideline F of the revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG) most pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case.
 
AG ¶ 18.22
6
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.22
In this matter, the government provided substantial evidence that Applicant accrued  delinquent
debts with an approximate total balance of $8,000. She admits there are still outstanding debts, and
her 2007 credit report confirms her alleged debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. 
With the government’s case established, the burden shifts to Applicant to present evidence of
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against her. I considered the Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶20(a), (the behavior happened so long ago, was
so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). It does partially apply
because Applicant's difficulty with finances in 1989 has been resolved through her Chapter 13
bankruptcy and payment plan in approximately 1994. The debt that accrued after that time was in large
measure due to emergency medical situations and her husband's inability to handle money. Applicant
is now divorced and she has been diligent in paying debts over the years. Her health is now stable and
she lives within her means.  
Applicant’s debts are the result of medical problems for her daughter and herself. She also
divorced her second husband because he did not support the family financially, squandered money and
even stole checks from Applicant after the divorce. Her first husband died and left her to support
herself and her son with few work skills. Applicant filed Chapter 13 Bankruptcy as a result and paid
all her creditors through the repayment plan which ended in the mid 1990's. FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation)
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.
I have considered the remaining mitigating conditions. FC MC AG ¶ 20© (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem/and or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or under control); FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts); FC MC AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to
resolve the issue)  
Applicant has received some  financial counseling from her boss and developed a structured
plan to resolve these debts. She has an arrangement with the IRS to pay the lien; she has paid several
of the debts and is researching the unknown medical accounts. She is researching the debts to locate
the collection companies. Her resolve and determination as shown through her successful Chapter 13
7
repayments are evident.  There are clear indications that the financial problem is being resolved or is
under control.
After her daughter was born with a medical problem, Applicant was faced with numerous
medical bills. This contributed to her inability to pay on her older debt. She paid her medical bills and
provided for her family. Applicant has a job with a good, stable income. She divorced her second
husband.  She has a solid plan and the determination to resolve her debts. She has made good faith
efforts to resolve all her delinquencies.
Whole Person
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern. The
objective of the trustworthy determination process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of a
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for assignment to sensitive
duties. Indeed, the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in considering
the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts,
omissions, motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis.
I have considered all the evidence and the “whole person” in evaluating Applicant’s security
clearance determination.  Applicant has a very good work history and  review from her employer. She
provides for her family and her daughter who have major medical problems. Her inability to initially
stay on hers repayment plan did not cause her to give up. She has made good faith efforts to resolve
her delinquent debts. The issue is not whether Applicant is still legally liable for any or all of her
outstanding debts, but whether she has presented sufficient evidence of extenuation, mitigation or
changed circumstances to warrant a favorable security determination. Applicant has mitigated the
government’s concerns under Guideline F. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is granted.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: For Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Clearance is granted.
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
