Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive),1
dated January 2, 1992, as amended.
DATE:  December 20, 2007
In re:
----------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-01979
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CLAUDE R. HEINY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Alison O'Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant had two debts, one she has paid and the other covered by insurance. The record
evidence is sufficient to mitigate or extenuate the negative security implications stemming from a
debt of such magnitude. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On July 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating that DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding  it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for1
2
Applicant. The SOR set forth reasons why a security clearance could not be granted or continued
due to financial considerations security concerns.
On August 17, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided
without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated September 26, 2007.  Applicant was sent a copy of the FORM, along with
notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
On October 19, 2007, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object
to the material. Applicant’s response was admitted into the record. On November 2, 2007, I was
assigned the case. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The SOR alleges security concerns based on financial considerations. After a thorough
review of the record, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 48-year-old aircraft mechanic who has worked for a defense contractor since
January 2004, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance. 
During the past eight years, Applicant’s husband had health issues. In 1998, Applicant’s
husband was unable to work for several months due to his illness. During his illness, Applicant
worked two or three jobs attempting to make ends meet. (Item 4) The SOR lists two charged off
accounts. The first debt is a $11,832 credit card obligation (SOR 1.a). Applicant contacted the
creditor and settled this debt, paying $1,200 as evidenced by an August 2007 letter. (Item 4) The
balance was interest and finance charges incurred during the last eight to ten years on the original
debt. Applicant had been unsuccessful in her previously attempting to work with the collection
agencies to pay this debt. The debt is paid and has a zero balance. (Item 4)
Applicant’s February 2006 credit bureau report (CBR)(Item 9) lists two accounts with this
creditor with different account numbers. However, the creditor does not appear on Applicant’s more
recent CBRs of June 25, 2007 (Item 4), the June 28, 2007 (Item 7), or the March 2007 (Item 8). 
In March 2001, Applicant purchased a car for $13,717. In August 2003, Applicant was
involved in an accident in which the vehicle was totally destroyed. At the time of the accident,
$7,000 was owed on the vehicle. Although Applicant had full insurance on the vehicle, the insurance
company offered payment of only $3,000, which reflected the salvage value of the car. A week prior
the accident, in anticipation of trading the vehicle, Applicant had it appraised and it was valued at
$8,200. The book value on the car was $7,000. (Item 4) The SOR alleges $4,000 is owed.
The insurance company appraiser told Applicant she did not have to accept the $3,000 offer,
so she did not accept it.  Time passed and she assumed the insurance company had paid the creditor
the full value due and owing on the vehicle.  However, the unpaid balance was reported as a loss by
the credit grantor. (Item 9) Years later, Applicant discovered, from a credit report, the creditor
charged off $4,306. The SOR alleges the debt was charged off in July 2003. 
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.152
3
Federal law mandates an original creditor must charge-off an account when no payments
have been received for a certain period of time. The state statute of limitation for debt collection in
Applicant’s state is four years. The statute of limitation applies only to litigation action and does not
mean the debt is no longer owed or has been erased. The passage of the Statute of Limitation bars
a creditor from using litigation to collect a debt. The debt remains on the credit report for up to
seven years and in some case the public record can remain for 10 years. 
POLICIES
The Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information, dated August 2006, sets forth Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating
Conditions (MC) for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each decision must be a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole person concept, and the factors listed in Section 6.3 of the Directive. The adjudicative
guidelines are to be applied by administrative judges on a case-by-case basis with an eye toward
making determinations that are clearly consistent with the interests of national security. The
presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not determinative
of a conclusion for or against an applicant.  However, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole,
I conclude the relevant guideline to be applied here is Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
BURDEN OF PROOF
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant. Initially, the
Government must establish, by substantial evidence, that conditions exist in the personal or
professional history of the applicant which disqualify, or may disqualify, an applicant from being
eligible for access to classified information. The burden of proof in a security clearance case is
something less than a preponderance of evidence, although the government is required to present
substantial evidence to meet its burden of proof. All that is required is proof of facts and
circumstances which indicate an applicant is at risk for mishandling classified information, or that
an applicant does not demonstrate the high degree of judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness
required of persons handling classified information. Additionally, the government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts
to an applicant to present evidence to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government's case.
Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision.2
As noted by the United States Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
528 (1988), “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” A person who has access to classified
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence.
The government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt
4
about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national
security.  Security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. 
CONCLUSIONS
The Government has satisfied its initial burden of proof under Guideline F, financial
considerations. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon terms.
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a history of
serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is inconsistent with the holding
of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is required to manage her
finances so as to meet her financial obligations.
Financial considerations become a security concern when a person has significant delinquent
debts. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal or
unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Additionally, an individual who is
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to
protect classified information.  Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
Applicant owes approximately $16,000 on two debts.  Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a)
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” apply. 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated she had paid the debt listed in SOR 1.a.  Having
stated a debt has been paid is equivalent to denying an allegation. The burden is then on the
Government prove the allegation. Government indicates there are two accounts with this creditor
and submitted Applicant’s February 2006 CBR that lists the two accounts. However, the record
contains three more recent CBRs, none of which shows a debt due the creditor. The debt does not
appear on her March 2007 CBR nor on either of her two June 2007 CBRs. Providing a single, older
CBR does not prove the debt is yet owed. 
Mitigating Condition MC 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” applies.  Applicant submitted an August 2007 letter indicating
the debt owed the creditor in SOR 1.a. had been paid. It is my experience that credit collection
agencies are reluctant to provide any favorable written information about payment of a debt. In this
case, the collection provided a letter indicated Applicant paid her account.  It would be unusual for
a collection agency to provide such a letter if Applicant owed additional monies to the same creditor.
A collection agency withholds all favorable information until the entire debt with a given creditor
has been paid or settled.  Based on the more recent CBRs and the practice of collection agencies,
I find Applicant has paid the creditor listed in SOR 1.a.
I find MC 20(b) “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,”
applies to the car debt. Approximately $4,000, the unpaid balance on a car loan, was reported as a
loss by the credit grantor. She had insurance on her car. A week before the accident the car was
“The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the3
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve
the issue.”
5
appraised at $8,000. After the accident, the insurance company told her it is only worth $3,000.  She
disputes owing anything.  She learned her insurance company failed to pay off the car years after
the event. 
Applicant’s husband suffered from illness and Applicant worked two or three jobs to make
ends meet.  This was a condition beyond her control.  Taking extra jobs shows she acted responsibly
under the circumstance. 
A person buys insurance to protect themselves and others from economic loss and medical
costs should an accident occur.  Following an accident, some insurance companies will offer less
than the true fair market value of an insured vehicle. Applicant maintained insurance to pay for the
vehicle if it was in an accident.  She has a legitimate dispute about this debt. The Government argues
Mitigating Condition (MC) 20 (e)  does not apply because Applicant failed to document the basis3
of the dispute. I find her explanation to be a reasonable and plausible explanation even without
written documents. 
Additionally, the debt exceeds the state statute of limitations.  This does not mean Applicant
no longer owes the debt, only that the creditor can no longer bring litigation to enforce the debt.
Failing to pay this debt does not show an inability by Applicant to live within her means.  It may
show an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations in that people should pay their just debts.
However, when one has insurance to pay the obligation in the event of an accident and the insurance
company refuses to make full pay, this does not show an unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations. The amount of the debt coupled with the passage of the statute of limitation indicates
Applicant is not financially overextended or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  It would be unusual for someone to engage in illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to
pay a debt that is no longer enforceable. Additionally, Applicant is not financially over extended by
a $4,000 debt.
While the record contains information addressed in one adjudicative guideline, consideration
such also be given to information bearing on the whole person.  The adjudicative process must
include examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination
that the person is an acceptable security risk.  Therefore, I have also considered: the nature, extent,
and seriousness of the conduct; Applicant’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the
circumstances surrounding the conduct; Applicant’s voluntary and knowledgeable participation; the
motivation for the conduct; the frequency and recency of the conduct; presence or absence of
rehabilitation; potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and the probability that the
circumstance or conduct will continue or recur in the future. 
On balance, the record before me support a conclusion Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
6
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7, of Enclosure 1 of the Directive are
hereby rendered as follows:
Paragraph 1 Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
               DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is
granted.
Claude R. Heiny 
Administrative Judge
