DATE:  December 31, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-06484
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
NOREEN A. LYNCH
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 71-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After working his entire life,
he retired in 2005. As a result of helping two family members by co-signing auto loans, he petitioned
for a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April and a Chapter 13 in October 1997. He paid his creditors and
resolved the debt. In May 2007, Applicant entered into a Chapter 13 plan in May 2007. Applicant
is paying his creditors under that plan. Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations
concern at this time.  Clearance is denied.
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended1
and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).
GE 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated November 22, 2006).2
Id.3
GE 2 and 3 (Bankruptcy Petitions).4
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant. On October 10, 2007, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons1
(SOR) detailing the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and
implemented by the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The revised
guidelines were provided to Applicant when the SOR was issued. Applicant answered the SOR on
October 27, 2007, and elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was
assigned to me on November 16, 2007. I scheduled a hearing for December 11, 2007.
The hearing was convened as scheduled on December 11, 2007, to consider whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Government exhibits (GE 1-9) were admitted. Testimony was taken from Applicant. The transcript
(Tr.) was received on December 19, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted allegations under subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.h set forth in the
SOR pertaining to financial considerations under Guideline F. Those admissions are incorporated
as findings of fact.  He denied allegations 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.j.  After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence in the record, I make the following additional finding of fact:
Applicant is a 71-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He has been with his current
employer working as a janitor since 2006. He completed a security clearance application on
November 22, 2006.2
Applicant married in 1969 and was divorced shortly thereafter in December 1969. He has no
children. He graduated from the National Institute of Technology in 1987. After working many years,
he retired in 2005.3
Applicant helped various family members by co-signing auto loans. As a result, he was twice
left with debt. In 1997, he co-signed a loan for a niece so that she could buy an automobile. She
defaulted on the loan. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 1997. The debt was successfully
discharged in July 1997. Prior to 1997, Applicant had no financial difficulties and paid his accounts
and bills.  4
Id.5
Tr. 29.6
GE 5 (Bankruptcy Petition).7
GE 6 (Response to interrogatories, dated 2007).8
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).9
Id. at 527.10
3
Although divorced for many years, Applicant and his ex-wife remained friends. In October
of 1997, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy because his ex-wife had an automobile accident
and the car loan was co-signed by Applicant. He paid under that plan until June 1999. He requested
a dismissal from the court so that he could pay all the creditors. He then refinanced his house that
year and used the proceeds to pay those debts.5
In 2000, Applicant had a short period of unemployment. He was working as a welder for a
long while. However, the company needed his services as a utility worker. He continued to work
until 2005 when he retired.
In 2006, Applicant moved from his hometown to a warmer climate. However, he could not
sell his house at the time. He left the state and defaulted on his mortgage.  The home mortgage6
balance was $85,200. The company initiated foreclosure proceedings for that amount. He also owned
two vehicles. He left one vehicle behind in his home state. He did not like driving that one any more
because he had difficulty getting out of the vehicle. The debt from the auto repossession is $11,000.
Applicant denied the other debts, including cable ($411), and direct tv ($348) because he
never signed up for direct tv. He also disputed the telephone bill ($3,384). When he filed for chapter
13 bankruptcy, he included those debts in the 2007 plan.7
Applicant now works as a janitor for a defense contractor. He does not believe he needs a
security clearance for his work.  He earns approximately $2,021 net a month and has expenses of
$1,682. He has a net remainder of $339 at the end of the month. Under his 2007 Chapter 13
bankruptcy plan, his monthly payment is $325 a month. Since July 2007, Applicant has been paying
under the plan. He is current on his rent and daily expenses. He received some financial counseling
as part of his bankruptcy proceedings.8
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  As Commander in Chief, the President has9
“the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person
access to such information.”  The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to10
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960). 11
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).12
Id.; Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.13
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.14
AG 18.15
4
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  An applicant has the ultimate burden of11
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her
security clearance. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant12
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such
sensitive information.  The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a13
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance.  14
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and
mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline. Additionally, each security clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative process factors listed in the
Directive and AG ¶ 2(a).
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed in the conclusions section below.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.
I reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Guideline F: Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations,
all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  15
Applicant admitted filing for bankruptcy twice in 1997 and again in 2007. His credit report
confirmed his debts. Thus, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply.
5
Applicant admitted that he co-signed two auto loans for different family members, and that
as a result he had financial difficulties.  He exercised poor judgment by co-signing loans for the
benefit of others to his financial detriment. FC DC 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means,
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ration, and/or other financial analysis) applies.
I have considered all the Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC), and
especially considered FC MC 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), FC MC 20(b) (the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances), FC MC 20(c) (the
person received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control), and FC MC 20(d) (the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
Although FC MC 20 (a) does not provide a temporal or specific definition of what constitutes
“recent” conduct, Applicant’s 2007 bankruptcy casts doubt on his financial judgment.  I find that FC
MC 20(a) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s home foreclosure due to his inability to sell his house in 2006, and his 1997
bankruptcy due to helping family members, merits partial mitigation under FC MC 20(b). However,
there is no evidence that he contacted his creditor or sought credit counseling before he left his home
in 2006 to establish the type of evidence necessary for the second prong of mitigation under 20(b).
Applicant received counseling as part of his 2007 Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. He no
longer has any delinquent debts due to the counseling and his 2007 payment plan.  FC MC 20(c)
applies in this case. 
FC MC 20(d) is applicable because Applicant used  bankruptcy to resolve his debts.  This
was a legal and good faith effort on his part to pay the debts alleged in the SOR.
Applicant denied or disputed several debts listed in the SOR, but he included those debts in
his payment plan. He did not provide documentation to substantiate the basis of his dispute. FC MC
20(e) does not apply. 
Whole Person Analysis
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk. Available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in
reaching a determination. In evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process
factors listed in the Directive and AG ¶ 2(a). I have also considered all the evidence, and every
finding of fact and conclusion discussed above. 
Applicant is an earnest, mature gentleman who has worked his entire life. Prior to 1997, he
had no financial difficulties. He helped family members by co-signing auto loans which led him to
6
financial difficulties that resulted in bankruptcy in 1997. He admits poor judgment in this issue.
However, in 2006, he decided to move to a warmer climate. He left his home and one vehicle behind
and as a result defaulted on his home mortgage and his car was repossessed. This was not a
responsible way to handle the situation, and again demonstrated poor judgment. Although, he used
a legal means to resolve his debt in 2007, it is not sufficient to establish a sound track record of
financial responsibility given his previous history. It is not clearly consistent with the national
security to grant Applicant a security clearance at this time.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
based on his financial issues. He is not eligible for a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:             Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance
is denied.
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
