DATE:  December 21, 2007
In re:
---------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-03637
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
LEROY F. FOREMAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Gwendolyn F. Stokes, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
Applicant admitted soliciting prostitutes on numerous occasions between 1992 and 1996.
In January 1994 and July 1996, he pleaded guilty to soliciting prostitutes.  In January 2006, he was
cited for soliciting a known prostitute, but the charges were dismissed.  His wife is unaware of his
record of soliciting prostitutes.  Security concerns based on criminal conduct, sexual behavior, and
personal conduct are not mitigated.  Clearance is denied.
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant applied for a security clearance on October 3, 2006.  On July 13, 2007, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis
for its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. This action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and
modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and implemented
effective September 1, 2006.  The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal
Conduct), D (Sexual Behavior), and E (Personal Conduct).
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 7, 2007, admitted some allegations and
denied some, and requested a hearing.  The case was assigned to me on October 10, 2007, and heard
as scheduled on November 14, 2007.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 21, 2007.
PROCEDURAL RULINGS
On October 3, 2007, Department Counsel filed a motion to amend the SOR by adding ¶¶ 2.b,
2.c, and 2.d under Guideline D, cross-alleging  the criminal conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c
under Guideline J as sexual conduct under Guideline D.  At the hearing, Applicant did not object to
the amendments, and I granted the motion (Tr. 11).  Applicant had not responded in writing to the
motion to amend, but at the hearing he admitted ¶ 2.b as amended, and he denied ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d as
amended.
Although the parties orally agreed in late October to the hearing date of November 14, 2007,
the written hearing notice was dispatched on November 1, 2007, less than the 15 days required by
the Directive ¶ E3.1.8.  Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement (Hearing Exhibit I; Tr. 13).
On motion of Department Counsel and without objection from Applicant, I took
administrative notice of the provisions of the city code pertaining to prostitution in the city where
the alleged conduct occurred (Hearing Exhibit II; Tr. 21-23).
Government Exhibit (GX) 2 consisted of DOHA interrogatories, Applicant’s responses, and
a 4-page extract from a report of investigation summarizing Applicant’s oral statement to a security
investigator.  Applicant pointed out several minor errors in the summarization in his response to the
interrogatories (GX 2 at 3) and at the hearing (Tr. 90-92).  Department Counsel did not offer an
authenticating witness for report of investigation attached to GX 2, as required by Directive ¶
E3.8.20.  Applicant’s counsel questioned whether two police reports offered by Department Counsel
(GX 3 and 4) were inadmissible because they were “investigative reports,” but she made no
foundational objection to GX 2 (Tr. 24-29).  I conclude that the lack of an authenticating witness for
the attachment to GX 2 was waived by the failure of Applicant’s counsel to object.
3
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated into my
findings of fact.  I make the following findings:
Applicant is a 48-year-old cable installer for a defense contractor (Tr. 37).  He was hired in
October 2006 and given an interim clearance.  His interim clearance was revoked when DOHA made
the preliminary determination to deny him a clearance (Tr. 38-41).  At the time of his hearing, he was
working as an auto detailer (Tr. 36).  If his clearance is granted, he will return to his job as a cable
installer (Tr. 117).
Applicant was married in June 1988, and his daughter was born in 1992.  After the birth of
his daughter, his wife became increasingly unwilling to engage in sexual activity (Tr. 71-72).  He
and his wife attended marriage counseling from about November 2001 to September 2002, but his
wife participated “on her own terms,” not participating in counseling sessions dealing with sexual
intimacy (Tr. 73-74).  Applicant has remained married even though the sexual intimacy issues have
not been resolved, because he still loves his wife (Tr. 76-77).
In January 1994, Applicant picked up a woman who waved at him while he was driving past,
and they agreed she would perform oral sex on him.  The police arrested Applicant before any sex
acts occurred.  Applicant pleaded guilty to attempting to solicit a prostitute, paid a $150 fine, and
was placed on probation for one year (GX 2 at 8).  At the hearing, he testified the charges ultimately
were dismissed (Tr. 57).
In July 1996, Applicant met a woman near a motel in the same area as the January 1994
incident.  They went to a motel room and Applicant asked the woman to perform oral sex on him.
The woman was an undercover police officer.  Applicant was cited for soliciting a prostitute.  He
pleaded guilty, paid a fine of $100, and was placed on probation for one year (GX 2 at 8; GX 3).  At
the hearing, Applicant admitted he pleaded guilty and was convicted, and he admitted telling a
security investigator he was fined “$100 or $150" and was placed on probation, but at the hearing
he testified he was unsure of the disposition of the charge (Tr. 55, 117-18).
In January 2006, Applicant picked up a woman who waved at him as he drove past, in the
same area as the two previous incidents.  The woman was a known prostitute.  No conversation
about sex and no sexual acts occurred.  After Applicant drove 2-3 blocks, he was stopped by the
police and cited for soliciting a known prostitute (GX 4).  Applicant testified the woman asked him
for a ride for a distance of 2-3 blocks, and he was pulling over to let her out when the police
confronted him.  He insisted he was not looking for sexual activity, but he admitted he exercised bad
judgment by picking up a stranger in that area (Tr. 103-05).  The charge was dismissed for lack of
evidence (Applicant’s Exhibit A).
In an interview with a security investigator on December 18, 2006, Applicant admitted the
incidents described above.  He also admitted hiring approximately 24 prostitutes between 1990 and
1996.  He explained that he sought out prostitutes because his wife is sexually anorexic and
withholds sexual relations from him (GX 2 at 9).  At the hearing, he testified that in retrospect he
had overestimated the number of times he sought out prostitutes, and that it was more likely about
16 times instead of 24 and for a shorter period, from 1992 to 1996 (Tr. 60-61).
4
Applicant has not told his wife or his teenaged daughter about his activities with prostitutes.
He feels guilty and remorseful about his conduct.  He also believes telling his wife about his conduct
would be a “low blow,” hitting her where she hurts the most (Tr. 80-81).  In an effort to avoid
reverting to his previous behavior, he is involved with a “men’s accountability group,” and he
engages in prayer and devotionals nearly daily (Tr. 107-08).
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . . . control access to
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently
trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person access to such information.”  Id. at
527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.  Eligibility for a security clearance is
predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria contained in the Guidelines.  Each clearance
decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision based on the relevant and material
facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, the disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions under each specific guideline, and the factors listed in AG ¶¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special relationship with the
government.  The government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in persons
with access to classified information.  However, the decision to deny an individual a security
clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  See Exec. Or. 10865
§ 7.  It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal
or professional history of the applicant which disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being
eligible for access to classified information.  See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth.,
36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The Guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between
proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App.
Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
5
The SOR alleges Applicant was cited for prostitution in January 2006 but the charge was
dismissed (¶ 1.a).  It also alleges he was charged with prostitution-related offenses in June 1996 and
January 1994, and he pleaded guilty to the charges (¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶ 30.  Conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” and an “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.”  AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).  Applicant’s conduct in
January 2006 apparently was interrupted by the police before any criminal conduct occurred.  I
conclude he refuted the allegation of criminal conduct in SOR ¶ 1.a.  However, his pleas of guilty
to attempting to solicit a prostitute in January 1994, and soliciting a prostitute in July 1996 are
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has the burden of proving a
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case
No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so much time has
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.”  AG ¶ 32(a).  Applicant’s last criminal act was in July 1996, more than 10 years ago.  His
conduct in January 2006 exhibited bad judgment but did not reach the level of criminal conduct.  The
first prong (“so much time”) is established.  However, the second prong (“unusual circumstances”)
is not established because Applicant’s marital difficulties relating to sexual intimacy continue to
exist.  The third prong (“does not cast doubt on the individual’s . . . good judgment”) also is not
established, because his repeated encounters with prostitutes cast doubt on his good judgment.
Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “there is evidence of
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record,
or constructive community involvement.”  AG ¶ 32(d).  Although more than 10 years have passed
since Applicant’s last criminal conviction for involvement with prostitutes, his contact with a
prostitute in January 2006, coupled with his implausible explanation for his conduct, strongly
suggests he was contemplating sexual activity when he invited the woman into his car.  His conduct
and his implausible explanation are sufficiently troublesome to raise doubt about his successful
rehabilitation.  I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is not established.
6
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior)
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges Applicant solicited approximately 24 prostitutes between 1990 and 1996.
SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d allege the same conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c.  The concern
under this guideline is that “[s]exual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality
or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may subject the individual
to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise questions about an individual's
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “sexual
behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted.”  AG ¶ 13(a).
Applicant admitted he engaged the services of prostitutes on numerous occasions between either
1990 (as admitted to a security investigator and in his answer to the SOR) or 1992 (as admitted at
the hearing) and 1996.  His conduct violated the local law prohibiting soliciting or patronizing
prostitutes (Hearing Exhibit II).  He pleaded guilty to attempting to solicit a prostitute in January
1994 and soliciting a prostitute in July 1996.  I conclude AG ¶ 13(a) is raised.  
Security concerns also may be raised by “sexual behavior that causes an individual to be
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  AG ¶ 13(c).  Applicant concealed his conduct from
his family to avoid causing them distress, and he admitted at the hearing that knowledge of his
conduct would be very painful to them.  I conclude this disqualifying condition is raised.
Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be raised by “sexual behavior of a public
nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment.”  AG ¶ 13(d).  While Applicant’s conduct
was not “public,” it clearly reflects lack of good judgment.  I conclude this disqualifying condition
is raised.
Security concerns may be mitigated by showing that “the sexual behavior happened so long
ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  AG ¶14(b).
The first prong (“so long ago) is established.  Even though the evidence suggests Applicant may have
been contemplating sexual activity when he was detained and cited in January 2006, the evidence
also indicates the police intervened before any sexual activity occurred.  Thus, the last incident of
sexual behavior was in 1996, more than 10 years ago.  The second prong (“so infrequently”) is not
established in light of Applicant’s admission of multiple transactions with prostitutes.  The third
prong (“unlikely to recur”) also is not established.  Although no sexual activity occurred in January
2006, the evidence strongly suggests Applicant was contemplating it.  The motivation for previous
sexual activity, i.e., his wife’s rejection of sexual intimacy, continues to exist.  Finally, Applicant’s
history of sexual activity with prostitutes and his conduct in January 2006 cast doubt on his good
judgment.  Based on all the evidence, I conclude AG ¶ 14(b) is not established.
Security concerns arising from sexual behavior also may be mitigated by showing that “the
behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  AG ¶ 14(c).  Applicant’s
wife and teenaged daughter are unaware of his long record of soliciting prostitutes.  His testimony
during the hearing, and his demeanor while testifying, made it clear that disclosure of his sexual
conduct to his wife and family would be painful for him.  I conclude AG ¶ 14(c) is not established.
7
Finally, security concerns based on sexual behavior may be mitigated by showing it was
“strictly private, consensual, and discreet.”  AG ¶ 14(d).  While Applicant’s conduct may have been
strictly private and consensual, he routinely solicited total strangers, including an undercover police
officer on one occasion.  His conduct was indiscriminate and clearly not discreet.  I conclude AG ¶
14(d) is not established.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b allege Applicant’s wife was not aware of the conduct alleged under
Guidelines J and D above. The concern under this guideline is: “Conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  AG ¶ 15.  A disqualifying condition may arise from “personal conduct, or concealment
of information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal,
professional, or community standing.”  AG ¶ 15(e).  This condition is raised by evidence Applicant
concealed his dealings with prostitutes from his wife in order to avoid inflicting emotional pain on
her.
Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual has acknowledged
the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.”  AG ¶ 17(d).  Applicant has acknowledged his
behavior, expressed remorse, attended marriage counseling, and is currently involved in a support
group.  However, the main stressor, i.e., his sexually dysfunctional marriage, remains unresolved.
His conduct in January 2006 raises doubt whether his dealings with prostitutes are “unlikely to
recur.”  I conclude AG ¶ 17(d) is not established.
Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual has taken
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  AG ¶
17(e).  Applicant has taken positive steps to change his behavior, but he continues to conceal his
sexual conduct from his wife.  I conclude AG ¶ 17(e) is not established.
Whole Person Analysis
In addition to considering the specific disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each
guideline, I have also considered: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the applicant’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  AG ¶¶
2(a)(1)-(9).  
Applicant is a mature adult.  In spite of their difficulties, he remains devoted to his wife.  He
has taken significant measures to break away from habit of consorting with prostitutes, but his recent
8
conduct raises doubt whether it will not recur.  He remains vulnerable to pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J, D, and E, and
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated
the security concerns based on criminal conduct, sexual conduct, and personal conduct.
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1. Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline D (Sexual Behavior): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3. Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
LeRoy F. Foreman
Administrative Judge
