DATE: December 10, 2007
In Re:
--------------------------
SSN: -------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-02485
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
BARRY M. SAX
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Robert Bohn, Esquire, McKenna Long & Aldrich
SYNOPSIS
This 49- year-old software engineer was born in China in 1958, and came to the U.S. 20 years
ago with her husband and baby.  She completed her education, raised a family and became a part of
American society.  The only allegations in the Statement of Reasons pertain to her having family
members in China. Recently, her mother and father have emigrated to the U.S.  Her connections with
China are minimal compared with her ties to the U.S.  She understands her security responsibilities
and she avers prompt reporting of any improper contacts.  Her history in the U.S. indicates her
willingness and ability to meet these responsibilities. Mitigation has been established. Clearance is
granted. 
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
On June 29, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant. The SOR detailed reasons
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding required under the Directive that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and
determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied or revoked. 
On July 30, 2007, Applicant responded to the allegations set forth in the SOR, and elected
to have a decision made by a DOHA Administrative Judge after a hearing. The matter was assigned
to me on September 12, 2007. On October 9, 2007, a Notice of Hearing was issued setting the
hearing for November 7, 2007. At the hearing the Government introduced two (2) exhibits
(Government’s Exhibit (GX) 1 - 2). At the hearing, the Government also offered six (6) Official
Notice Documents (ON) 1 - 6. The Applicant testified and introduced twenty-four (24) exhibits
(Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A - X. All exhibits and Official Notice documents were admitted. The
transcript (Tr) was received at DOHA on November 20, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Applicant is a 49-year-old computer engineer linguist/translator for a defense contractor. The
SOR contains nine (9) allegations under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).  Applicant answered all
allegations, most with comments and explanations. All specific admissions are accepted and
incorporated herein as Findings of Fact.
After considering the totality of the evidence, I make the following FINDINGS OF FACT
as to the present status of each SOR allegation. 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
1.a. Applicant’s husband is a citizen of the People’s Republic of China (China).  He resides
with Applicant in the U.S. He came to the U.S. in 1988 to pursue his post graduate degree. Applicant
came the next year with their baby son. They both graduated with Engineering degrees from the same
university. They both became Permanent Residents in 1992. Her husband began the naturalization
process, but he postponed completing the process because of his elderly and very ill 77-year-old
father in China, who is too frail to travel to the U.S. It is easier and faster for her husband to go to
China, if his father suddenly became ill, if he was still able to use a Chinese passport. American
citizens must obtain a visa (Tr at 43-46). 
He is a legal Permanent Resident and intends to apply for U.S. citizenship when the need for
quick travel no longer exists. He has visited China only three times since first coming to the U.S. in
1988. This includes one business trip for his company. He is very active in community affairs in his
home area (AX U), as are their children (AX V and AX W). 
3
1.b. - Applicant’s mother is a citizen of China and a resident of the U.S. She retired from
teaching school about 15 years ago. She and her husband applied to emigrate to the U.S. in 2003.
They were approved and  moved to the U.S. prior to the hearing (Response to SOR, Attachment 3).
1.c. - Applicant’s father is a citizen of China and a resident of the U.S. He retired about 15
years ago. He and his wife applied to emigrate to the U.S. in 2003. They were quickly approved and
moved here shortly before the hearing (Id.). 
1.d. Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of China. He used to be a teacher, but for
the last 10 years has been self employed as a free lance screen writer and artist. They speak only a
few times a year. 
1.e. and 1.f. - Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of
China. She is 73, and lives on a pension. Her primary task is to take care of her elderly and ailing
husband, who is 77. Applicant has no personal contact with her in-laws. Her husband has visited his
parents in China only a few times in the last 20 years (Tr at 83). 
1.g. - Applicant had telephonic contact with her parents once or twice a month. She visited
her parents, when she traveled to China. However, both parents now reside in the U.S. 
1.h. - Applicant has telephonic contact with her brother several times a year. They talk about
family matters and do not discuss the nature of her employment. 
1.i. - Applicant had only limited contact with her in-laws when she visited China. 
1.j. - Applicant was employed fora short time by an Institute of Meteorology and
Measurements as an Engineer from 1987 to 1989. This was almost 20 years ago and was right after
she graduated from school. She helped make industrial thermometers. This was at a time when the
government owned almost all industries and businesses. 
1.k. - Applicant traveled to China in 1998, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004, and August 2006. With
her parents now in the U.S., she no longer has any need to travel to China (Tr at 54).
Applicant was born in China in 1958.  She came to the U.S. in the late 1980s, with her oldest
son, who was naturalized in 2002. She completed her education, began her career, and has two sons,
19 and 14, the youngest of which was born in the U.S. The 19-year-old is now in college here. Their
home is worth about $1.1 million (AX Q), her salary is about $107,00 per year, she has about
$112,000 in a Company Savings Plan, her husband has about $522,000 in his Company Stock Plan
(AX O), and the two of them have about $225,00 in an IRA (AX S). Applicant and her husband left
any assets they had in China when they left more than two decades ago (Tr at 47). 
She has received numerous letters of praise and recommendation from work supervisors and
colleagues (Response to SOR, Attachments 1 and 2; AX A, from a man who has held a DoD Secret
security clearance for 20 years; AX B, AX C, AX J, and AX W and Tr at 38-42); Certificates of
Recognition of Exceptional Performance (Attachments 4, 5, 7, and 9), and positive work evaluations
(Attachment 6) 
4
Even though she has not yet received a security clearance, she has received company-wide
training, program, and manuals, on the protection of company sensitive information and material (Tr
at 37, 38). She always follows procedures (Id.). She strongly avers that if improperly contacted,
regardless of source, she would immediately report the contact to Homeland Security and her
Company’s Security Officer (Tr at 60, 61). She identifies most strongly with the United States and
very little with China (Tr at 64-66). Referring first to her children, "It’s their country, it’s my country,
it’s our country. So they are going to be here forever. I will remain here for the rest of my life, with
my whole family" (Tr at 66). 
POLICIES
Each adjudicative decision must also include an assessment of nine generic factors relevant
in all cases: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding
the conduct, to include knowing participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6)
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence (Directive, Enclosure 2 at Section 2, pages 18, 19). I have considered
all nine factors, individually and collectively, in reaching my overall conclusion. 
Each of the eligibility criteria established by Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive
5220.6 identify personal characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the ultimate
question of whether it is "clearly consistent with the national interest" for an individual to hold a
security clearance. An applicant’s admission of the information in specific allegations relieves the
Government of having to prove those allegations. If specific allegations and/or information are
denied or otherwise controverted by the applicant, the Government has the initial burden of proving
those controverted facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons. 
Once the Government meets its burden (either by the Applicant’s admissions or by other
evidence) and proves conduct that creates security concerns under the Directive, the burden of
persuasion then shifts to the Applicant to present evidence in refutation, extenuation or mitigation
sufficient to demonstrate that, despite the existence of conduct that falls within specific criteria in
the Directive, it is nevertheless consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue
a security clearance for the Applicant.
The person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the Government based upon trust and confidence. As required by DoD Directive 5220.6, as
amended, at E2.2.2., "any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security will be resolved in favor of the nation’s security."
5
Official Notice Documents 
The Government has introduced a number of Official Notice Documents pertaining to China.
The Official Notice documents discuss the official U.S. concern with China - that it a large and
vibrant country of 1.3 billion people with an economy expanding at about 10% a year. China has an
authoritarian Communist government with a poor human rights record, the suppression of political
dissent. China possesses large and sophisticated military forces, including nuclear weapons and
missiles. According to the Intelligence Threat Handbook, "The United States is a primary
intelligence target of China, because of the U.S. role as a global superpower, its substantial military,
political, and economic power in the Pacific Rim and Asia." 
Another official document states: China uses legal and illegal means, including espionage,
to obtain such [military-related] technologies (ON VI). Over the past year, the United States has
convicted and sentenced a number of individuals for illegally exporting critical technology to China
(Id.). The covers sheet to the Government submission of Official Notice Document abstracts
concerns from all six documents, all of which I give considerable weight.
China is clearly one of those countries deemed to be of the highest order of risk of seeking
to violate U.S. security interests. Under DOHA Appeal Board precedent, it is clear that Applicant
has a particularly heavy burden of establishing she is not at risk of being subjected to pressure or
coercion 
CONCLUSIONS 
Applicant is a 49-year-old computer engineer. She was born in China in 1958 and emigrated
to the U.S. in 1989, with her oldest son, a year after her husband had arrived here. She became a U.S.
citizen in 2001. Applicant has made herself a part of American society, albeit with Chinese roots.
Applicant describes herself as follows: 
After all, I am a mom with two wonderful children growing up in this country. My
commitment, obligation, loyalties, and love [for] the U.S. precede any other interests. I, as
parent, educate them to be a contributor and leader to the U.S. society. We have obligations,
responsibilities, rights, and privileges here. My older son and I vote. I also try to set a good
example for my children by being a role model. No foreign group, organization, or
government can influence me by any means to do anything that can negatively affect the
bright future of my children. No one can choose their birth place, but my husband and I chose
to live in this country and made the choice for our children for a better life. We were
uprooted in China long ago and have established the foundation for our life with our children
here" (Attachment to Response to SOR) 
In summary, my foreign contact is so casual and infrequent that it will not create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation, or put me in a position of having to choose between the interests
of any foreign group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States. There is no
6
conflict of interest because I don’t have any obligations to any foreign person, group, government,
or country. Just in case such conflict of interest emerges in the future, my longstanding relationships
and loyalties [to] the United States will enable me to resolve it in favor of the U.S. interest" (Id.). 
As is the case with all Applicants who have reported family and relatives in foreign countries,
Applicant faces the logically difficult, if not impossible, task of proving a negative; i.e., that
something that has not happened in the past is at risk of happening in the future. What she can
establish is who she is and how she is likely to act in the future. 
In the words of others who know her in a work context, Applicant is "trustworthy, stands by
her commitments, and has demonstrated a high level of performance and professionalism
(Attachment 1 to Response to SOR). Similar comments are made by other colleagues as well (Id.,
at Attachment 2.)  As to financial matters, Applicant has documented her financial ties to the U.S. -
her current net worth as well in excess of $1 million (GX 2). 
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if te individual has
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or indeed to help a foreign
person, group, organization or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interests. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is
located, including but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Disqualifying Condition - 7.(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Mitigating Conditions - 8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 8.(b) there
is no conflict of interest, either because of the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, organization, or country is so minimal or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict
of interests in favor of the U.S. interest. 
As established by Applicant’s own words and conduct, and the highly favorable comments
from others in positions of considerable security significance, she has (1) demonstrated an
unequivocal preference for the United States, (2) renounced her Chinese citizenship upon becoming
an American, (3) never renewed her now expired Chinese passport; and (4) has shown strong and
long lasting ties to the United States and its interests. I conclude that no "heightened risk" has been
shown that she would ever act improperly in a national security context. (Guideline B: Foreign
Influence at 7.(a). To the contrary, even with her remaining ties to China, the record demonstrates
that she "can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest (Id., at 8.(b)).
7
In addition, the totality of the record, evaluated under the "whole person" concept, shows
Applicant to be woman of strength and integrity, dedicated to her adopted homeland, and determined
to protect the life she has made here for herself and her family. Overall, and considering her in the
light of the whole person concept, I conclude she currently possesses the judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness required of someone seeking a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are 
Paragraph 1 Fore the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For the Applicant
DECISION
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
BARRY M. SAX 
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
