DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 05-06949
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 3 November 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline J.  Applicant answered the SOR 19 November 2007, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 19 December 2007, and I convened a hearing
30 January  2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 7 February 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Accordingly, I incorporate his
admissions as findings of fact. He is a 46-year-old telecommunications installer
employed by a defense contractor since September 2003. He has not previously held a
clearance.
Between February 1981 and December 1996, Applicant was involved in six run-
ins with law enforcement officials. The offenses run the gamut from simple marijuana
possession, to theft, to assault, to more serious offenses involving cocaine possession
and distribution. Three of the alleged offenses were dismissed (1.a.), not disposed of
(1.b.) or nolle prossed (1.e.) under circumstances that suggest that the incidents lack
security significance, particularly where the most recent of those incidents is over 16
years old. The remaining three offenses (1.c., 1.d., and 1.f.) involved more serious drug
charges. In February 1988, Applicant was convicted of cocaine possession, and
sentenced to one year confinement, suspended, probation, and drug treatment. In
October 1988, he was charged with three counts of cocaine distribution, was convicted,
and served 20 months in jail. In December 1996 he was charged with multiple cocaine
offenses, and ultimately pleaded guilty to attempted cocaine distribution—for which he
received two-years probation.
Although Applicant came from a middle-class background, he attributes these
drug offenses to his desire to be part of the “in” crowd in his neighborhood. His 1996
arrest occurred when he obtained some cocaine from a friend so he could pay someone
to wash his car. He was arrested by an undercover policeman.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
¶31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,3
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
¶32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such4
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence or criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement;
¶31.(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial, of a crime, sentenced to5
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than
a year.
¶32.(e) potentially disqualifying conditions . . . (f) above, may not be mitigated unless, where meritorious6
circumstances exist . . . [the Director], Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), has granted a
waiver.
The 2008 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 110-181) repealed the “Smith Amendment,” 10 U.S.C. § 9867
[thus removing the statutory basis for ¶31.(f) and ¶32.(e)] effective 1 January 2008. However, the statute
was not retroactive, nor does it void the provisions of the RAG. Barring action by the Secretary of Defense
to revise implementation of the RAG, those guidelines remain the applicable law of this case.
3
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline J, and
Applicant did not completely mitigate the security concerns. His six arrests between
1981 and 1996 raise concerns about his criminal conduct.  While the three minor3
offenses are mitigated by the passage of time and the unlikelihood of recurrence,  the4
same cannot be said about the more serious drug charges. Although Applicant’s most
recent drug arrest was over 11 years ago, the circumstances of that arrest (busted for
using cocaine to pay for a car wash) cast significant doubt on his judgment, coming as it
did after his jail time following his 1988 arrest. Further, Applicant’s 20-months
imprisonment disqualifies him from holding a clearance,  and cannot be mitigated5
absent a finding of meritorious circumstances by the Director, DOHA.  I resolve6
Guideline J against Applicant.7
4
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
