 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 05-08862 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his Personal Conduct. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On July 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on October 16, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
October 22, 2007, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 6, 2007. 
 
2 
 
 
The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf but did not submit any documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 15, 2007.  
 
The Administrative Judge who conducted the hearing left DOHA before a 
decision in this case was issued. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2008. I 
contacted Department Counsel and requested he contact Applicant and see if Applicant 
desired that I reopen the hearing for additional evidence or if Applicant desired that I 
base my decision on the transcript and evidence submitted at the first hearing. Applicant 
requested that I reopen the hearing. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 23, 
2008, and I reopened the hearing as scheduled on February 5, 2008. The government 
did not offer any additional documentary evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. 
He did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the 
second hearing (Tr. (2)) on February 13, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Administrative Judge advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the 
Directive to 15 days notice before the first hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his 
right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR with the exception of ¶ 1.g, which he denied. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He is a college 
graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree and a Master’s degree. He is married and 
has a child that is about six months old.1  
 
 Applicant attended college from 1995 to 2001. He started working as a veterinary 
assistant at an animal hospital when he was in high school and continued while he was 
in college. Applicant was involved in a number of incidents related to the animal 
hospital. Between about 1995 and 1998, while working at the animal hospital, Applicant 
killed several cats by injecting them with bleach. Applicant was the senior employee at 
the hospital on occasions when co-workers gave unauthorized bleach injections to cats 
that were scheduled to be euthanized. This was not the proper humane means to 
euthanize animals. A co-worker suggested to Applicant that he should try it and he did. 
Applicant admitted that “[once he] did it for the first time, [he] was still curious and tried a 
second time.” When asked if the cats suffered, Applicant testified, “[I]t’s hard to say, I 
guess.” Applicant described the deaths as similar to what occurred when the cats were 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
injected with the standard medication used to euthanize animals; they would stretch out 
and die.2 He was asked: 
 
 Q: I guess I’m trying to understand if it’s the same, why even do it? 
 
A: I mean - - I don’t know. It’s one of those things where you’re young and 
you do a stupid thing and you don’t think about it being that big of a deal 
until you think back - - think back on it. And you don’t really have an 
excuse for it. I don’t know. It’s probably one of the stupidest things I’ve 
ever done.3  
 
 Applicant was required to enter the time he started and ended work at the animal 
hospital on a computer. Applicant learned how to manipulate the computer. On about 40 
occasions between about 1995 and 1998, Applicant changed the computer to reflect 
that he reported to work on time, when he was actually late by about five to ten minutes. 
Applicant stated that he had no good reason for manipulating the computer as his boss 
did not care that he was several minutes late. He further stated that he did not do it for 
the money as he often worked after hours without pay in order to help out.4  
 
 The owner of the animal hospital also operated a Christmas tree business during 
the holidays. Applicant and other co-workers were sometimes called from the animal 
hospital to assist on the Christmas tree lot. This angered them and they stole money 
from the sale of the trees. Applicant stated that he would take $20 here or there and 
estimated that the total amount that he stole between about 1995 and 1998 was $500 or 
less.5  
 
 Between about 1999 and 2000, a co-worker at the animal hospital asked 
Applicant if he would provide her with a urine sample. Her husband had used marijuana. 
She wanted to give the urine to her husband so that he could substitute Applicant’s 
urine for his on a drug test. Applicant stated that he felt sorry for the woman because 
her husband was abusive to her and he provided her with his urine on about three 
occasions. He stated the husband worked for a construction company and was not 
involved in government work.6  
 
 In about 2000, Applicant and his friends vandalized public restrooms by urinating 
all over the restroom. He stated they were drunk the first time they did it. After that they 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 19, 56; Tr. (2) at 30-34; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
3 Tr. (2) at 33. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-21, 56-57; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 21-23, 53; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 16-19, 54-56; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
would do it during “road trips” and other times. He estimated that he did this on about 
ten occasions.7  
 
 From about 1995 to 2004, Applicant committed copyright violations by unlawfully 
downloading computer software, movies, and music. This started when Applicant was in 
college. Applicant stated at that time it was considered unusual to purchase software 
instead of pirating it. He rationalized his actions by the fact that he could not have 
purchased the software because he did not have the money, so the companies were 
not really losing money. He continued the practice after he graduated from college even 
though he could afford to pay for the software, movies, and music. He stated he “was so 
accustomed to just getting them for free that it was hard to stop and start paying for 
them.” Applicant testified he “stopped doing it once [he] went through the security 
process because [he] realized this could adversely affect it.” He testified that he did not 
think of it as something that mattered until he was asked about it during his polygraph in 
about 2004.8  
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a number of occasions between about 1995 and 
1999. The exact amount of times is unclear as he has provided varying information. 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on January 28, 2002. 
Question 27 asked: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant answered “YES.” He listed the period from “1995/06/01” to “1995/06/02.” 
Under “NAME/FREQUENCY” he listed “MARIJUANA” and “2.” 9 
 
 Applicant had a background interview about six to eight weeks after he submitted 
his SF 86. He told the investigator that he thought he used marijuana about five times, 
but he could not be sure. Applicant was given a polygraph for his background 
investigation in about 2004. He told the polygrapher that he thought he used marijuana 
about five times between 1995 and 1999, but it could have been more. He stated that 
he thought it was less than ten times but he was 100% certain it was less than 20 times. 
Applicant submitted another SF 86 on February 14, 2005. Applicant again answered 
“YES” to Question 27. He listed the period from “1994/04/01” to “1999/12/31.” Under 
“NAME/FREQUENCY” he listed “MARIJUANA” and “15.” Applicant wrote in the General 
Remarks section, “I would like to state that the number of my uses of marijuana were 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 23-24; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
8 Tr. at 24-27, 57-58; Tr. (2) at 18-20; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
9 GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
estimated. I believe it was less times.” In his response to Interrogatories in May 2007, 
Applicant stated he still believed he used marijuana on less than ten occasions. He 
stated that after discussing it with his wife, he remembered that the first time was on St. 
Patrick’s Day in 1995, and that he did not use it after meeting his wife in December 
1998. During his first hearing he testified he told the polygrapher that he was 100% sure 
that it was less than 15 occasions. He testified that the first time he used marijuana was 
in May 1995, when he went to visit a friend at a college, and it was May 1995, not June 
1995, that were the two times that he was thinking of when he answered his SF 86. He 
testified at his first hearing that he smoked marijuana with friends from work, starting 
about 1996. He stated he would go to parties and some of his friends had marijuana, 
and “sometimes [he] would and sometimes [he] wouldn’t [use marijuana],” but “[i]t 
wasn’t like an all the time thing.” He also testified that he believed it was actually 
between five and ten times. At his second hearing, he testified that he believed he used 
marijuana between five and ten times and probably closer to five.10  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the 2002 SF 86. He stated that he 
misinterpreted the question and that he thought the question asked him to list all the 
times that he had used marijuana, similar to the question that asked to list all the places 
that he had lived. He stated he listed the two occasions that he knew the dates that he 
used marijuana. He indicated that he knew he would speak with an investigator and he 
would tell the investigator that it was more than two occasions, but he did not have 
dates for the other occasions. He stated that he was not concerned that his marijuana 
use would affect his security clearance because of the time that had passed since he 
last used it. He admitted that he was concerned about his company finding out about his 
marijuana use. He further testified that his concern about his company finding out he 
smoked marijuana had nothing to do with his answer to the SF 86, and that if he was 
truly concerned about his company and was willing to lie on the SF 86 to conceal his 
drug use, that he would not have listed any use.11 After considering all the evidence 
including Applicant’s various statements and after gauging his demeanor and credibility, 
I find Applicant intentionally falsified his Security Clearance Application in 2002, by 
listing that he only used marijuana on two occasions in 1995. I further find that Applicant 
was untruthful in his response to Interrogatories, in his Answer to the SOR, and during 
both hearings when he denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86.12 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 28-34, 39-43, 49-52; Tr. (2) at 11-17, 21, 28-29; GE 2, 4. 
 
11 Tr. at 28, 43-44; Tr. (2) at 7-11, 20-27; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
12 Applicant’s false statements which were not alleged in the SOR are not considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when analyzing the “whole person” and the potential 
application of mitigating conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 During Applicant’s polygraph in 2004, he was told he did not pass the polygraph 
and was asked why he thought he did not pass.13 At that time Applicant revealed the 
information discussed above which formed the basis for the allegations in the SOR. He 
was denied access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) in about February 
2005, based upon much of the matter that he discussed with the polygrapher and which 
are currently listed as allegations in the SOR.14 
 
 Applicant stated he is deeply remorseful for what he has done, that he has 
changed from the young man who made poor choices, and that he has learned from his 
mistakes. He praises his wife as the stabilizing influence in his life. He has moved away 
from the bad influences in college and at the animal hospital. He and his wife bought a 
house about five years ago and he states he no longer is involved in questionable 
conduct.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
13 There is no evidence that Applicant actually was deceptive on his polygraph, as opposed to 
being told he was deceptive as part of an interview/interrogation technique. The results of the polygraph 
are not considered in determining the facts of this case or Applicant’s credibility. The polygraph is only 
considered for the affect it had on Applicant admitting to his conduct.  
 
14 Tr. at 27, 30-34, 44-47; Tr. (2) at 19; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
15 Tr. at 34-39; Tr. (2) at 35-37; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
8 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing.  
 
           Applicant’s admitted conduct as alleged in SOR ¶¶1.a through 1.f, raises AG ¶¶ 
16(c), (d), and (e). The intentional falsification of his SF 86 raises AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
 
9 
 
 
16(e). The fact that Applicant was denied access to SCI in 2005, based upon the 
conduct that is addressed in these proceedings does not independently raise any 
disqualifying condition. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability;  
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
Much of Applicant’s conduct occurred while he was in college. The conduct in 
SOR ¶¶1.a through 1.e occurred in 2000, or earlier. The most recent conduct alleged 
was the unlawful downloading of copyrighted material as alleged in SOR ¶1.f, which 
ended in 2004. Applicant has made many positive changes in his life since those times. 
His wife is a stabilizing influence and he is a new father. They have established roots by 
buying a house about five years ago. He has disassociated himself from the negative 
influences in his life. AG ¶¶ 16(c), (d), (e), and (g) are raised for those allegations.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant falsified his SF 86 in 2002, by minimizing the number of times he used 
marijuana, and when he used it last. He provided additional information to his 
background investigator several months later when he was questioned about his drug 
use. He provided all the information that formed the basis for the allegations in the SOR 
after the polygrapher told him that he failed the polygraph. Applicant provided additional 
information about his marijuana use in his 2005 SF 86. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (e) are partially 
applicable because of those actions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant engaged in reprehensible 
conduct when he was younger. Along with other misconduct, he stole from his 
employer, manipulated his employer’s timekeeping equipment, vandalized public 
restrooms, provided urine samples to a co-worker so that her husband could pass a 
drug test, and killed cats by injecting them with bleach. Applicant’s actions with the cats 
carries such a stigma that it is difficult to say when it would no longer serve as a basis 
for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. His misconduct goes to the heart of his 
trustworthiness. He receives credit for the positive changes in his life discussed above. 
However, Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86. He was untruthful in his response to 
Interrogatories, in his Answer to the SOR, and during both hearings. Without total 
candor, I am unable to find that he has been rehabilitated or that there is little likelihood 
of continuation or recurrence of his misconduct. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his Personal 
Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
