 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 06-19990
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
On May 26, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86)
to request a security clearance for his employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant1
Applicant’s request. On August 28, 2007, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F (financial considerations) and2
Guideline E (personal conduct).
 Authorized by the Directive, at E3.1.17.3
2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 13, 2007, and I scheduled a hearing to be held on
December 11, 2007. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented
seven exhibits (Gx. 1 - 7). Applicant testified in his own behalf. DOHA received the
transcript (Tr.) on December 19, 2007. I left the record open until December 21, 2007,
to allow Applicant to make a post-hearing submission (Tr., 96 - 97); however, nothing
further was submitted. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant had filed
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on May 20, 2003; that the petition was converted
to a Chapter 7 filing on January 7, 2005; and that the Chapter 7 case was dismissed on
February 7, 2005. The government further alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.n that,
between February 2002 and June 2005, he owed about $30,000 in delinquent accounts
that have been charged off as business losses, referred to collection agencies, or
enforced through judgments and garnishments. Applicant denied these allegations, but
also asserted that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c have been paid by wage
garnishments.
During cross-examination of the Applicant, Department Counsel moved to amend
the SOR to conform to the information produced at hearing.  Applicant did not object3
and I granted the motion. (Tr., 52 - 54, 79 - 80) Accordingly, I amended the SOR to add
a new allegation as SOR ¶ 1.o the following:
You are indebted to Greentree/Eastrock Financial in the approximate
amount of $38,614 for a second home mortgage. You did not make
payments on that second mortgage for approximately two years. Your
second mortgage was foreclosed on in August 2007.
Applicant admitted the allegation. (Tr., 80)
Under Guideline E, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant
deliberately falsified his response to DOHA interrogatories in November 2006 by
asserting his Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged, and by providing a document in
support of his response, when he knew the case had, in fact, been dismissed. In SOR
2.b, the government alleged Applicant deliberately falsified his response to a second set
of DOHA interrogatories in February 2007 when he again asserted his bankruptcy had
been discharged, and again provided a document in support of his response. Applicant
denied both allegations, asserting he thought “discharged” and “dismissed” meant the
same thing in bankruptcy. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.
 The order stated that it applied to Applicant only.4
3
Applicant is 42 years old and, since April 2004, has worked for a defense
contractor as a senior designer. He generates, modifies, and maintains shipboard
systems drawings and blueprints using computer-aided drawing (CAD) at a shipyard.
He also served in the U.S. Navy Reserve from 1984 until 1995, achieving the rank of
petty officer second class (paygrade E-5). Applicant has held a security clearance either
through his civilian work or through his military service since about 1984.
Applicant has been married since 1997, and has two children, ages 14 and 12. A
previous marriage ended in divorce in 1997 after ten years. He has two children from
that marriage, ages 19 and 16, for whom he was ordered to pay monthly support as a
term of the divorce decree. At one point, his pay was garnished to satisfy a $1,192
arrearage. That debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) was satisfied by 1999, before Applicant was able to
buy a house. He has not been behind on his child support payments since 1999.
Applicant and his wife began experiencing financial problems in 2002, when they
were both unemployed between May and September of that year. Since then there
have been no periods of unemployment. Nonetheless, they accrued several delinquent
debts totaling about $30,000. 
In July 2005, Applicant failed to pay $507 on a jewelry store account, the original
balance of which was about $800. The debt was enforced through a civil judgment
(SOR ¶ 1.b) and satisfied in October or November 2005. (Tr., 85 - 86; Gx. 2) The
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e - 1.I represent $432 in unpaid medical bills incurred for his
wife’s periodic emergency room visits for a heart condition. Applicant claimed he and his
wife have challenged these debts, but provided no supporting documentation. (Tr. 80 -
82)
Between 2002 and 2005, Applicant accrued three delinquent credit card
accounts totaling about $2,550 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.j, and 1.k). He also owes about $25,370
as a result of two car repossessions (SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m), and another $766 for an
unpaid early termination fee from a home security service (SOR ¶ 1.n).
In May 2003, Applicant and his wife, as joint debtors, filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection. In November 2004, the Chapter 13 trustee moved to dismiss
their Chapter 13 bankruptcy for failure to make payments. In January 2005, their petition
was converted to a Chapter 7 liquidation bankruptcy. On February 7, 2005, Applicant’s
role in the joint bankruptcy petition was ended by an Order of Dismissal for Failure to
Attend Meeting of Creditors.  (SOR ¶ 1.a) On May 6, 2005, Applicant’s wife received a4
Discharge of One Joint Debtor. Thereafter, the case was closed. (Gx. 4; Gx. 7)
Applicant and his wife bought a house in 1999 for $109,000. In June 2000, they
obtained a second mortgage for about $38,000 to pay for improvements to the house.
They stopped making payments on their second mortgage sometime in 2005. When
their first mortgage also became delinquent in 2007, the company holding the second
mortgage bought the first mortgage and foreclosed. Applicant and his family had to
 Directive. 6.3.5
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and6
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
4
move out of their house in November 2007, and he still owes $38,614 (SOR ¶ 1.o) for
non-payment of his second mortgage. (Tr., 36 - 52, 75 - 79; Gx. 5; Gx. 6)
In November 2006 and February 2007, Applicant responded to interrogatories
sent to him by DOHA adjudicators. In response to questions about his finances, unpaid
debts, and bankruptcy status, Applicant asserted most of his debts had been
discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2005. In support of his claim of
discharge, Applicant provided in each notarized response to interrogatories a copy of a
Discharge of One Joint Debtor, which contained his name as the debtor whose
obligations were to be liquidated. However, a comparison of the docket histories
contained Gx. 2 and Gx. 7, a close examination of the document proffered by Applicant
in his interrogatory responses, and acceptance of the common sense notion that it
makes no sense for the courts to issue a separate discharge for each joint debtor, all
lead to one conclusion – Applicant altered the document he submitted by substituting
his name where his wife’s had been on the authentic discharge order. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and
2.b) Applicant insists the document is as he received it from the court. He also has
implied his wife, who notarized his signature on his answer to the SOR and on his
second response to interrogatories, may have had something to do with how the
document appears. (Tr. 93 - 96)
After expenses each month, Applicant estimates he has about $1,000 left over
from the $3,700 net monthly income he and his wife bring home. However, the
expenses he is paying do not include any payments to the debts listed in the SOR. (Tr.,
85 - 90) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or6
mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations), at AG ¶ 18, and
Guideline E (personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
5
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a8
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations. 
Under Guideline F, “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.” (AG ¶ 18) The government presented sufficient information to support
the allegations of a failed bankruptcy petition in 2005 (SOR 1.a), and multiple delinquent
debts totaling more than $30,000 (SOR 1.b - 1.n). The government also supported its
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.o that Applicant owes more than $38,000 after his mortgage was
foreclosed last year. While the information presented supports Applicant’s contentions
that the debts in SOR 1.b and 1.c have been paid, available information shows
Applicant has had significant debts since 2002, that he is unwilling to pay or resolve
through other means, such as bankruptcy. Accordingly, the record requires
consideration of AG ¶¶ 19(a) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) and 19(c)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts).
By contrast, the record does not support consideration of any of the Guideline F
mitigating conditions listed at AG 20. His 2007 mortgage foreclosure precludes a finding
his financial problems are not recent, and he presented no information to show his
debts will not recur or do not reflect adversely on his suitability for access to classified
information. (AG 21(a)) Applicant claims his financial problems stemmed from periods of
 See footnote 6, supra.10
6
unemployment, but those events occurred five years ago, and Applicant has not acted
responsibly to manage his finances. (AG 21(b)) For example, he had an opportunity to
have his debts discharged in bankruptcy but lost that opportunity by failing to participate
in the process as required. Further, he has not acted in good faith to pay or otherwise
resolve his debts (AG 21(d), and he has not sought help for his financial problems from
a credit counseling service or other appropriate entity (AG 21(c)). On balance, Applicant
has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the government’s information.
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in AG ¶
15, is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” The
government’s information supports the SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b allegations that Applicant
deliberately falsified his responses to government questions about his finances.
Applicant deliberately and unabashedly tried to mislead and deceive the government
when he claimed his debts had been discharged in bankruptcy and when he provided
altered documents in support of his false statements. Applicant’s conduct falls squarely
within AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority,
or other official government representative), and is directly contrary to the basic tenets
of the industrial security program, which relies on the candor and integrity of persons to
whom access is granted. Even allowing for the possibility his wife was involved in
altering the document, Applicant is responsible for the statements and representations
he makes to the government.
I have also reviewed the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 17. The record does
not warrant consideration of any of them. Accordingly, Applicant has failed to mitigate
the security concerns about his personal conduct.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guidelines F and E. I have also
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG
2(a).  Applicant is 42 years old and responsible for supporting his wife and children.10
Apart from a brief period five years ago, he has been gainfully employed. However, the
seriousness of his conduct cannot be overstated. Nor is there any information to
suggest he is rehabilitated and unlikely to engage in such falsifications in the future, as
he persisted in his denials of falsification at hearing. As for his finances, Applicant has
not shown he has any inclination to properly manage his money. Significant doubts
persist about whether Applicant is suitable for continued access to classified
 See footnote 9, supra. 11
7
information. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national interest.  11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
