 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-10539 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel, 
James Duffy, Esquire, Assistant Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns arising from 
his parents’ dual citizenship with Afghanistan and the United States, and his father’s 
important position in the Afghani government. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (eQIP)1 on August 3, 
2005. On August 29, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence).2  
1  Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing. 
 
2  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 4, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on November 28, 2007. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 5, 2007, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 9, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were received without objection. GE 3 was not admitted, but considered for 
administrative notice purposes only.3 Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 17, 
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 4, 2007, Applicant admitted all SOR 
allegations with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old consultant for a federal contractor. He has never been 
married and has no children. His paternal and maternal grandparents and his parents 
were born and raised in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan). His paternal 
grandparents immigrated to the United States around 1983 (Tr. 84). His grandfather had 
an import and export business in Afghanistan. His grandmother was a homemaker. 
Both of them passed away in the United States and are buried in a multi-family 
cemetery plot in the United States (Tr. 32). Applicant, his parents, brother, and other 
relatives have space reserved for them in the family cemetery plot, and have expressed 
their desire to be buried in the United States. His maternal grandfather died in 
Afghanistan, and his maternal grandmother immigrated to the United States around 
1988. She has been a homemaker all her life.  
 
Applicant’s father is 60 years old and his mother is 45 years old. From 1978 to 
1987, his father held a supervisory position in an important agency of the government of 
Afghanistan (Tr. 85). Around 1987, the Taliban came to power in Afghanistan. Afraid of 
the new regime, his parents immigrated first to India for a short period of time, and then 
to France where they lived from 1988 to 1992. In 1992, they immigrated and settled in 
the United States. Applicant’s father was unemployed from 1992 to 2000. Around 2000, 
his father began working as a language consultant and taught French and Farsi Dari 
(Afghanistan’s Persian dialect). Applicant’s parents became naturalized U.S. citizens in 
December 2000. Applicant and his brother were minors and acquired U.S. citizenship at 
 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3  Department Counsel’s November 19, 2007 motion asked that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts concerning the government of Afghanistan (Tr. 92-93). The request and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were considered and included in the record as GE 3 for 
Identification. 
 
 
3 
 
 
the same time. His parents and brother are dual citizens of Afghanistan and the United 
States. 
 
After September 11, 2001, Applicant’s father was contacted by old friends and 
co-workers within the government of Afghanistan and he began working for the Afghani 
government against the Taliban (Tr. 89). Since 2003, Applicant’s father has been 
working in an important position for the government of Afghanistan. Applicant testified 
his parents own no property outside of the United States. He claimed all of their 
investments and property is located in the United States (Tr. 32). Their permanent 
residence is in the United States; however, they currently live in a European country 
due to his father’s job. Applicant’s father travels at least once a year to Afghanistan and 
has frequent contact with important people within the Afghani government. 
 
Applicant’s father was educated in France where he received a juris doctor and a 
doctorate degree (Tr. 33). Applicant testified his father’s job is dangerous and he is 
placing his life at risk by working for the Afghani government. He does it because he 
feels obligated to help fight terror and the Taliban. He believes his father would never 
compromise the United States because he considers himself a U.S. citizen, has stated 
his intention to resign his job for the government of Afghanistan if he is asked to 
renounce his U.S. citizenship, and he plans to retire in the United States. Applicant 
further believes his father would never compromise his position.  
 
Applicant immigrated with his parents to the United States at age nine. 
Thereafter, he was raised and educated in the United States. Although Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen when his parents were naturalized, he formally 
applied for his U.S. citizenship as soon as be became of legal age (Tr. 90). In May 
2005, he received a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and economics. He was 
hired by a federal contractor in August 2005, and had interim access to classified 
information until August 2006 (Tr. 7-8). He enrolled in law school during the fall of 2007, 
and is currently working part-time for another defense contractor (Tr. 6).  
 
Applicant’s younger brother is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Afghanistan. He lived with his parents in Europe from 2003 until the fall of 2007 when 
he started college in the United States. He has possession of both countries’ passports 
(Tr. 63-64).  
 
Applicant has a large extended family – his father has eight siblings and his 
mother has 12 siblings, all of whom were born and raised in Afghanistan (Tr. 65-76). 
However, Applicant testified he no longer has relatives living in Afghanistan. All of his 
relatives immigrated either to France or the United States. Applicant has three uncles 
and one aunt whom have been living in France for approximately 20 years. Two of his 
uncles became naturalized French citizens, and relinquished their Afghani citizenship in 
the process. One is a U.S. citizen living in France. His relatives living in France were 
educated there, and have families and own businesses in France. The rest of 
Applicant’s relatives are residents of the United States. It is not clear whether all of his 
parent’s siblings living in the United States are naturalized U.S. citizens; however, 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant believes most of them are citizens or are in the process of applying for U.S. 
citizenship. Applicant has frequent contact with his relatives in the United States. 
 
Applicant maintains casual contact with his relatives in France and visits them 
approximately once a year. He visits relatives in France when he visits his parents in 
Europe, and during special occasions such as his cousin’s wedding in 2005. Applicant 
claimed he does not contact his relatives in France telephonically or by letter. Most of 
his contacts with them are through Internet social networking websites (Tr. 67). One of 
Applicant’s uncles living in France owns real estate property in the United States. 
Applicant manages his uncle’s real estate property in the United States. He and his 
uncle opened a joint U.S. bank account to facilitate his managing his  uncle’s property 
(GE 2).  
 
Applicant has very strong ties of affection and obligation towards his parents (Tr. 
49). He and his brother visit them two to three times a year, usually during the 
Christmas and summer holidays. Applicant and his mother opened a joint account in the 
United States. She deposits money in the account so that Applicant can pay for his and 
his brother’s education, living expenses, and for him to manage his parent’s home (GE 
2). 
 
During May-July 2005, Applicant traveled with his father to Afghanistan and 
stayed there for two weeks. His father wanted Applicant to see first hand the living 
conditions in Afghanistan, and to impress on him how nice it is to live in the United 
States (Tr. 79). For security reasons, whenever Applicant’s father travels to Afghanistan 
he travels anonymously, without official escort or protocol (Tr. 81). After visiting other 
countries, Applicant believes the United States offers the best opportunities for a first 
generation immigrant. He considers the United States the best place in the world to live 
(Tr. 37). 
 
Applicant believes his relationship with his parents should not raise a concern for 
several reasons; Afghanistan and the United States have similar interests and are 
fighting the war on terror and drugs; his father believes in democracy, free markets, and 
civil liberties (Tr. 61); his father is doing all he can to help the people of Afghanistan fight 
terror and the war on drugs; and Afghanistan’s economic and industrial situation would 
not allow the country to use any information Applicant could acquire. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Afghanistan was controlled by 
Islamic extremists (the Taliban) from around 1990 to 2001. The Taliban committed 
serious human rights violations and atrocities against minority populations and women, 
and provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden, Al-Qa’ida, and other terrorist 
organizations. A new democratic government took power in 2004, assisted by the 
United States and an International coalition. Despite the new democratic government, 
Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor because of the continuing 
insurgency and the weakness of the central government. The government has not been 
able to develop and sustain the rule of law within its borders. This has allowed non-state 
actors, hostile states, terrorist organizations, and insurgents to continue to operate in 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Afghanistan. International terrorist groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as 
capable state intelligence services. These actions endanger the international community 
and its citizens, and threaten U.S. national security. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.4 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”5 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
4  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
5  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is: “foreign contacts and interests 
may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial 
interests, he or she may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” AG ¶ 6. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two disqualifying conditions are particularly relevant to this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and, 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.6  
6  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Applicant’s father and mother were born and raised in Afghanistan, and they 
continue to be citizens of that country. Moreover, from 1978 to 1987, Applicant’s father 
worked for the government of Afghanistan in an important position. Since 2003, 
Applicant’s father has been working again for the government of Afghanistan in another 
important position. He and his wife travel at least once a year to Afghanistan. Applicant 
has strong ties of affection and/or obligation with his parents. He has frequent contacts 
with and visits his parents at least twice a year. Applicant’s strong ties of affection 
and/or obligation with his parents potentially create a risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because there is the possibility that Afghan terrorist groups, 
insurgents, and hostile states working within Afghanistan may exploit the opportunity to 
obtain intelligence, classified, or economic information about the United States.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with his parents also create a potential conflict of interest 
because his relationship is sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire 
to help his parents or the government of Afghanistan by providing sensitive or classified 
information.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government. 
 
  There are six Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 that are 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions. After considering the totality of 
the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I conclude that none of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. Applicant has a very close relationship of affection and/or 
obligation with his parents. From 1978 to 1987, his father worked in an important 
position for the government of Afghanistan. In 2001, he again began working for the 
government of Afghanistan. Since 2003, he has held an important position within the 
Afghani government. Applicant’s parents live in Europe, but they travel to Afghanistan 
as part of his government-related job. Considering Afghanistan’s government instability, 
his father’s position in the Afghani government, and the different terrorist organizations 
working within Afghanistan, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show he would not be 
placed on a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States. Mitigating 
conditions AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) do not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. Applicant has been in the United States since age 
nine and he was educated in the United States. He formally applied to become a 
naturalized U.S. citizen as soon as he reached legal age. He has no financial, business, 
or property interests in Afghanistan. He has been to Afghanistan only once in his life, to 
learn first-hand about how people in Afghanistan live and to understand how good are 
the living conditions and opportunities in the United States. Most of Applicant’s relatives 
live in France or in the United States.  
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
Notwithstanding, Applicant has a very close relationship of affection and/or 
obligation with his parents. His father works in an important position for the government 
of Afghanistan and he may be placed in a position of having to choose between his 
affection and loyalty to his parents and his loyalty to the United States. Under the 
circumstances of this case, Applicant’s mitigating information is insufficient to convince 
me that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States’ interest. 
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Afghanistan’s form of government.7 Afghanistan is an Islamic republic with 
a recently established and weak democratic government. Its government has a poor 
record of protecting human rights and has been unable to provide good governance and 
to sustain the rule of law within its borders. Terrorist groups, non-state actors, and 
hostile states conduct effective intelligence activities and operate within its borders. 
Their actions threaten the international community and its citizens and threaten the 
national security of the United States.  
 
Considering the totality of the circumstances, the evidence shows it is likely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
parents and the interests of the United States.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been in the United 
States for 15 years and a naturalized U.S. citizen for around seven years. He was 
educated in the United States and his grandparents lived in the United States for 
 7  The focus of the analysis is primarily on its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States. Terrorism and crime are also factors to be 
considered.  
 
 
9 
 
 
approximately 25 years. His parents are dual citizens of the United States and 
Afghanistan. He has no relatives living in Afghanistan. His parents own property only in 
the United States and they intend to retire in the United States. Applicant worked for two 
defense contractors and had interim access to classified information at the secret level 
for one year. There is no evidence that Applicant has ever compromised classified 
information or that he has failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the 
protection of classified information. 
 
After carefully considering Applicant’s circumstances, including his father’s 
important position with the Afghani government, I conclude he is in a position where he 
may be induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
that is not in U.S. interests, or he may be vulnerable to pressure or coercion by his 
father, the government of Afghanistan, or one of the many terrorist organization 
operating in Afghanistan. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns arising from his foreign influence security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
