                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 06-16801 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2005, Applicant submitted a Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as Security Clearance Application (SF 
86).1 On August 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,2 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 4. There is an allegation of falsification of the 2005 SF 86.   
 
2GE 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Aug. 28, 2007). Item I is the source for the facts in 
the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
, 2008. 
                                                          
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.4 A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated October 24, 2007, was provided to him, and he was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation.5 Applicant provided a letter with two enclosures. Applicant’s submission 
was received at DOHA on December 18, 2007. The case was assigned to me on 
January 31
 
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a to 1.g in his response to the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 26 years old (GE 4). He married and subsequently filed for divorce in 
November 2003 (GE 4; GE 5 at 8).  On August 11, 1999, he joined the Army (GE 6). He 
served on active duty for 3 ½ years (GE 6). He also served the last three years working 
for a defense contractor in Iraq.   
 
 On May 15, 2003, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) imposed 
under Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 815, for failing to 
obey a lawful order by driving on April 7, 2002, while his driving privileges were 
suspended. He received extra duty for three days (suspended). See Response to SOR 
¶ 1.a.   
 
3On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
4GE 3 (Applicant’s response to SOR) is not dated or signed. Applicant wrote “I admit” and initialed 
next to each of SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g. The third page of the SOR is not part of GE 3. He signed a receipt for 
the SOR on Sep. 16, 2007 (GE 2).  
 
5Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Oct. 29, 2007; 
however, Applicant’s receipt is signed, but not dated. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that 
he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
 On March 24, 2003, Applicant received NJP for failure to report for duty on 
February 12, 2003. He received forfeiture of $357, reduction to Private First Class, as 
well as restriction and extra duty for 14 days. See Response to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 On February 20, 2003, and on June 24, 2003, Applicant provided urine samples, 
which subsequently tested positive for the presence of the marijuana metabolite.  He 
was also absent from his place of duty from May 12, 2003 until June 22, 2003 (GE 6, 
Block 29).    
 
 His charges of twice using marijuana, and absence from his place of duty were 
subsequently referred to a special court-martial. He was sentenced to 45 days’ 
confinement (GE 5 at 6).6  However, the command chose to accept Applicant’s request 
for a discharge in lieu of courts-martial under Chapter 10, Army Regulation 635-200 (GE 
6). His discharge certificate, dated July 29, 2003, characterized his service as Other 
Than Honorable (GE 6).  See Response to SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.e. 
 
 In his sworn response to interrogatories, Applicant said he only used marijuana 
twice in 2003 and was caught both times on urinalysis tests (GE 5 at 2, 4). He claimed 
his defense counsel said after he served his confinement his record would be expunged 
(GE 5 at 7).  He did not provide a statement from his defense counsel.7   
 
Falsification of SF 86 
    
 Applicant’s SF 86, executed on November 14, 2005, asked three questions that 
are relevant to the issue of whether Applicant falsified his SF 86: 
 
Section 19: Your Military Record  Have you ever received other than an 
honorable discharge from the military? 
 
Section 23: Your Police Record For this item, report information 
regardless of whether the record in your case has been ‘sealed’ or 
otherwise stricken from the court record. The single exception to this 
requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled 
Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under 
the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.   
 
*  *  * 
d. Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related 
to alcohol or drugs?8 
6 He said he served 45 days of confinement; however, his confinement is not reflected on his DD 
Form 214 (GE 6). 
 
7 Applicant’s defense counsel probably advised Applicant that the charges would be dismissed by 
the convening authority when the Chapter 10 was approved, and therefore, he would not have a 
conviction.  A competent defense counsel would not have advised Applicant that there would not be a 
record of the offenses, or that his record concerning these offenses would be expunged. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity The following 
questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. You are 
required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your failure to do 
so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision grounds for an 
adverse employment decision or action against you, but neither your 
truthful responses nor information derived from your responses will be 
used as evidence against you in any subsequent criminal proceedings.  
 
a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have 
you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana . . . ? 
 
Applicant answered, “No” to these three questions. 
 
In his response to interrogatories, Appellant said, “I did not answer the question 
truthfully because I no longer use illegal drugs and I did not want my company to fire me 
for a mistake I already paid for” (GE 5 at 7). He said he did not provide accurate 
information about his characterization of service because he applied to have his 
discharge upgraded, and a Veterans Administration representative told him that his 
discharge would be upgraded before his security clearance was processed (GE 5 at 7). 
In response to the FORM, Applicant briefly explained his answers to these three 
questions as follows: 
 
As the documents show [I] have admitted to the findings that have been 
brought out concerning my violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
and of presenting false information in my application for employment with 
my present employer.  My reason, though not defensible, is that I needed 
to turn my life around and demonstrate that I could render honorable 
service to my country. I have served for over three years here in Iraq 
supporting our military and all of my evaluations have been outstanding.  
My supervisors have given their support of me and have submitted written 
documentation of their trust and confidence in me and my dedication to 
my country and job. 
 
Applicant made the false statements “to secure a job to turn around [his] life.” He 
described his offenses on active duty as due to immaturity.  He promised not to violate 
the trust he received from his employer. 
 
His employer and a senior government employee provided letters lauding 
Applicant’s stellar performance in Iraq. Applicant was responsible for personnel actions 
and records in Iraq. Applicant is dependable, loyal, honest, professional, diligent and 
trustworthy. Applicant loves his country, family and supporting our troops.  
    
 
 
8 In response to Section 23 of his SF 86, he said he received a court-martial for AWOL (GE 4 at 
23). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”9 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).10 
9 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
10 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant deliberately provided false information on his 2005 SF 86. His rationale 
for providing false statements on his SF 86 was to secure employment with a 
government contractor. He also wanted to obtain a security clearance. His attempt to 
obtain these government benefits under false pretenses requires application of AG ¶¶ 
16 (a) and 16(b). 
 
In regard to Applicant’s 2003 misconduct while on active duty in the Army, AG ¶ 
16(d)(3) potentially applies.  AG ¶ 16(d)(3) provides: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
*  *  * 
 
(3) a pattern of . . .  rule violations. 
 
In regard to the 2003 offenses of using marijuana twice, being absent from his 
place of duty, failure to report for duty, and disobeying an order, the drug allegations are 
more appropriately alleged under Guideline H (drug involvement), and all of the UCMJ 
violations are more appropriately alleged under Guideline J (criminal conduct) because 
all violations of UCMJ punitive articles are criminal offenses.   
 
Moreover, the most serious UCMJ offenses, using marijuana twice and absent 
from place of duty over 30 days are encompassed in the Other Than Honorable 
discharge issued pursuant to Army Regulation 635-200, Chapter 10. See SOR ¶ 1.c.  
To eliminate the duplication, I find for Applicant under Guideline E for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d, and 1.e.  However, I specifically find that AG ¶ 16(d)(3) applies with respect to SOR 
¶ 1.c.   
  
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant’s falsification of his 
SF 86 on November 14, 2005, is recent.11 He did not promptly inform the government of 
the falsification. He attempted to mislead a security investigation. He did not receive 
counseling designed to improve his conduct.  Applicant’s claim that his defense counsel 
told him his record would be expunged is not credible. No one advised him to falsify his 
SF 86. He admitted the false statement at issue, and the falsification of his SF 86 is 
substantiated. His statement that he changed does not convince me that similar 
misbehavior is unlikely to recur. The falsification of his SF 86 casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to tell the truth in 2005 when 
he thought that he would receive an advantage or benefit by falsification of his SF 86.  
His current service in Iraq is an important positive step, but it is not enough to mitigate 
his conduct. 
11 Arguably, AG ¶ 16(d)(3) does not apply because the conduct in SOR ¶ 1.c could have been 
alleged under a different guideline.  Moreover, the conduct in SOR ¶ 1.c is partially mitigated under AG ¶ 
16(c) because it happened over four years ago under unique conditions (while Applicant was on active 
duty), and as such the conduct is unlikely to recur. However, the conduct in SOR ¶ 1.c cannot be 
considered piecemeal. The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a 
reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant’s conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When the active duty 
misconduct is considered in connection with the 2005 falsification of his SF 86, the personal conduct in 
SOR ¶ 1.c cannot be mitigated under AG ¶ 16(c). The misconduct on active duty continues to cast doubt 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001 
by falsifying three answers on his 2005 SF 86. I find that he deliberately falsified his 
2005 SF 86.   
 
For a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to occur, the falsification must be material. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
(1995): as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of 
influencing, the decision making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States 
v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004).    
 
  If Applicant had provided accurate answers on his SF 86, his accurate answers 
are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His two uses 
of marijuana, absence from his unit in excess of thirty days, and Other Than Honorable 
discharge received in lieu of courts-martial are important derogatory information that 
occurred about 30 months before he signed his SF 86. The 2003 misconduct overall is 
sufficiently recent (at the time he signed his 2005 SF 86) and serious12 to jeopardize 
approval of his security clearance. Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is 
a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes confinement for five 
years and a $10,000 fine). Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply because Applicant 
violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001.   
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
12 In Applicant’s case, this includes aspects such as, the seriousness of the misconduct, and the 
number of violations of the law, regardless of whether the misconduct resulted in an arrest or conviction. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) – 31(c) do not apply. Applicant’s false statement occurred on his 
2005 SF 86, which is somewhat recent. It casts doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. He was not pressured or coerced into making his 
false statements on his 2005 SF 86.  He admitted making the false statements, and the 
offense is substantiated.  
 
AG ¶ 31(d) partially applies. There is some evidence of successful rehabilitation, 
including the passage of about 30 months since he completed his 2005 SF 86 without 
recurrence of criminal activity. He expressed his remorse. He has received some job 
training, and has an outstanding employment record serving in Iraq. However, his post-
offense behavior is insufficient to mitigate the very serious misconduct in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
Eventually Applicant disclosed his falsification of his 2005 SF 86 to security 
officials. His recognition of his misconduct and promise to refrain from future misconduct 
weighs in his favor. His 2003 misconduct on active duty occurred so long ago that it 
would be mitigated (in February 2008), but for the 2005 falsification of his SF 86. He 
provided evidence of remorse, or regret concerning his misconduct. He was 
embarrassed by his misconduct, and he recognized the damage his misconduct will 
cause his reputation. His record of good employment weighs in his favor. These factors 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
  The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. His  
falsification of his 2005 SF 86 and his 2003 misconduct on active duty were 
knowledgeable and voluntary. His misconduct occurred in 2003 and 2005, and is 
therefore not isolated. He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. 
Criminal misbehavior is not prudent or responsible. His falsification of his 2005 SF 86 is 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
particularly aggravating, and weighs heavily against granting or continuing his security 
clearance. He did not receive counseling or therapy, and may not have a clear 
understanding about how to avoid problematic situations and why he engaged in the 
misconduct. I have persistent and serious doubts about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
  His criminal misconduct calls into question his current ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct13 
and criminal conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”14 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.b: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f to 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 Even if I had found “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.c because the conduct could have 
been alleged more appropriately under a different guideline, I still would have found against Applicant 
under the Guideline E for SOR ¶¶ 1.f to 1.h and under the whole person concept. 
  
14See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
