                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 06-11517 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
BRAEMAN, Kathryn M., Administrative Judge: 
 
History of the Case 
 
            The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant on April 27, 2007. The SOR detailed reasons why the 
Government could not make the preliminary positive finding that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.1 
The SOR alleged specific concerns over Financial Considerations (Guideline F) in 
paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct (Guideline J) in paragraph 2, and Personal Conduct 
(Guideline E) in paragraph 3.  These security issues were alleged based on the revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines2 issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the 
1 This procedure is required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992 (Directive), as amended and revised.   
 
2 A copy of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines was sent with his SOR and provided again by 
Department Counsel on July 30, 2007.  While he received it, he did not bring a copy with him, so he was 
given time before the hearing proceeded to review it.  (TR 5, 13) 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Department of Defense, to be effective September 1, 2006.  Applicant responded to 
these SOR allegations in a notarized Answer of July 7, 2007, where he admitted in part 
and denied in part various allegations, and requested a hearing.   On August 31, 2007, 
Department Counsel filed a Motion to Amend the SOR to add numerous additional 
allegations to paragraph 2 (2.f. through 2.m.)  At the hearing Applicant stated he had no 
objection to the Motion to Amend; consequently, I granted the Motion to Amend.   (TR 
12)  While Applicant paid some of the delinquent debts and provided evidence on his 
criminal and personal conduct, he was unable to document efforts to establish a plan to 
resolve the remaining debts or to demonstrate a path to rehabilitation.  Consequently, 
clearance is denied. 
 
            Department Counsel on August 3, 2007, submitted a Ready to Proceed notice.  
Subsequently the case was assigned to me on August 3, 2007.  A Notice of Hearing 
issued on August 16, 2007, set the matter for September 25, 2007. 
 
            At the hearing Department Counsel offered thirteen documents (Exhibits 1-13) 
that were admitted into evidence.  In response to Applicant’s objection on the grounds 
of inaccuracy, part of Exhibit 2 was redacted before it was admitted.  (TR 17-26)  
Exhibits 3 and 4 were admitted over his objection; however, he was allowed additional 
time to submit information to clarify the issues he raised. (TR 28-31)  Applicant offered 
no documents, but testified himself.  At his request, and as the Department Counsel did 
not object, we left the record open until October 9, 2007, in order for him to submit 
supplemental information.  (TR 41, 72-73, 110-112)  However, he submitted no 
additional evidence, so the record closed on October 9, 2007.  The transcript (TR) was 
received on October 3, 2007. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
            After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon 
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following Findings of Fact: 
 
            Applicant is 38 years old and has worked in a technical job for a defense 
contractor for eight years, from 1999 to the present. He was recently promoted 
to supervisor in 2005.  While he has been in a job where he has previously not needed 
a security clearance, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) to 
obtain a security clearance in April 2004. (Exhibit 1; TR 4-7; 54-55)    
 
Applicant completed the 11th grade.  He married in May 1998.  (Exhibit 1; TR 4) 
 After he had marital difficulties, they separated in 2002.  Initially, he had custody of their 
five children ages 11 to 19; but later his wife got custody.  He also has two other 
children, one is a step-child.  (TR 45-47; 51-52) 
 
Finances, Criminal Conduct, Personal Conduct 
 
            Applicant provided no adverse information on his SF 86 concerning his 
delinquent debts of approximately $9,000 to fifteen creditors and his criminal record.  
(Exhibits 2 -13) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
            Applicant denied allegation 1.a. as he resolved the $595 debt to Creditor #1 
when his pay was garnished for a judgment entered against him for damages to a rental 
house.  (Answer, TR 41; 55-59) 
 
Applicant denied allegation 1.b. to Creditor #2, but stated his pay was being 
garnished to resolve this $1,000 judgment to a city for a utility debt.  (Answer, TR 59-61) 
 
Applicant admitted debts to creditors in allegations 1.c. to 1.j.  (Answer) 
 
Applicant denied allegation 1.k. for $148. At his hearing he admitted he owed the 
creditor $148, but had not paid due to financial problems.  He denied 1.l. and 1.n., as he 
does not know who those creditors are.  He denied 1.m. because he was entitled to his 
unemployment compensation.  He admitted 1.o.  (Answer, TR 62-67) 
 
            His marital difficulties in 2001 and other issues led to his financial problems and 
his criminal conduct.  He was assaulted by a neighbor in 2000 or 2001;  however, the 
neighbor was found not guilty.  Then Applicant was liable for hospital bills he could not 
pay.  (TR 42-45; 82)  Applicant has not sought any financial counseling, but he intends 
to pay his bills when he can afford to do so.  Currently, he pays a substantial amount of 
money for child support and supports three households, so has no discretionary money 
left to pay any delinquent debts. (TR 52-53; 68-72) 
 
            Applicant admitted the criminal conduct alleged in 2.a. to 2.e.  (Answer; TR 75-
77; 89-95; 100) At the hearing Applicant admitted allegations 2.f. (a misdemeanor 
trespassing offense), 2.g. (open container of alcohol while driving), 2.h. (assault and 
battery on a family member), 2.i. (failure to obey a court order to complete a domestic 
violence prevention program), 2.j. (driving with no liability insurance), 2.k. (habitual 
offender), 2.l. (threatening bodily harm, charge dismissed), and 2.m. (loud music – 
vehicle).   (TR 78-88)  Later, Applicant completed the domestic violence prevention 
program.  (TR 84-85) 
 
Applicant did not fully understand the form or the security clearance process and 
could not remember dates.  He denied allegations 3.a. as he did not have a felony 
conviction, 3.b. as he was trying to “block it out” and forget the past arrests, and 3.c., 
but he admitted allegation 3.d. that he falsified his SF 86 by not revealing his financial 
delinquencies over 90 days late.  (Answer; TR 96-99; 101-106)  He forgot a lot of the 
details. No one in is security office explained the significance of the form.  His word is 
his bond.  He did not intend to falsify his SF 86. (TR 106-110) 
 
Applicant now has a stable job and a good relationship with his fiancé.  Since he 
has been with her for the past five years he has straightened out his life. He and she are 
working together to study for and pass the GED because he wants to advance himself 
at work.  Although he was labeled a habitual offender in 1996, and lost his driver’s 
license, he got his license back recently as his company paid his past traffic fines.  (TR 
48-49; 95-96) 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Policies 
 
            Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider in 
evaluating an individual's security eligibility which are divided into conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying and conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns.  In deciding whether to grant or continue an individual's access to 
classified information, the mere presence or absence of any adjudication policy 
condition is not decisive.   
 
            Based on a consideration of the evidence as a whole in evaluating this case, I 
weighed the relevant Revised Adjudication Guidelines, and determined the following 
security concern was relevant to my determination: 
 
Guideline F:  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern caused by financial problems is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, clack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial 
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
            The responsibility for producing evidence initially falls on the Government to 
demonstrate that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
applicant's access to classified information. Then the applicant may present evidence to 
refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate in order to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government, and to demonstrate persuasively that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue the clearance.  Under the provisions of Executive 
Order 10865, as amended, and the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an 
applicant's security clearance may be made only after an affirmative finding that to do 
so is clearly consistent with the national interest. In reaching the fair and impartial 
overall common sense determination, the Administrative Judge may draw only those 
inferences and conclusions that have a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of 
record.   
 
            Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides industrial security 
clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” The decision to deny an 
individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the allegiance, 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
loyalty, and patriotism of an applicant.3 It is merely an indication that the applicant has 
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a security clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
      
            The government provided substantial evidence of Applicant’s financial problems 
reflecting debts of approximately $9,000 to fifteen creditors for two judgments and other 
debts.   Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition, AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. His financial problems are sufficiently significant to raise 
security concerns. 
 
            With the government’s case initially established, the burden shifted to Applicant 
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case 
against him.  
 
            Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  3 Executive Order No. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
 
            AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies4 because his financial problems “occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur,” however his continuing financial 
problems “cast doubt on [his] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He 
fell behind on his bills because of domestic turbulence and his requirement to provide 
support for children in three households.  He, however, did not provide any evidence 
that he is now paying the bills on time.  He does not receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because he will continue to be under financial stress until he is able to develop and 
implement a plan to resolve these debts.   
 
AG ¶ 20(b) provides that security concerns may be mitigated when, “the 
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
As discussed above, Applicant’s financial issues resulted from a series of domestic 
problems. However, he failed to demonstrate how he “acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.” He will receive credit in the Formal Findings for paying some of his 
debts through garnishment of his wages.  Again, he failed to provide evidence that he 
has developed a plan to resolve his remaining delinquent debts.  He receives partial 
credit under AG ¶ 20(b).   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply as he has not met with a financial advisor and has no 
intent to do so.  Only a few SOR alleged debts are paid, and he provided no budget or 
plan to demonstrate these financial problems are under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part because he “initiated a good-faith effort” to repay some 
of the overdue creditors by wage garnishment.  While he did not fully document the 
debts paid through wage garnishment, I accept his testimony that those judgment debts 
have been or are being resolved.  However, the majority of the other debts remain 
unresolved. AG ¶ 20(e) applies in part as Applicant did “dispute the legitimacy” of some 
of the past-due debt where he testified credibly he did not know certain creditors or 
recognize certain debts.  Moreover, the government did not meet it’s initial burden on 
the debts he disputed by establishing the legitimacy of those debts.    
 
In sum, Applicant credibly described his sincere hope that he wanted to resolve 
his remaining delinquent debts. However, he provided no plan as to how he might do so 
even though he was provided an opportunity to submit post-hearing documents.  He 
receives credit in the Formal Findings for those debts he paid or is paying through 
garnishment.  He also receives credit for those debts the government failed to establish.  
 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
AG ¶ 30 describes security concerns about criminal conduct, “[c]riminal activity 
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
4 See generally ISCR 04-07360 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006) (stating partial credit was available under 
the good faith mitigating condition for debts being resolved through garnishment). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” AG ¶ 31 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in Appellant’s case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and, 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Appellant has a series of misdemeanor arrests that include both traffic offenses 
and domestic violence issues in the turbulent relationship with his wife from who is now 
separated.  Many of the cases were dismissed, or in others he paid a fine.  For his 
failure to complete his domestic violence prevention course, he served time in weekend 
confinement.  He had so many arrests and convictions that in April 2003 he was 
convicted of being a Habitual Offender and fined. 5 
 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
For many of the allegations that occurred in the 1990 to 2000 time frame and for 
minor offenses Appellant falls within AG ¶ 32(a) as so much time has elapsed since 
these misdemeanors occurred or in other cases the charges were dismissed.  Also, 
there were special mitigating and unusual circumstances in his domestic dispute with 
his wife. He eventually completed the Domestic Violence Prevention program.  To his 
credit his driver’s license is no longer suspended.  However, his conviction in 2003 for 
being a Habitual Offender, as well as his 2006 traffic offense, and a 2006 arrest for 
threatening bodily harm (a charge that was dismissed) raise a red flag of concern 
because of either recency or seriousness.6  While Applicant claims that he has 
5 In Applicant’s case, this includes aspects such as, the seriousness of the misconduct, and the 
number of violations of the law, regardless of whether the misconduct resulted in an arrest or conviction. 
6 I have determined that most of the criminal conduct is mitigated under AG ¶ 16(c) because it 
happened so long ago or under unique conditions (Applicant no longer lives in the household where the 
domestic violence occurred), and as such the conduct is unlikely to recur. However, the SOR conduct in  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
ns persist. 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
reformed his conduct that led to these criminal incidents, he provided no evidence 
outside his own testimony of his rehabilitation.  Thus, concer
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct raises security concerns stating, 
“[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.”  
 
AG ¶ 16 has two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern in 
this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
With respect to the four omissions from his SF 86, his failing to reveal his arrests 
and his financial problems is a security concern.  AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply.  
 
On the other hand, AG ¶ 17 details seven conditions that could mitigate personal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
2 cannot be considered piecemeal. The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and 
reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant’s conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When his 2003 
habitual offender misconduct is considered in connection with the 2006 offenses, the criminal conduct in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.j to 2.m cannot be mitigated under AG ¶ 16(c). The misconduct in SOR ¶¶ 2.j to 2.m continues 
to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c) and 17(f) are the mitigating conditions that partially or fully 
apply. Appellant disclosed his arrests when he was interviewed as those arrests were 
the subject of an Amended SOR. Through this disclosure, he eliminated any possibility 
that his omissions could be used to coerce or threaten him.  Given his limited education, 
his statement is credible that he did not fully understand the security form and no one in 
the security office explained the questions to him. The omissions “happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  He admits he knew about the 
financial issues, but did not know that he should provide the details.  In the future he will 
carefully review security documents before he signs them and will not omit important 
information. His omissions from his SF 86 were careless, but not deliberate. He credibly 
established that he did not intend to falsify his SF 86 by these omissions. In sum, he did 
not have any intent to deceive the government or security officials.  
 
Whole Person 
 
            I considered the specific factors listed in AG ¶ 2: “(1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence” of the conduct at issue.   
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant has been a full time worker for eight years who has advanced at work 
and has been promoted to a supervisor.  He established that an unstable domestic 
situation contributed to his financial issues and criminal conduct.  Having considered 
both the record and Applicant in light of the “whole person” concept, I conclude he is a 
sincere person.  However, he made insufficient efforts to reform his financial practices; 
and he is not yet on the road to financial recovery. While there is little potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress as he has stable employment, he has 
substantial debts and very limited resources.  In conclusion, financial issues do remain 
a security concern. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the 
facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude he failed to 
mitigate the security concerns pertaining to financial considerations. 
 
Similarly, he failed to fully establish a case of mitigation under Criminal Conduct 
as he was arrested for being a habitual offender in 2003, and his problems with arrests 
and convictions persisted into 2006. He did not show how he was been rehabilitated. 
Having reviewed the guidelines and assessed him as a “whole person” in order to 
evaluate Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests, I find 
Appellant has failed to mitigate all security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1. Guideline F:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:                                      For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:                                      For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c. to 1.k:                 Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l. to 1.m:                For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n. to 1.o:                         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:                          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.i:                         For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.j. to 2.m:                   Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:                          FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a to 3.d:                        For Applicant 
                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
            In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
the Applicant.  Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
KATHRYN MOEN BRAEMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
           
