1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-25790
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Rita C. O’Brien, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant. As required by Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 ¶ E3.1.2 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended, DOHA issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on November 6, 2006, detailing the basis for its decision: security
concerns raised under Guideline F (financial considerations) of the revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of
Defense effective September 1, 2006. Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June
15, 2007, by admitting to all 25 allegations raised. Applicant again admitted to all 25
allegations on August 21, 2007, in an amended response which included his request for
“a decision without a hearing.”
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM) on
September 25, 2007. Applicant was instructed to file any objections to the information in
the FORM within 30 days of receipt of that package. Applicant received the FORM on
October 4, 2007. No information was submitted in response to the FORM within the 30
day period provided. The case was forwarded by the Director, DOHA, on February 21,
2008, for assignment of the case. I was assigned the case that same day. 
 SOR ¶ 1.a.1
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e.2
SOR ¶ 1.s and ¶¶ 1.v through 1.x.3
 SOR ¶ 1.r, ¶ 1.t, and ¶ 1.u.4
 The labrum is the cartilage ring surrounding the shoulder socket.5
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s response to the 25 allegations raised is limited to his 25 admissions.
Consequently, there are scant available facts as to his life, his financial history, and his
current fiscal situation. He is a 42-year-old machinist who has worked for the same
federal contractor since February 2005. He is married and the father of six children,
ranging in age from 25 to 5 years. He also has three grown stepchildren. Applicant
received approximately three years of training at a regional education center. 
On September 8, 2000, Applicant filed a voluntary Chapter 7 petition for
bankruptcy.  His total listed liabilities were approximately $28,433 and his total listed1
assets were approximately $1,653. Those debts subject to the bankruptcy proceeding
were discharged on December 29, 2000. 
On or about September 2000, a judgment was entered against Applicant in the
amount of $85. On or about May 2002, another judgment was entered against
Applicant in the amount of $359, and a debt to a state utilities entity was placed in
collection in 2002 for the approximate amount of $257. On or about August 2003, a
third judgment was entered against Applicant in the approximate amount of $1,434. As
of January 3, 2007, these obligations remained unpaid.  2
Also outstanding as of January 3, 2007, are debts for two collection accounts in
the approximate amounts of $49 and $461, respectively, a child support arrearage of
approximately $4,170 and a debt to a state employment commission that was charged
off in the approximate amount of $2,566.  Three medical accounts were referred for3
collection between June 2004 and June 2005. These collection efforts concerned
approximate amounts of $302, $75, and $304, and were similarly outstanding as of
January 3, 2007.  4
On or about September 2, 2005, Applicant suffered an accident while working,
injuring his left shoulder, knee, and wrist. Between that date and February 22, 2007,
Applicant’s condition has been medically addressed approximately 27 times, including
three surgeries, multiple MRIs, and control of several localized infections requiring
antibiotics and additional care; related pain was pharmaceutically managed. His
diagnosis as of March 2007 was “Left RTC SLAP tear,” indicating rotator cuff and
labrum  tears, and “Left knee, torn meniscus.” Also noted was continued knee5
 See Item 6 (Applicant’s Response to DOHA Interrogatory, dated March 9, 2007) at 16-18 (marked as pages6
48-50).
 Item 6, supra, at 4 (marked as page 36).7
 Id.8
 Id. at 5 (marked as page 37).9
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.q.10
 Item 6, supra, at 6-9 (marked as pages 38-41).11
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).12
3
discomfort despite overall improvement.  He was released for light duty in March 2007.6
Projections regarding Applicant’s maximum medical improvement and permanent
partial disability were listed as “to be determined.” Starting February 22, 2007, he was
permitted to return to full time, transitional work with “no prolonged standing or walking,
no climbing, stooping, squatting, crawling, or kneeling, can’t carry heavy objects, no
duty involving unprotected heights. No lifting with left arm.” 
In response to DOHA inquiry as to his current financial obligations Applicant
wrote the following: “I was injured back in Sept. of ‘05. Since then I have managed to
pay my most important bills first which was child support and back taxes. My
employment allowed me to start catching up on past bills until these three surgeries
within the last year are better [sic] that have had a large impact on my income.”  As to7
his efforts toward his finances, he wrote: “Doing the best I can with what I have until
able to return to work. Also I am not able to pay off full amount of my monthly child
support. Also can’t afford to pay on bill[s] until returning to work.”  In response to an8
inquiry regarding his past chapter 7 bankruptcy, Applicant stated: “My debts out
weighed my income after my divorce and I wanted a fresh start.”9
Between Applicant’s September 2005 injury and the issuance of the May 2007
SOR, 12 medical accounts were referred for collection, amounting to approximately
$2,237.  While still restricted to light duty, Applicant completed a Personal Financial10
Statement, DSS Form 154, on March 9, 2007.  It showed Applicant’s monthly11
expenses and payments to equal his net monthly income without accounting for any
payments on his delinquent debts. The monthly income shown was $1,240 acquired as
”work comp/short term disability.” Nothing else is known of his current financial situation
or current physical condition.
Policies
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  As Commander in Chief, the12
President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a
Id. at 527.13
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960). 14
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).15
Id.16
Id.; Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ E2.2.2.17
Executive Order 10865 § 7.18
See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.19
4
position . . . that will give that person access to such information.”  The President13
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for
access to classified information “ only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to do so.”  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that14
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance15
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt16
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive information.  The decision to deny an17
individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of an
applicant.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines18
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.19
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline. In evaluating the security
worthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also assess the adjudicative
process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive to be considered in evaluating a person’s
eligibility to hold a security clearance. Additionally, each security clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material
facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the factors listed in the
Directive. Specifically these are: (1) the nature and seriousness of the conduct and
surrounding circumstances; (2) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (3) the age
of the applicant; (4) the motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct
was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of the consequences; (5)
the absence or presence of rehabilitation; and (6) the probability that the circumstances
or conduct will continue or recur in the future. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
revised adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured
against this policy guidance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find the following adjudicative
guideline most pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case:
5
Guideline F- Financial Considerations: Finances are a concern because failure
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well
as those which would mitigate security concerns, pertaining to the adjudicative guideline
are set forth and discussed in the conclusions below.
Conclusions
I have carefully considered all the appropriate legal standards and facts in
evidence, including Applicant’s admissions to all the allegations raised in the SOR. I
have also considered the foregoing in light of the applicable guideline, including both
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions available under that guideline.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he failed to pay. He admits he owes
the cumulative debt and it remains delinquent. Based on such evidence, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) 19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC 19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.
Consequently, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate financial considerations security
concerns.
Applicant’s 2000 chapter 7 bankruptcy put him on fresh financial footing after his
divorce from his first wife. Judgments and obligations adding up to several thousand
dollars, however, were acquired between that time and his 2005 accident. Since the
accident, the financial chasm between financial stability and his current debt problems
has grown, amounting to over $13,500 in delinquent obligations. Although he is
committed to meeting his child support obligations and back taxes, the recent and
unbridled growth of additional debt does not give rise to Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) 20 (a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment).
With the exception of SOR ¶ 1.w (child support arrearage), Applicant has not
referenced any attempt to address the obligations noted in the SOR. Nor has Applicant
noted whether he has sought and received financial counseling to help him address his
debts and manage his finances in the future. Consequently, neither FC MC 20 (d) (the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts) nor FC MC 20 (c) (the person received or is receiving counseling for the problem
6
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
applies.
Applicant’s September 2005 accident resulted in debilitating and painful injuries
to his shoulder, wrist, and knee. Such injuries highly limited his mobility, required
multiple surgeries, and necessitated a protracted recuperation period. Although his
current health and ability is unknown because he chose to have a determination on the
record and because he declined to respond to the September 2007 FORM, such
situations generally trigger the application of FC MC 20 (b) (the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).
In this situation, however, Applicant’s medical bills and his interim inability to
make payments on his debts are but small parts of a bigger picture. No facts were
presented as to any efforts exerted to address the non-child support related obligations
incurred before his September 2005 accident and at issue in the SOR. Because no
evidence was offered as to what his former earned income was or projected earned
income might be, it cannot be determined whether his return to work and a regular
income will be an increase or decrease from the level of disability compensation income
demonstrated. He similarly failed to posit or project a strategy for addressing his debts,
commit to financial counseling, or otherwise address ameliorative plans regarding his
finances after he returns to full health and vigor as well as full-time employment.
Although the accident may mitigate him from some of his obligations during his period
of recuperation, it does not absolve him from either nominally addressing his debts or,
at least, demonstrating a calculated plan to address them in a responsible, determined
manner in the future. 
Whole Person Analysis
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount
concern. The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded,
commonsense assessment of a person's life to make an affirmative determination that
the person is eligible for a security clearance. Indeed, the adjudicative process is a
careful weighing of a number of variables in considering the “whole person” concept. It
recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions,
motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking
into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature
thinking, and careful analysis.
Based on the scant facts in the record, I considered the whole person in
evaluating the case. I considered Applicant’s age, education, and profession. I also
considered his financial situation over the past eight years, his income, and his debts,
and his attempts to address his obligation. In light of these considerations, I have also
considered Applicant’s 2005 injury, medical needs, physical limitations, and general
recuperation; it is acknowledged that his injury is the sort that would be particularly
debilitating to a machinist. Applicant was debt free after his 2000 bankruptcy. By the
7
time he was injured in September 2005, he had already acquired new delinquent debt.
There is no indication he addressed any of the accounts noted in the SOR before his
injury, nor is there evidence he has since address that debt. There is no indication that
he ever conceived a plan or received financial counseling to address those debts,
before or after his accident. Consequently, his injury cannot be cited as the cause of his
inability to pay the vast majority of his delinquent debt.
Although his final submissions were dated around the time he was returning to
work, Applicant presented little more than admissions to the SOR allegations and an
explanation as to his injury. Without some indication as to how a return to salary might
help ameliorate his financial situation, and absent some projection regarding a workable
repayment plan to address his debts, there is no indication Applicant has considered
when, or if, he might meet these obligations in the future. 
Applicant admitted all 25 financial allegations and failed to mitigate the financial
security concerns to which those allegations gave rise. Any reasonable doubt about
whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive information. Based on the little information
provided, Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns. Therefore, based on the totality
of the evidence in this case, I conclude it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Accordingly, Guideline F is against
Applicant.
Formal Findings
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.w: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is
denied.
______________________________
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
