1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-23369
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 20,
2005. On August 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 24, 2007, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on October 22, 2007. I received the case assignment on October 31, 2007. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on November 7, 2007, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on November 26, 2007. The government offered 14 exhibits (Exh.) which
were received without objection. Applicant submitted three exhibits which were admitted
2
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf at the hearing. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 4, 2007. Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, testimony, and the applicable statutory provision relating
to an applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Post-hearing Submission
Applicant was given 30 days from the date of the hearing or until December 31,
2007, to submit additional material which he stated that he intended to obtain by
traveling to state where property that was the subject of the hearing was located. When
he did not submit anything on that date, the government contacted him and learned that
he believed the date was the end of January 2008. He was then given until January 25,
2008 to make a submission. He did so on January 28, 2008. The government objects to
the documents based on the lateness of the submission. She also questions the value
of the submissions as credible evidence. The documents were admitted. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR
of financial security concerns with explanations.
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a major defense contractor working as a
test engineer for the past four years. He holds a B.S. degree in electrical engineering
from a well known southwestern university. Since graduation in 1997 he worked five
years for another defense contractor before taking his present position. He has held a
security clearance since 2003. 
This matter concerns Guideline F Financial issues involving two allegations. The
first concerns a 2005 judgment for $95,512 arising from a bank mortgage on real estate
(SOR 1.a.); the second concerns a 2002 repossession of an automobile (SOR 1.b.). He
first became aware of his financial problems in December, 2004 when he was unable to
buy a home for himself and his family because of his bad credit rating based these two
delinquent debts (Tr. 17) which he reported on his SF 86. He advised his security office
of these financial issues on September 28, 2005 (Exh. 2). 
The debts of both allegations resulted from a real estate investment collaboration
Applicant entered into in 2001 with his uncle to buy, renovate, and rent two houses to
low income tenants (Exh. 4).The houses purchased were in the home state of Applicant
which is over a thousand miles from his state of residence. The properties were
purchased in Applicant’s name by the uncle using a power of attorney given to him by
Applicant. Thus, he is legally responsible for the debt. The $95,000 judgment is based
on a foreclosure on one of the houses. A loan was made by the bank to the uncle based
on the appraised value of the house of $125,000 which was apparently vastly
overstated (Exh. B).
3
Payments were not made on the loan and three bankruptcies were filed in 2002
and 2003 in the Applicant’s name by the uncle in an unsuccessful effort to preclude
foreclosure of the property. Applicant has requested dismissal of the record of all of the
bankruptcies from the trustee (Exh. 7). A full statement of the various dealings between
Applicant and his uncle is in the record (Exhibit 4).
An inspection of the subject property was made in May 2006 and a report
provided which indicates that the house is basically a shell with significant damage from
the elements and fire (Exh. C). Pictures of the property were shown at the hearing and
described in the record (Tr. 24-26). This has now developed into a question of the
amount of the appraisal and whether it was obtained by fraud. Applicant has taken
action to obtain a new appraisal and to revoke the actions of the bank that foreclosed.
The post-hearing submission contains drafts of letters to local, state and federal officials
that he intends to submit as soon as he has the new appraisal to show that he is not
responsible for the debts and that the loan for which he is being held responsible was
fraudulently obtained. 
The second financial allegation concerns repossession of a new vehicle in 2002
purchased by his uncle in Applicant’s name using the power of attorney Applicant
provided to him. It has now been removed from his credit report because the creditor
has agreed that it was obtained through identity theft (Exh. 8). He has also obtained
letters advising of corrections in his credit reports based on identity theft by his uncle
(Exhs. 8, 9, and 10). In 2006, he attempted to hire legal counsel (Exhs. A) but the
attorney declined to take the case because of the distance from his office to the courts
where the action occurred (Exh. 11). Applicant has since attempted to resolve the
matter himself. He filed a fraud and identity theft complaint against his uncle (Exh. 12).
Applicant is unmarried but has two children by the woman with whom he lives
who is employed. They have joint income of over $5,000 a month with over $1,000 left
over after expenses each month (Exh. 3). He received a salary increase this year of
$2,600 per year. His credit reports and testimony indicates that he has had no other
financial difficulties. He has been unable to buy a home for his family since the failed
effort in 2004 and will not be able to do so until he clears up the present delinquent debt
in this matter and his credit rating is restored. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also
EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or
sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F Financial
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial concerns is set out in
AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes several conditions that might be applicable and could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and,
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust.
AG ¶ 20 describes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns that
might be applicable in this matter. They are that:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under
the circumstances; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant was alleged to have two delinquent debts. The auto repossession, has
been resolved since the creditor acknowledged that it was caused by identity theft.
Thus, only the mortgage issue remains to be resolved and Applicant has shown a series
of actions taken by him over the past two years to illustrate how the debt occurred and
his efforts to resolve the debt. While the actions he has taken may not have been as
prompt as they might have been or as successful as he hoped, I find that the he has
taken sufficient action to warrant the application of the above mitigating conditions in
this matter. Because the actions occurred in another state far removed from Applicant’s
home and he was unaware of it for some time, he has had difficulty getting to the
6
bottom of the fraudulent activity. However, since he became aware of the problem at the
end of December 2005, he has taken many steps to resolve it. 
Identity theft and the fraudulent financial activity that often ensues is well known
to be a complicated issue to resolve in a timely matter often involving not only time but
also money. While Applicant’s actions in giving a power of attorney to another, even a
relative, was not a prudent decision, he was not a sophisticated investor and thought he
could trust his close relative. He realizes the mistakes he made and is quite unlikely to
repeat them again. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Applicant has a responsible position in the defense industry where he has been
employed for the past ten years. He has had no legal difficulties during that period and
the current problems arising from the failed real estate efforts are the first difficulties he
has had of a financial nature. He has presented evidence in this matter to show the
history of the problem and the efforts he has made to resolve them to my satisfaction.
He successfully persuaded the creditor in his automobile repossession allegation to
drop the matter after showing them some of the same evidence he has produced in this
matter. The real estate transaction is more complex than the auto repossession and has
taken longer to resolve. 
I find that the facts surrounding the allegations are not likely to recur, were not
the Applicant’s fault, and he had not only no motivation for any misconduct, but knew
nothing about it until December 2004. He has motivation to resolve the issue and have
his credit rating restored so that he might be able to transact business without the
burden of an adverse credit rating. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance at this time. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
_________________
CHARLES D. ABLARD
Administrative Judge
