 The Statement of Reasons incorrectly lists Applicant’s first name as “--------.”1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-26675
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
On February 24, 2006, Applicant submitted an application to renew the security
clearance required for his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the
results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding2
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On July
13, 2007, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
 Applicant objected to Gx. 4 because the documents therein are nearly illegible. I overruled his objection4
because I am able to read enough of the documents to determine they are summaries of Applicant’s federal
tax accounts for tax years 1987 through 1993. The information in Gx. 4 gives a detailed accounting of the
basis for the tax liens documented in Gx. 2. However, the detail in Gx. 4 was not essential to my findings of
fact here.
 The allegation did not specify when the lien was filed.5
2
which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)3
under Guideline E (personal conduct).
On October 3, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2007, and I scheduled a hearing to be
held on December 14, 2007. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government
presented ten exhibits (Gx. 1 - 10).  Applicant testified in his own behalf and submitted4
one exhibit (Ax. A). DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 4, 2008. I left the
record open to allow Applicant time for a post-hearing submission. On January 7, 2008,
I received information from Applicant which has been included in the record as Ax. B.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is granted.
Procedural Issues
As originally issued, the SOR alleged under Guideline E that Applicant
deliberately made false statements to the government through a Questionnaire for
National Security Positions (QNSP) dated February 24, 2006. Specifically, it was
alleged he lied when he answered “no” to QNSP question 23, which is purported to
have elicited information about his arrest record, thus omitting the fact he was charged
in March 2003 with assault and battery. (SOR ¶ 1.a). The government further alleged
Applicant lied when he answered “no” to QNSP question 27, which is purported to have
elicited information regarding whether Applicant had any tax liens against him in the
preceding seven years, thus omitting the fact he had a federal tax lien against him.
(SOR ¶ 1.b)  Finally, the government alleged Applicant lied when he answered “no” to5
QNSP question 28, which is purported to have elicited information about whether
Applicant owed any debts greater than 180 days past due in the last seven years, or
whether he was then more than 90 days past due on any debt, thus omitting again the
fact he had a federal tax lien against him. (SOR ¶ 1.c)
On October 30, 2007, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding
an additional allegation under Guideline E as follows:
1.d You falsified material facts on a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions, you caused to be transmitted on or about February 24, 2006, in
3
response to “Section 28. Your Financial Delinquencies. a. In the last 7
years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?; b. Are
you current over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” You deliberately
failed to disclose that you were indebted to the Internal revenue Service
for back taxes, interest and penalties for tax years 1998, 1999, and 2002,
totaling approximately $2,050 in July 2006.
The motion also proposed adding a second paragraph containing
allegations under Guideline F as follows:
2. Guideline F: Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy 
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Available information raising this concern shows that:
a. You failed to file your Federal Income Tax Returns for tax years
1989, 1990, and 1991, and filed late your Federal Income Tax Returns for
tax years 1987, 1988, 1992, and 1993. 
b. On July 19, 1994, the Internal Revenue Service filed a federal
tax lien against you for the approximate amount of $33,069.54 for tax
years 1987 through 1992. As of July 3, 2007, this debt had not been paid.
c. You filed late your Federal Income Tax Returns for tax years
1998, 1999, and 2000.
d. You are indebted to the Internal Revenue Service in the
approximate amount of $849.14 for tax years 1998 through 2000. As of
July 9, 2007, this debt had not been paid.
Applicant did not respond to the motion before the hearing. At hearing, he did
not object to the motion, which I granted as submitted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the original allegations under Guideline E (Tr., 16 - 17) He also
denied the new allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, but admitted the new allegations in SOR ¶¶
2.a through 2.d. (Tr., 17 - 24). After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 58 years old and has worked as a painter for defense contractor at
a U.S. Navy shipyard since 1972. After he finished high school, he served in the U.S.
Navy from 1970 until 1972. Applicant has been married to his current wife since 2002.
A previous marriage ended in divorce around 1986. (Gx. 1, Gx. 5)
 In response to DOHA interrogatories on April 20, 2007, Applicant attached a handwritten letter purported to6
be from a representative of the IRS. At hearing, Department Counsel stated he had contacted the author and
verified the authenticity of the letter as a communication from an IRS representative. (Tr., 41).
4
Applicant did not file federal income tax returns as required in 1989, 1990, and
1991. He also filed his returns late for tax years 1987, 1988, 1992, 1993, 1998, 1999,
and 2000.
On July 19, 1994, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a lien against
Applicant for unpaid taxes in tax years 1987 through 1992. The tax debt totaled
$33,069.54. (Gx. 2) At one time, Applicant also owed $2,050.20 for tax years 1998,
1999, and 2000, but he entered into a repayment agreement with the IRS (Gx. 6). His
debt to the IRS from those tax years is now $1,155.16 for tax year 1999 only. (Gx. 7)
The second page of Gx. 2 notes that, unless the IRS were to renew, within 10 years, its
claims underlying the lien, the lien would be released. The 1994 lien expired in March
2007 (Gx. 7), but there is no information about whether the lien was renewed. The IRS
has stated that, aside from the $1,155.16 owed for tax year 1999, he is “in compliance
with all filing requirements through 2005.” (Gx. 7)  Applicant has also received small6
refunds from his past tax year filings. (Ax. B)
Applicant has held a security clearance for most of his adult life, starting with his
service in the Navy. During a previous investigation to renew his clearance, Applicant
was interviewed by a government investigator in May 1994. Applicant reported at that
time he had not filed his tax returns since 1986. At the time of the interview, he had
contacted the IRS and was waiting to complete an arrangement to file his returns and
pay an estimated $7,000 in federal and state taxes. (Gx. 5) 
Applicant’s most recent background investigation began when a Questionnaire
for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) was submitted on or about February 24, 2006. Gx. 1 is
a copy of the electronic summary of that questionnaire. Applicant’s signature is on an
attached signature page taken from a Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP). The summary of the SF 86 does not reflect the actual questions Applicant
answered when he submitted his application. Rather, the document contains
abbreviated terms indicating what the question addressed. For example, where a
question asked for information about whether there were any arrests in the last seven
years for offenses not listed elsewhere, the form lists only “23F - LAST 7 YRS,
ADDITIONAL CHARGES?” There is no language explaining the need to list arrests
even if the charges were dismissed, or listing the availability of a limited statutory
exception to the reporting requirement. In sum, Gx. 1 contains none of the language
cited in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d.
In March 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault and battery on
a spouse after neighbors called the police about an argument he was having with his
wife. The charge was dismissed after his wife testified in his behalf. (Tr., 56 - 57) The
arrest was not reflected in Gx. 1. Applicant explained he thought he did not have to list
the arrest because the charges were dismissed. (Tr., 65 - 66) Nor was the unpaid tax
lien listed in Gx.1; however, under a section of the questionnaire entitled “SUBJECT’S
 Directive. 6.3.7
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and8
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).9
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).11
5
COMMENTS,” it was noted that Applicant is “PAYING ON TAXES YEAR 2000 - $175
PER MONTH.” 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors7
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or8
mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline E (personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15 and
Guideline F (financial considerations), at AG ¶ 18.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to9
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a10
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.11
 Directive, E3.1.14.12
6
Analysis
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in AG ¶
15, is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d that he intentionally
falsified his security questionnaire. The government was thus required to present
information to prove those controverted issues of fact.  These SOR allegations cite12
specific questions and quote the language of each one. The document presented in
Gx. 1 does not contain any of that language. Nor does Gx. 1 appear to be a QNSP as
alleged, and the signature pages included in Gx 1 are from two other forms, neither of
which is a QNSP. In short, there is no proof that Applicant answered the questions
quoted in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d. Without that information, I cannot conclude he certified his
answers to those questions were true and correct to the best of his knowledge.
In the alternative, the remarks section of Gx. 1 notes monthly payments for back
taxes, thus providing the government with notice of Applicant’s tax problems. Further, I
found plausible Applicant’s explanation that he did not think he was required to list his
assault and battery arrest because the charges were dismissed.
Based on the foregoing, the information presented in support of SOR ¶ 1, as
amended, does not prove Applicant acted with the intent required by AG ¶16(a)
(deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities). Accordingly, I resolve Guideline E in favor of the Applicant.  
Financial Considerations. 
Under Guideline F, “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.” (AG ¶ 18) The government alleged Applicant failed to file taxes either
on time or at all for several years between 1987 and 2000. As a result, Applicant was
subject to a tax lien filed in July 1994 for unpaid taxes totaling $33,069.54 for tax years
1987 through 1992. It was also alleged that Applicant owes $849.14 for tax years 1998
through 2000. The government presented sufficient information to support the SOR ¶ 2
allegations. These facts require consideration of the disqualifying condition listed in AG
¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), 19(c) (a history of not meeting
 See footnote 8, supra.13
 See footnote 7, supra. 14
7
financial obligations), and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). 
The record also warrants consideration of the mitigating condition listed in AG ¶
20 (c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control). Available
information shows that, as of the hearing, Applicant owed $1,155.16 for tax year 1999
only, the tax lien was released, he had resolved all of his past filing requirements, was
making payments on his remaining tax debt, and had even received some refunds for
past tax years. On balance, the security concerns raised by the government’s
information are mitigated.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guidelines F and E. I have also
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG
2(a).  Applicant is 58 years old and has spent the past 32 years in the same job. He13
has held a security clearance for all or most of that time, apparently without incident.
Applicant is a high school graduate who, while he did not attend to his filing
requirements as he should, has now corrected his past tax problems. That the lien was
not renewed is somewhat of a double-edged sword. Ideally, he would take action to
repay it, but that would revive the IRS claim. However, because the IRS has chosen
not to further pursue its claim, it is no longer something which might cause Applicant to
engage in illegal acts to resolve. 
On balance, Applicant did not engage in fraudulent behavior to avoid paying his
taxes, and he is likely to timely file his tax returns in the future. A fair and
commonsense assessment  of all available information shows that the Applicant’s14
finances and personal conduct do not present an unacceptable risk should he be
granted access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
8
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
