 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------ ----  ) ISCR Case No. 06-26161 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on September 
16, 2005. On June 8, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
and personal conduct under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response.  He denied all 
allegations with explanation.  He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  Department counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on October 26, 2007.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on November 16, 2007, and was provided the opportunity to file objections, 
 
2 
 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions.  
Department Counsel mailed additional material to Applicant at the same mailing 
address on December 10, 2007.  Applicant was provided an additional 30 days to 
respond with additional information.  Applicant did not respond to the FORM or the 
additional material.  The case was assigned to me on January 15, 2008.  Based on a 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department counsel in the FORM moved to amend the SOR to add a second 
allegation, 2.b, under Guideline E, based on falsifications in Applicant’s answer to the 
SOR.  Specifically, the new allegation is that Applicant knew of four debts that he stated 
in his answer to the SOR that he did not have knowledge. 
 
Applicant was provided in the FORM an opportunity to respond to the 
amendment of the SOR.  Applicant did not raise an objection to amending the SOR.  
The SOR is amended to add allegation 2.b under Guideline E as requested by 
Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old senior information technology security manager for a 
defense contractor.  He has worked with this contractor since 2005.  He retired after 18 
years of active Army service in 2001.  Between 2001 and 2005, he worked as a senior 
systems engineer for defense contractors.  He and his first wife divorced after a 23 year 
marriage in 2002.  They had two children who are now in their twenties.  Applicant notes 
that some of the debts in the SOR were incurred by his first wife while he was stationed 
overseas, and also because she did not pay their bills.  He remarried in 2004.  He held 
a security clearance while on active duty in the Army. (Item 23; Response to SOR, 
undated) 
 
Applicant responded “NO” to question 24 on his security clearance application 
which asked had he ever been charged with or convicted of an offense(s) related to 
alcohol or drugs.  Records show that in April 1994, while on active duty, Applicant was 
arrested and charged by civilian authorities with driving under the influence.  He was 
found not guilty of driving under the influence but guilty of reckless driving.  He paid a 
fine.  Applicant stated he had not been drinking alcohol that night but had taken a cold 
medicine that contained alcohol.  In responding to the question on the security 
clearance application, Applicant believed he did not have to list the offense since it 
happened over 14 years earlier and he thought outside the time line for listing these 
type offenses.  He states he was told he only had to go back ten years.  (Item 2, 
paragraph 2. a; Item 10) 
 
Applicant claims in his answer to the SOR that he did not know about some of 
the debts listed.  The debts include a debt of $16,660 to a bank in collection (allegation 
 
3 
 
 
1.d); a debt for $117 for satellite television service (allegation 1.e); a debt to a credit 
union for $3,224 (allegation 1.q); and a bank debt for $9,978 (allegation 1.s).   
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 2004.  He listed unsecured 
liabilities of over $194,000 with $6,700 in assets. (Item 20)  The bankruptcy trustee 
recommended dismissal of the bankruptcy because the unsecured debts were 
consumer debt; Applicant is capable of paying on his debts based on his income and 
work potential; the purchases causing his debts exceeded his ability to pay at the time 
the debts were incurred; he could contribute to debt payment without being deprived of 
the necessities of living; he qualifies for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy; and he has not 
participated in a debt repayment program.  The trustee questioned Applicant’s good 
faith in resolving debt. (Item 21)  The bankruptcy was dismissed based on the 
recommendation of the trustee. (Item 22)  Applicant claims his former wife and their 
divorce caused his financial problems leading to bankruptcy, and that the trustee 
recommended dismissal of the bankruptcy because he was continuing to support his 
college student daughter. (Item 2)  
 
The SOR lists 18 delinquent debts totaling over $105,000.  These debts include a 
collection account for a utility for $89 (1.b); a medical debt for $135 (1.c); a credit card 
debt to a bank for $16,660 (1.d); a satellite television account for $117 (1.e); a cable 
debt for $143 (1.f); another cable debt of $431 (1.g); a state lien for child support for 
$2,910 (1.h); a credit card debt for $27,000 (1.i); a credit card collection account for 
$7,051 (1.j); a consumer loan for $544 (1.k); a collection account for $13,000 (1.l); two 
credit card accounts to the same company for $1,634 (1.m) and $2,413 (1.n); three 
credit accounts to the same credit union for $7,666 (1.o), $11,000 (1.p), and $3,224 
(1.q); another delinquent credit account for $1,039 (1.r), and a bank credit card debt for 
$9,978 (1.s).  All of the above delinquent debts are listed on and confirmed by various 
credit reports.  The credit reports also show Applicant’s debt total has risen from 
$68,000 in 2001, to $74,000 in 2003, to $86,000 in 2004, to over $100,000 in 2007.  As 
noted, the SOR lists delinquent debts of over $105,000. (See, Items 14, 16, 17, 25, 26, 
and supplemental FORM material, December 10, 2007)   
 
Applicant denied any knowledge of the debts in 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.j, 1.l, 1.q, 1.r, 
and 1.s.  He did not present any information concerning any inquiry he made about the 
debts.  He stated the cable debts in 1.f and 1.g were paid in full but he does not have 
receipts.  Applicant stated he was out of the country on military assignment when he 
was ordered to pay child support.  He contacted the child welfare office upon returning 
and set up an automatic payroll deduction for the child support.  He has continued to 
pay child support even though he is no longer required to do so.  He presented no 
information concerning support payments or any efforts to pay past due child support 
that may have accumulated while he was overseas.  He discussed the credit card debt 
listed at 1.i with the creditor to have them split the debt between he and his wife.  The 
creditor refused and Applicant stated he would only pay his part of the debt.  He has 
presented no information to show any payment of any part of this debt.  He claims the 
debt listed at 1.j is his wife’s and not his debt and was charged off before he returned 
from overseas.  Applicant claims the credit card debts at 1.m and 1.n are the same debt 
 
4 
 
 
and that he paid the debt.  He presented no information to verify the debts are the same 
or that they have been paid in full.  In addition, on his statement to security 
investigators, he acknowledged he owed both debts. (Item 18 at 3)  Applicant stated the 
credit union debt at 1.o is the same debt as listed at 1.k.  The debts are for different 
amounts and the account numbers are not the same on the credit reports.  Applicant 
claims the debt at 1.p is for a car purchased by his former wife and he is not responsible 
for the debt.  He presented no information on any contact with the creditors on these 
debts. 
 
Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he did not know about the debts at 
1.d, 1.e, 1. q, and 1.s.  All four debts are listed on various credit reports dated as early 
as 2001.  In addition, he acknowledged the four debts in a statement to security 
investigators in 2004.  (Item 18, statement dated February 13, 2004, at 3-4). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18)  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s delinquent debts are a security concern raising Financial 
Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts), FC DC ¶ 19(b) (indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible 
spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt), FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations), and FC DC ¶19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis).  Applicant accumulated delinquent 
debts because of an unwillingness to pay his financial obligations.  The debt total has 
risen over the years with no indication of any attempt to pay the debts.  The debts 
appear to be for normal consumer items which indicate he may be spending beyond his 
means. 
 
 Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
 
6 
 
 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.  Most of the delinquent debts have 
not been addressed by Applicant and are listed on the most recent credit report.  The 
debts are still not paid so they are current debts.  There are a number of delinquent 
debts from various sources so they are not infrequent.  The debts seem to be ordinary 
credit card debts, telephone bills, department store accounts, or loans.  There is no 
evidence they were incurred under unusual circumstances.  An examination of the 
debts by the bankruptcy trustee shows they are largely consumer debts.  Since they are 
current debts that have not been paid, they cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).  Applicant claims some of his 
debts were incurred by his wife without his knowledge while he was overseas.  He 
presented no information to establish that the debts were incurred by his wife.  He also 
did not show any actions he took to resolve the debts once he returned from overseas.  
Applicant also claims his debts were caused by his divorce.  He presented no 
information to show how the divorced caused his debts.  In fact, the credit reports show 
he incurred delinquent debt years before the divorce, and continued to incur delinquent 
debt after the divorce.  He did not establish he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, so the mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control).  Applicant presented no information of financial counseling, so this 
mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant presented no information to show he has a plan to pay the debts or any action 
that he has taken to pay his debts.  There is no indication Applicant acted responsibly 
towards his debts or that the situation is under control.  In fact, the opposite seems to be 
true, his finances are not under control and that he has not acted responsibly.  The 
indication is that he just did not pay his debts, the debts continued to accumulate, and 
he continued to incur more debt.  There is no indication of a good faith effort to pay 
creditors or resolve debts.  Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate 
security concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  The security 
clearance process depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s potentially inaccurate 
answers to a question concerning an alcohol-related charge on his security clearance 
application and his SOR response that he had no knowledge of delinquent debts raise 
security concerns under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (the 
deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations determine security eligibility or trustworthiness). 
 
 Applicant denied intentional falsification.  He believed he only had to list alcohol-
related offenses that happened in the last ten years.  He claims to have asked 
supervisors and other about the process and was informed that he had to go back only 
ten years.  Since the offense was over 14 years earlier, he did not include it.  However, 
in his response to the SOR, he claims he had no knowledge of four debts.  The debts 
are clearly listed on credit reports and he acknowledged the debts in a statement he 
provided security investigators.  It is clear that he knew of the four debts and his 
statements on the debts in response to the SOR are false.  While there is a security 
concern for an omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a security clearance, 
every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a falsification.  A 
falsification must be deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and 
willfully.  Applicant knew of the four debts when he completed his response to the SOR, 
so his false responses as to knowledge of the debts were knowing and willful.  The 
question concerning alcohol-related charges is clear and straight forward and uses the 
word “ever” and does not limit the time of concern.  Applicant established a pattern of 
action in answering questions falsely or providing false information.  Applicant has 
demonstrated on two separate occasions that he deliberately provided false information 
in the security clearance process with intent to deceive.  I find against Applicant as to 
Personal Conduct.   
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
 
8 
 
 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s Army service and many years holding a security 
clearance.  However, Applicant has not taken action to resolve his past due debts.  His 
indifferent attitude and lack of actions shows he is not trustworthy, responsible, or 
exercises good judgment.  I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his finances and personal conduct.  Clearance is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
