1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------. )       ISCR Case No. 06-26682
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 28,
2005. On October 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
G, J, and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 31, 2007. He answered
the SOR in writing on November 2, 2007, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on November 16, 2007. The case
was assigned to another judge and a hearing was scheduled on December 12, 2007.
The hearing was cancelled due to appearance of counsel. I received the case
assignment on December 7, 2007. I granted Applicant’s request for a delay until
GE 1 (Applicant’s security clearance application, dated November 28, 2005).1
GE 3 (Applicant’s response to Interrogatories, dated March 16, 2006).2
Id.3
2
January 29, 2008, in order for his counsel to be available. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on January 2, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 29,
2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 10, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through D,
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 11,
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 25, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a- 1.g; ¶¶ 2.a-2.c; and ¶¶ 3.a, 3.b, 3.c, 3.e, and 3.f of the SOR, with
explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶ 3.d of the SOR. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is 41 years old. He is divorced with two adult children. After his high
school graduation in 1987, he began employment with a government contractor. He has
maintained that employment for 20 years, receiving various promotions. He holds a
confidential clearance.1
Applicant started drinking alcohol in high school with his friends. He drank beer
on the weekends. In 1986, he was charged with improper equipment and Driving Under
the Influence (DUI). He attended driver improvement class. The charge was later
amended to Reckless Driving. His license was suspended. In 1987, Applicant was
charged with Drunk in Public. He and his girlfriend were in his car and she had an open
bottle of alcohol. He was arrested and fined $15 and ordered to pay $20 in court costs.
He was on probation for one year. In 1988, Applicant was fined for being disorderly in a
public place.2
In May 1989, Applicant was found guilty of a DUI. He completed an alcohol driver
awareness program ordered by the state. His license was suspended for six months. He
received counseling in a chemical dependency program after that incident from June
26, 1989 until January 1990.  3
Applicant’s 1989 marriage ended in divorce in 1998. Applicant was awarded
custody of his two sons after contested custody. He raised his two sons as a single
parent. In March 1999, Applicant was with his son at a basketball game. He and his ex-
wife had a disagreement over how to handle a minor injury that his son received.
Applicant was arguing with his ex-wife and stepped in front of her and she fell back. He
was charged with a misdemeanor assault and battery of a family member. As a result of
Tr. 38; 39 and 40.4
Tr. 35; GE 4 (Interrogatories, dated March 2006).5
Tr. 42; 43 and 44.6
GE 2 (Applicant’s response to interrogatories, dated March 2006).7
GE 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated March 2005).8
AE C (Performance Appraisals 2005-2007).9
AE B (Enclosures 1-7).10
3
this charge, Applicant was required to attend anger management classes. He
completed the course successfully. The court also placed Applicant under a restraining
(protective) order for 12 months. Applicant complied with the court orders and on July 5,
2000, the charges were dismissed.4
In February 2000, Applicant received his second DUI charge. He was found
guilty and sentenced to 60 days jail (suspended), placed on probation, fined, had his
license suspended and was  referred to alcohol rehabilitation. He completed counseling
and received treatment for a substantial period of time until November 2002. Applicant
attended Alcoholics Anonymous and abstained from drinking for a short time.5
On October 27, 2000, Applicant purchased a shot gun for his son as a Christmas
present. He completed the requisite paperwork. He was charged with making a false
statement to purchase a firearm/false statement on firearm consent form, which is a
felony under state law because he did not disclose that he was under a protective order
at the time of the application for the firearm. He believed the year for the protective
order was over and thus he did not disclose anything on the form. On March 8, 2001,
the charges were Nolle Prosequi (dismissed) and Applicant paid a $50 fine.6
Applicant has continued to consume alcohol. He drinks beer after work. His
normal work day is approximately 12 hours. His recent alcohol consumption was
approximately 12 beers a week. He does not drink at work.7
On Applicant’s November 28, 2005, security clearance application he disclosed
his incidents and arrests involving alcohol, domestic violence and purchase of a shotgun
for his son. He answered “yes” to questions concerning his police record. He listed the
charge for making a materially false statement and the subsequent dismissal of the
charge in 2001. He did not disclose any use of marijuana or any other illegal drug.8
Applicant’s work performance is rated “exceeds normal requirements” or higher.9
He has recommendations from his colleagues and his supervisor. Applicant is very
professional in his conduct and work ethic. He is an asset to his current team. He gets
along well with others and has a strong commitment to his job. Applicant is a
conscientious and meticulous worker. He requires minimal supervision. 10
Tr. 44.11
GE 5 (Report of Evaluation, dated July 17, 2007).12
Id.13
AE A (Affidavit, dated January 23, 2008).14
4
Applicant responded to written interrogatories in March 2006. He disclosed that
he had used marijuana (1996) in response to Question 1 concerning the use of any
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen (to include LSD or PCP) and/or any
Cannabis (to include marijuana and hashish).  11
In November 2006, Applicant was working 12 hour days for long periods at a
time. He forgot to register his vehicle. He was charged with failure to obtain
registration/title, an infraction under the state code. He was fined and ordered to pay
costs.
On July 2, 2007, Applicant was evaluated for substance abuse as part of his
security investigation. He admitted to a history of significant alcohol use. He also
acknowledged using marijuana and trying cocaine in the past but does not do so any
longer. After receiving treatment for alcohol and substance abuse from 1999 until 2002,
he continued to drink. His last reported alcohol use was June 30, 2007. However, a
urine screen collected at the time of the evaluation revealed a positive for
ethyglucuronide. The urine screen reports any consumption of alcohol for approximately
80 hours prior to the test. Due to the test result, the evaluator opined “the test results
appear to be in direct contradiction with his self reported last use. This allows for some
concern that his consumption may be more significant than he revealed.” The evaluator
in 2007 recommended an outpatient substance abuse treatment program for at least 16
weeks. Applicant did not heed the recommendation for the treatment or abstinence. She
also recommended a 12-step support group and urine screening and breath alcohol
testing. Applicant did not comply with the recommendations.12
During the 2007 evaluation for drug use, Applicant was asked many questions.
He admitted trying cocaine in the past when he was a teenager. He forgot to list cocaine
as a drug that he had used in the past on his March 2006 interrogatories.13
On January 23, 2008, shortly before his hearing, Applicant signed an Affidavit
that he no longer drinks alcohol. He is willing to submit to another evaluation and
participate in treatment.   He realizes that it was not the wisest decision not to begin14
another treatment program at that time. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
5
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
6
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and “(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent.”
In this case, Applicant has a documented history of problems with alcohol when
he was young man (1986-1989). He has several alcohol related driving incidents and
arrests. His last DUI was in 2000. He admitted he has a history of significant alcohol use
which has led to impaired judgment while driving. Thus, AG ¶ 22 (a) and (c) apply.
In July 2007, Applicant was evaluated for substance abuse by a licensed
substance abuse therapist/practitioner. The legal and substance abuse treatment
history was deemed significant. Thus, AG ¶ 22(e), “evaluation of alcohol abuse or
alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a
recognized alcohol treatment program,” applies.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
7
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant had a lengthy history of alcohol abuse, and his last DUI was in 2000.
Since that time, he has not had any other alcohol-related incidents. He has received
counseling and treatment on several occasions. Applicant did not see a need to abstain
from alcohol after his treatments. In 2006, he acknowledged drinking beer and he
intended to do so in the future. However, he did not heed a 2007 recommendation to
abstain from drinking or enter an outpatient treatment program. He acknowledges that
was not a wise decision. The therapist doubted that Applicant truthfully reported his last
use of alcohol. Just a few days before the hearing, Applicant vowed to abstain from
alcohol and began counseling sessions. He received alcohol treatment and counseling
in the past and did abstain from drinking for short periods of time. Thus, his drinking is
likely to recur. Applicant’s recent consumption of alcohol and untruth to the therapist as
shown by the urine test showing recent alcohol use does not allow mitigation under
23(a) and (b).
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal activity
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules
and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “© allegation
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
Applicant’s alcohol-related arrests and DUI’s combined with his arrest for
domestic assault, his charge of making a false statement to purchase a firearm
constitute criminal activity as envisioned under ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
8
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement;
Applicant has had no serious infractions with the law since 2000. He has been
employed with the same company for 20 years. He raised his son as a single parent.
His completed anger management classes after the domestic incident with his ex-wife.
He has modified his alcohol consumption as described above. He is described as an
exemplary employee. Thus, 32(a) and (d) apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
Applicant disclosed the information concerning the 2001 charge concerning the
gun he purchased on his 2005 security clearance.  He did not disclose any illegal drug
use in the past. However, when he completed his 2006 interrogatories he listed
marijuana use in 1996. I find him credible that he did not think of that since it was in the
distant past. The government did not establish that this was an intentional omission on
the part of the Applicant. Similarly, in 2007 when Applicant was interviewed and
evaluated for substance abuse, he acknowledged use of marijuana and trying cocaine.
He did not list cocaine in the 2006 interrogatories. He used cocaine one time when he
was a teenager. He did not think about it when he was answering the questions about
illegal drug use in 2006. If he were trying to hide something, he would not have been so
open with the evaluator in 2007. Thus, ¶16(a) has not been established. 
9
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
Applicant had problems with alcohol when he was young. His last incident with
alcohol occurred in 2000. Since that time he completed court ordered treatment
programs and modified his drinking. Applicant did not exhibit any problems with alcohol
after his 2002 treatment. However, he was diagnosed recently in 2007 by a licensed
therapist and did not heed the recommendations for treatment. He also was not truthful
about the last use of alcohol according to the test result noted in that report. Applicant
also was involved in a domestic assault incident with his ex-wife in 1999. He completed
his probation and successfully completed anger management classes. In 2000, he
decided to purchase a gun for his son. However, he did not realize that he was still
under a protective order. Thus, he did not disclose anything unfavorable on his
application for the gun purchase. The charge for the misrepresentation was dismissed. 
Applicant raised his sons as a single parent. He has been employed with the
same company for 20 years. He has received various promotions during the years. His
appraisals rate him as exceeding standards. He has never had any difficulty at work
with any situation, including alcohol. He disclosed information on his 2005 security
clearance application in detail concerning his alcohol-related incidents, arrests, and
domestic assault charge. He also listed the charge concerning the purchase of the gun
and the charge for misrepresentation. However, he did not list any use of an illegal drug
on that application.
In 2006, when Applicant completed an interrogatory for drug use, he listed
marijuana in 1996 but did not list the cocaine. During the 2007 evaluation he was asked
many questions. He acknowledged that he used marijuana and had tried cocaine once.
Applicant was candid at the hearing that he did not think to mention the 1996 usage of
marijuana or his experiment with cocaine. He had already disclosed his various
infractions and problems with the law and his police record in the 2005 application. This
was not an intentional deception on Applicant’s part.
10
Applicant is a loyal and hardworking employee. He is a dedicated father. He has
many favorable references and character notes. He extricated himself from his marital
situation. However, he has not mitigated the security concerns under the alcohol
consumption guideline. Just several days before the hearing, Applicant vowed his
alcohol consumption was behind him. Granted, he has not been involved in any legal
issues or problems at work as a result of drinking. However, given the long history of
alcohol use, diagnosis by a therapist, minimizing of alcohol consumption, and his
decision in 2007 not to followup on treatment and abstain from drinking, it is premature
to conclude that it will not recur. He has just recently decided not to drink and began
alcohol treatment. He realizes that he is now subject to scrutiny for testing and would
jeopardize his job and his security clearance.  However, a longer track record of
abstinence is necessary to mitigate alcohol consumption concerns. He was candid at
the hearing and was credible in his testimony that he is not vulnerable to any threats or
intimidation that might jeopardize national security.        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from criminal conduct and
personal conduct. He has not mitigated the concern under alcohol consumption. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
11
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
