 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-05309
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Steven D. Tibbets, Esq. and Jason Matechak. Esq.
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern caused by his deliberate falsification
of a security clearance application he submitted in August 2006 and his failure to report
adverse information concerning himself to his employer as required. 
On September 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR, which is in essence the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns
under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and E (personal conduct). Applicant submitted an
undated response to the SOR which was received by DOHA on October 12, 2007.
Applicant admitted the SOR allegation contained in subparagraph 1.a, denied the
allegations contained in subparagraphs 1.b, 2.a, and 2.b, and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on December 3, 2007, and
reassigned to me on January 16, 2008, for administrative reasons. A notice of hearing was
issued on January 3, 2008, scheduling the hearing for January 24, 2008. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled. The government called one witness and submitted 16
documentary exhibits that were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-16. GE 1-3 and
GE 5-16 were admitted into the record without objection. GE 4 was admitted into the record
without objection, excepting those portions of the document that are illegible. Applicant
testified, called two witnesses to testify on his behalf, and submitted nine documentary
exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-9. AE 1-4 and AE 6-8 were admitted
into the record without objection. The Government’s objections to AE 5 and AE 9 were
overruled and they were admitted into the record. The transcript was received on February
1, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admission to the one allegation in the SOR is incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 45 years old and has been employed by defense contractors, presently
as a project manager, since in or about May 1985. He holds a bachelor in electrical
engineering degree and a master in engineering management degree. He was awarded
the master’s degree in May 1990. Applicant has held a security clearance for
approximately 20 years, including a top secret clearance since 2002. No prior adverse
action has been taken to revoke of downgrade his security clearance eligibility.      
Applicant has been married since July 1983. He and his wife have two children,
ages 16 and 12. Applicant has volunteered for years as a youth volleyball coach. He is
active in church activities, including service recently for several years as a deacon. He also
contributes financially to local charitable causes. Applicant submitted the testimony and
affidavits of numerous co-workers who uniformly attest to his outstanding reputation as a
trustworthy, reliable, honest, and ethical individual. They consider him to be a
conscientious employee whom they highly recommend be allowed access to classified
information. 
On March 5, 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving a Vehicle While
Under the Influence (DUI), Driving a Vehicle While Impaired by Alcohol (DWI) and Failure
to Obey a Properly Placed Traffic Control Device. The arrest occurred after Applicant had
stopped for dinner and drinks with friends following a volleyball tournament in which he had
participated. Applicant consumed several alcoholic beverages with his meal and had a 0.07
blood alcohol level at the time of his arrest. That level is below the level at which the state
where he was arrested presumes a driver to be under the influence of alcohol. 
Applicant appeared in court on July 31, 2006. The charge of DWI was reduced to
the offense of Reckless Driving. Applicant entered a plea of guilty to the reduced charge
on his attorney’s advice and was sentenced to serve two years on probation before
judgment, fined $177.50, and assessed court costs in the amount of $25.50. The other two
charges were dismissed based on the state’s motion to nolle prosequi the charges. On his
3
attorney’s suggestion, Applicant also voluntarily attended an alcohol awareness class
following his arrest.
Applicant executed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions
(e-Quip) on August 24, 2006. In response to a question asking if he had “been arrested for,
charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) . . . ? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150
unless the violation was alcohol or drug related.)” he failed to disclose the arrest for DWI
and the conviction of Reckless Driving with the resulting probation before judgment and
fine of $177.50.
Applicant provided several reasons why he failed to disclose the arrest, charge,
conviction and fine. First, he testified he did not associate “the traffic stop with the matter
of being able to access and secure and protect classified data.” (Tr. 63) He also went on
to explain that his attorney told him that the sentence of probation before judgment meant
it was like the offense never happened. (Tr. 69-70) Additionally, Applicant testified that
although he was handcuffed, transported to a police station in a police car, and
fingerprinted (Tr. 110), he didn’t believe he had been arrested because he had not been
read his Miranda rights and placed in a cell. (Tr. 111) 
Applicant was questioned about his arrest and conviction by an investigator from the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on October 6, 2006. She prepared a report of that
interview in which she reported Applicant told her the arresting officer told Applicant “he
was placing subject under arrest for DUI, DWI, and failing to obey a posted traffic device,
after subject advised the officer that he did not want to take the field breathalyzer.” (GE 2)
A copy of the investigator’s report containing this statement was provided to Applicant and
on August 9, 2007, he swore or affirmed the contents thereof were accurate. Applicant
testified he “missed this part . . . did not pay attention to this part . . . . ” (Tr. 133) when
asked about the apparent contradiction with his hearing testimony. 
Applicant attended an annual security briefing provided by his employer on August
17, 2006. Included in that briefing were admonitions that the employer required employees
to self-report “Fines Of $150 Or More (Including Traffic Violations)” and “Traffic Citations
That Are Alcohol Or Drug Related.” (GE 6) Although Applicant told a co-worker about his
arrest, he did not report the arrest, charges, and fine to his employer until almost a year
after he had submitted the e-QIP, and was subsequently confronted by the OPM
investigator about the omissions. 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
E (personal conduct), with their disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are most relevant
in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the5
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to6
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
5
Applicant was arrested for and charged with DUI and DWI in March 2006. He pled
guilty to the reduced charge of Reckless Driving in July 2006, and paid a fine and court
costs totaling $203. He was also sentenced to serve two years probation before judgment
and remains on probation at present.
Applicant executed and submitted an e-QIP on August 24, 2006. In response to the
applicable question, he failed to disclose the arrest, charge, conviction and/or fine as
required. Considering his educational level, the lengthy period of time he has held a
security clearance, the annual security clearance briefings he received, the proximity of the
most recent briefing to the time of his submission of the e-QIP and the substance of the
explanations he has provided for the omissions, his denial of deliberately falsifying the e-
QIP is not credible. 
I have considered the fact Applicant did discuss his arrest with a co-worker and her
expressed opinion that she did not think it was an incident that needed to be reported.
However, when weighed against the admitted facts that: 1) Applicant was briefed a mere
week prior to submission of the e-QIP that not only the arrest and charges were matters
that must be disclosed but that his fine and conviction also needed to be disclosed; 2)
Applicant’s statement to the OPM investigator that he had been told by the arresting officer
he was being placed under arrest; and 3) the plain language of the question, it is clear
Applicant was aware at the time he submitted the e-QIP that he was required to list the
arrest, conviction and fine, and deliberately chose not to do so. His failure to disclose this
information, as required, was a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001.
Disqualifying Conditions (DC): 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses; and 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted apply.     
The arrest, charges, and conviction that resulted from Applicant driving a vehicle
after consuming alcohol are isolated incidents. There is no reason to believe they will ever
recur. The only record evidence of prior involvement with the criminal justice system is that
Applicant received a citation for a minor traffic offense many years ago. Additionally,
following his arrest on this occasion he voluntarily attended and successfully completed an
alcohol awareness program. As to those offenses, Mitigating Conditions 32(a): so much
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 32(d): there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal
activity, remorse of restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record,
or constructive community involvement apply. Accordingly, I find Applicant has mitigated
the criminal conduct concern that arose from his alcohol-related arrest.
As noted above, Applicant deliberately provided a false answer in the e-QIP in an
effort to keep the Government from learning of his alcohol-related offense in violation of
18 U.S.C. § 1001. He compounded this offense by providing false testimony in his attempt
to explain away the falsification. As noted earlier, it simply is not believable that an
individual with Applicant’s education and work experience who has held a security
clearance as long as Applicant has and who received a security briefing a week before
6
submitting the e-QIP would not have been aware of the need to disclose that information.
As such, I do not find any mitigating condition applies to this offense. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
For the reasons explained above under Guideline J, I find Guideline E DC 16(a):
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personal
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies.
Applicant was required by his employer to report the adverse information concerning
his arrest, conviction, and fine to the employer independent of providing that information
in the e-QIP. He did not do so when the incidents occurred nor after receiving a security
briefing at which the reporting requirement was briefed. His obligation to self-report such
information was recorded in attendance records maintained by his employer. DC 16(f):
violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to employer as a
condition of employment applies. 
Again, and as noted above under Guideline J, it simply is not believable that an
individual with Applicant’s education and work experience who has held a security
clearance as long as Applicant has and who received a security briefing during which self-
reporting requirements were discussed would not have been aware of the need to disclose
the adverse information about his arrest, conviction and the resulting fine to his employer.
Accordingly, I do not find any Guideline E mitigating condition applies.  
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the security
concerns caused by his criminal and personal conduct. He has failed to overcome the case
against him in this regard or satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guidelines J and E
are decided against Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1. b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a & b: Against Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
