                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                     ) ISCR Case No. 07-01427 
 SSN:   )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 2, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F, E, and B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant partially answered the SOR in an undated response and subsequently 
provided a complete answer on October 10, 2007. She elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s file of 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
relevant material (FORM) on November 30, 2007. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
on December 4, 2007, and it was received on December 6, 2007. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM. On December 11, 2007, 
Department Counsel submitted a supplemental file of relevant material. Applicant was 
afforded another opportunity to file objections and submit material. Applicant did not 
object to the supplemental material and did not provide any additional information. The 
case was assigned to me on January 31, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR and they are incorporated 
herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
statements submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old contracts administrator who has worked for a federal 
contractor since August 2006. She is a college graduate. She is married, but going 
through a divorce.  
 
 Applicant signed her security clearance application (SCA) on September 12, 
2006. She listed she had approximately $10,000 in credit card debts over 180 days 
delinquent. She provided the following statement: “I was out of work and didn’t pay 
credit card bills, working with debt consolidation to pay off creditors.”1 Applicant does 
not list any periods of unemployment on her SCA.2 
 
 In response to interrogatories dated April 23, 2007, Applicant responded she was 
verifying all of the allegations in subparagraph 1, except the debts for her student loans 
that were deferred. She also stated “I was considering contacting a consumer credit 
counseling service, but have not done so to date.”3 
 
 The SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts. Applicant admits in her answer dated 
October 10, 2007, she owes the debts alleged under subparagraphs ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.j, 
1.m, 1.p, and 1.v, totaling $27,986. She denies the remaining debts totaling $16,883. 
She also has $55,000 student loan debt that is deferred. In her answer regarding ¶ 1.a, 
she stated she was “working to pay this account,” ¶1.b, she was “trying to work out a 
payment plan with this creditor,” ¶¶1.f and 1.j she was “trying to work out a payment 
plan,” ¶1.m “I have been unable to locate this creditor,” ¶1.p “I am trying to get an 
address to mail payments to for (sic) this account,” and ¶1.v “I currently have a payment 
agreement.”  
 
1 Security Clearance Application provided with Supplemental Material.  
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Item 10. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant provided a document dated April 19, 2007, which indicates she paid 
the debt in ¶1.f; this debt had been delinquent since 2002.4 Applicant addressed some 
of her debts as follows: She provided an unsigned payment plan from the creditor in 
¶1.v.5 She provided a letter from a collection agency in ¶1. q, indicating it was no longer 
the owner of the debt and provided Applicant with the name and phone number of the 
collection agency now holding the debt.6 She provided a letter from the creditor in ¶1.d 
(who is the same creditor in ¶¶1.g and 1.h, both debts are judgments) indicating they 
disagreed with her interpretation of federal law and they have alerted the credit 
reporting agencies that she disputes the account.7 She provided a letter from the 
creditor listed in ¶1.p stating that she only provided a partial account number so they 
could not locate her account. They also explained to her information she needed to 
provide and the place to send the information to verify the account.8 A similar letter was 
provided from the creditor in ¶1.c stating she had provided incomplete account 
information and provided her with contact information for assistance.9 No information 
was provided by Applicant regarding what actions she has taken subsequent to the 
above mentioned correspondence or regarding all of her other delinquent debts. 
Applicant also stated, “I am currently working on verifying which debts listed on my 
credit report belong to me as I am a victim of identity theft.”10 She did not provide any 
corroborating information about this assertion, such as a police report, a dispute with 
the credit bureaus, or a request to monitor her credit reports.  
 
 Applicant failed to disclose on her SCA her marital status. She admitted she 
falsified the information about her marital status.11 The explanation for why she did not 
list her marriage on her SCA was: “I am not aware of much of the information requested 
and thought it easier to explain as the form did not leave room for missing 
information.”12 The question of ones marital status is uncomplicated. Ample room is 
available on the SCA under the “Additional Information” block to provide explanations. 
That block was empty. Based on the information provided, I find she intentionally 
falsified her SCA.  
 
4 Item 5 at 6. 
 
5 Item 5 at 7-8. 
 
6 Item 5 at 9. 
 
7 Item 5 at 10. 
 
8 Item 5 at 11. 
 
9 Item 5 at 12. 
 
10 Item 5. 
 
11 Item 5. 
 
12 Item 8.  
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s husband is a citizen and resident of Guyana. It is alleged he works for 
the government of Guyana. Applicant stated: “I don’t know if he still lives there. He is no 
longer employed by the Guyanese government.”13 Applicant failed to divulge her 
husband’s citizenship. No information was provided as to what job her husband held in 
the Guyanan government, what contacts he maintains, or where he is currently 
employed. On her SCA, she indicated that she took many short trips to Guyana from 
June 2000 to June 2004. She did not directly answer allegation ¶3.c which alleged she 
traveled to Guyana in June 2000 for her marriage, once between 2000 and 2004, and 
once in 2005.14 I find Applicant’s failures to divulge the above information were 
deliberate and intentional.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
13 Item 5.  
 
14 Item 5. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially over-extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 for financial 
considerations that could raise a security concern and have especially considered AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). Applicant has a history of delinquent debts extending from 2000 
to present. She admitted she owes many of the delinquent debts. Most of them remain 
unpaid and she provided minimal information regarding any substantive actions she has 
taken to pay or resolve the debts. I find both AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and especially considered (a) 
(“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”), (b) (“the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances”), (c) (“the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
 
6 
 
 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”), (d) (“the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”), and 
(e) (“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”).  
Applicant owes thousands of dollars to numerous creditors and failed to provide 
evidence that she is addressing all of her debts. No information was provided to show 
the delinquencies were beyond her control. No information was provided to show she 
actually followed through with credit or financial counseling. It appears she paid one 
debt, but has not initiated a good faith effort to pay her other debts or resolve their 
delinquent status. Applicant made one statement that she was the victim of identity 
theft, but failed to provide information as to which debts she believed were not hers. 
She admitted to over $22,000 in delinquent debt that was not part of an alleged theft. I 
find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct. Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
I have considered all of the personal conduct disqualifying under AG ¶ 16 and 
especially considered (a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities”). Applicant intentionally and deliberately falsified information 
on her SCA by not listing her correct marital status and failing to divulge that her 
husband was a citizen and resident of Guyana.  
Applicant is a college graduate working as a contracts administrator. Her 
explanation as to why she failed to list her marital was that she was “not aware of much 
of the information requested and thought it easier to explain as the form did not leave 
room for missing information.” There is a specific block on the form that allows for 
providing additional information. Applicant chose not to use that block to provide the 
requested information. Minimally she could have divulged she was married, but she did 
not. She also chose not to divulge that her husband is a citizen and resident of Guyana. 
Her explanations are disingenuous and I find her omissions were intentional and 
deliberate.  
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
16. Applicant knew she was married and knew her husband’s citizen status, but failed to 
 
7 
 
 
provide this important required and requested information. She has not provided any 
mitigating evidence. Therefore, I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: Foreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7. I have 
especially considered AG ¶ 7 (a) (“contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion”). I have considered all the information provided and 
conclude that Applicant is married to a citizen of Guyana. She deliberately falsified her 
marital status and her husband’s foreign status. She failed to provide a reasonable 
explanation for lying on her SCA about this information. Her concealment of this 
information, by itself, creates a heightened risk. I have no information about her contact 
with her husband, whether they live together, whether he provides financial support to 
her or visa versa. It is alleged that he works for the Guyanan government. She stated he 
no longer work there, but failed to provide any other information. The lack of information 
regarding either his former role in the government or present role creates a heightened 
risk. With additional information that risk might be mitigated, but based on the lack of 
information provided, Appellant has failed to meet her burden of mitigation. I conclude 
no mitigating conditions apply. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
 
8 
 
 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a long history of 
financial delinquencies. She has failed to address how she is resolving the debts and 
almost all of them remain unpaid. Her answers are inconsistent as to what actions she 
was taking to resolve the debts. She claimed she was a victim of identity theft, but 
offered no evidence to show her actions to resolve that issue. She admitted she lied on 
her SCA about her marital status. She failed to list her husband is a foreign national and 
any specifics about his employment or activities. Applicant deliberately and intentionally 
falsified her SCA. Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
Guidelines F, E, and B. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c-1.v:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO 
Administrative Judge 
