KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline J
DIGEST: In this case Applicant has served in the U.S. military in dangerous circumstances in
Afghanistan and has risked his life to protect American personnel there.  The Judge has
articulated a detailed, rational explanation for her favorable determination.  Favorable
determination affirmed.
CASENO: 07-00034.a1
DATE: 02/05/2008
DATE: February 5, 2008
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00034
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 8, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
Department Counsel’s appeal is limited to Guideline B.1
“[T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the2
positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position
of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests
of the U.S.;”  
[T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign3
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;”
2
(Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On
September 6, 2007, after reviewing the record, Administrative Judge Mary E. Henry granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1
Department Counsel argues that the judge erred by applying Foreign Influence Mitigating
Conditions (FIMC) 8(a)  and 8(b)  and by her failure to discuss the dangerous conditions in2 3
Afghanistan in her whole-person analysis.   
The Judge found that Applicant has two children who are American citizens by birth.
Applicant’s mother and one brother are American citizens residing in the U.S.  Applicant’s sister is
a citizen of and resides in Canada.  Applicant has two brothers who are citizens of and reside in
Afghanistan.  Applicant maintains regular phone contact with those two brothers, who are auto parts
salesmen.  The Judge recognized the security significance of the presence of the two brothers in
Afghanistan, but concluded that the concern was mitigated under FIMC 8(a).  The Judge stated that
the brothers have no ties to the Afghan government or to any non-governmental organization hostile
to U.S. interests in Afghanistan, and when Applicant was in Afghanistan as a translator, the brothers
helped recruit employees for the U.S. military.  Decision at 8.
With regard to FIMC 8(b), Applicant stated that he was loyal to the U.S. and would do
nothing to compromise U.S. interests.  Generally, an Applicant’s statements, by themselves, as to
what he would  do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to little weight.
On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the U.S. is very important
and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.  See, e.g.,ISCR Case 04-
02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007).  In this case, Applicant has served the U.S. military as a
translator in dangerous circumstances in Afghanistan and has risked his life to protect American
personnel there.
In her whole-person analysis, the Judge set out Applicant’s ties to the U.S.  Applicant has
lived in the U.S. for more than 20 years and returned to Afghanistan only once, when necessitated
by his job as a translator for the U.S. Army.  Although he is separated from his wife, he maintains
a close relationship with his children, who are U.S. citizens by birth.  His mother lives in the U.S.
3
The Judge acknowledged the dangerous conditions in Afghanistan.  However, she pointed
out that the Afghan government is moving forward with democracy and developing a  rule of law,
with the assistance of the U.S.  There were no findings that the government of Afghanistan possesses
an aggressive or hostile intelligence/security profile vis-a-vis the U.S., or is otherwise engaged in 
efforts to acquire classified or sensitive economic information from the U.S.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2006).  
The Judge emphasized the contribution Applicant has made in the War on Terrorism in
Afghanistan.  The record contains letters of recommendation from three Americans who have served
in Afghanistan with Applicant.  All attest to his integrity and his invaluable contribution to the
American mission there.  Applicant has served as a translator and as a cultural liaison between
Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing tensions and facilitating transactions between the two
groups.  Applicant participated in interrogations of the Anti-Coalition Militia (ACM) and gathered
information from ACM detainees which developed a greater understanding of ACM activities to
further support U.S. operations.  Applicant put his life in danger on at least one occasion to protect
American lives and interests in Afghanistan.  
Accordingly, in this case, the Judge has articulated a detailed, rational explanation for her
favorable determination under the whole-person concept.  The Board need not agree with the Judge’s
whole-person analysis to conclude that it is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance is AFFIRMED.             
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin           
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
