1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-06187
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Rita O’Brien, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on March 1,
2005. On August 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 27, 2007, and elected to
have his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted
the Government’s written case on October 23, 2007. Applicant received a complete file
of relevant material (FORM) on October 30, 2007, and was provided the opportunity to
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s
The Government submitted eight items in support of its contentions.1
Item 3 (Applicant’s answer to SOR, dated September 11, 2007).2
Item 4 (Security Clearance Questionnaire, dated March 2005).3
Id.4
Item 5 (Applicant’s Affidavit, signed January 31, 2006).5
Id.6
The total outstanding debt is likely more because allegation 1.d lists a debt of $7,008 which is the past7
due portion. The charged off debt for this account was approximately $15,000. This additional amount, as
shown on the 2007 credit report, brings his total delinquent debt to $42,571. 
2
case.  Applicant did not submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on1
January 28, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 19, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegation
in ¶ 1.e of the SOR.  2
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He worked as a
design manager from 1989 until 2000. He is married and has two children. He has
worked for his current employer since December 2003.3
Applicant had his own business for several years.  However, in 1999 his4
business began to fail. His debt occurred from 1999 until 2002 because he tried to keep
the business in operation with his own funds.  He was forced to close his business in5
August 2002. He was unable to pay his business debts.
Applicant experienced no difficulty finding employment after the close of his
business. He has been steadily employed for the past five years. His spouse had been
employed on a part time basis in 2002 and most recently on a full time basis in 2007.
He elected to pay the college tuition for his children rather than pay his delinquent debt.6
The debts alleged in the SOR total approximately $35,000.  Applicant admits the7
debts in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. He claims that he made payments in 2007 on four of the
accounts. However, he provided no evidence or documentation to support the claim.
The charged off accounts remain on his 2007 credit report. Applicant also reported that
he is “waiting for settlement” figures on the debts in 1.b, 1.c and 1.d of the SOR. He has
not paid on the fifth debt (1.e) because it is “contested.” The debt in 1.a is admitted but
then disputed because he claims all his medical bills are paid. The account in 1.a is for
a medical bill. At the same time, Applicant disputed the debt but there is nothing in the
Item 6 (Applicant’s Response to DOHA Interrogatory, dated June 26, 2007).8
Id.9
3
record to support either a payment or the dispute.  In addition, Applicant disputed debt8
1.e based on high interest charges.
In 2005, Applicant listed his substantial debts on his security clearance
application. On that March 2005 application, he remarked that he had every intention of
paying his delinquent obligations. He further explained he began a debt management
program through an Employee Assistance Program at work and would pay off his debt
in 2006. However, there is no record of this financial plan in 2007.
Applicant’s current employment is stable and provides a steady income. Since
2002 he has been gainfully employed. His net monthly income in June 2007 was
$4,450. He has a monthly net remainder of $800. He notes that he is trying to pay back
his creditors while providing for his family. However, he is waiting for settlement figures
from three of the debts as discussed above. His June 2007 personal financial statement
lists his monthly expenses including “miscellaneous” but does not list any scheduled or
reported payments– it affirms “waiting for settlements to be arranged.”  9
Applicant has not received any financial counseling according to his answer to
the SOR. Although he did mention in 2005 that he began a program through his work,
but there is nothing in the record to support this claim. He did not contact his creditors to
arrange any settlements or even small payments on any of the delinquent accounts.  
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
4
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable to
pay some obligations for a period of time. His credit reports confirm that he has not paid
the charged off collection accounts. The activity for the delinquent debts ranges from
5
2001 until the present. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose between about 2001 and 2003. He accumulated some
delinquent debt due to his failed business venture. While that situation may have
precipitated the debt, the inquiry does not end at that point. The Applicant’s problems
have been ongoing and he has not resolved the significant delinquent debts. His
inaction after being employed raise concerns about his current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. This potentially mitigating condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of
the financial problems arose from his downturn and the ultimate close of his business.
However, he did not act responsibly in identifying and resolving his delinquent debts. He
did not set up a plan to repay on a systematic basis. His spouse returned to work and
Applicant chose to pay college tuition instead of his delinquent debt. I find this
potentially mitigating condition does not fully apply in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received counseling and has not resolved
the delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement. He presented no evidence or
documentation to support payment on any of his debts. He is now financially sound and
prepared for future contingencies. He allowed his numerous debts to remain unpaid for
a period of several years despite his increasing income. In 2007, he promised to pay off
“all adverse credit” but he has not done so. I conclude these potentially mitigating
conditions do not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant disputed the first debt
of $100 (medical account). He did not produce any documentation to support this claim.
His statements are inconsistent. As to the debt in 1.e, he disputes it because the
interest charges are high. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
6
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s career and employment
situation was apparently fine until his business venture in 2000. His financial difficulty
began when the business declined and his revenue did not match his business bills.
Due to the downturn and eventual demise of his business venture in August 2002, he
accumulated debt due to circumstances largely beyond his control. However, he did find
employment in 2002 and his wife started to work part time. She is now working full time.
Applicant has been with his current employer since December 2003. His income has
increased and he now has a positive monthly net remainder. Despite this substantial
improvement in finances, Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances
because once he had stable employment he did not start paying his delinquent debt. He
still has the delinquent debt. He provided no documentation to support his claim that he
is paying on some of the debts. He did however, elect to pay the college tuition for his
two children. Even if Applicant could not pay the entire debt, he could have made some
effort to set up a payment plan. However, he has not taken affirmative action to pay or
resolve most of the delinquent debts, raising concerns about his good judgment. Of
course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paidBit is whether his financial
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. Applicant
has not shown sufficient effort to resolve his delinquent debts. He has not met his
burden of proof in this case to overcome the government’s case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from financial
considerations. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
