1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-08385
SSN: --------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 25,
2005. On September 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 9, 2007, and elected to
have his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted
the Government’s written case on October 31, 2007. Applicant received a complete file
of relevant material (FORM) on November 12, 2007, and was provided the opportunity
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s
The Government submitted seven items in support of its contentions.1
Item 3 (Applicant’s answer to SOR).2
Item 4 (Security Clearance Questionnaire, dated January 2005).3
Id.4
Id.5
2
case.  Applicant did not submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on1
January 28, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 19, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegation
in ¶ 1.f of the SOR.   2
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended college
continuing education classes in 1996 and 1997. He worked as a senior engineer from
1991 until 2002. He is divorced and has no children. He has worked for his current
employer since June 2004.3
In January 2001, Applicant began treatment for a Bipolar disorder. At the same
time, his father was very ill with cancer and emphysema. Applicant left his high stress
employment and returned home to be with his father. When his father died in July 2002,
Applicant had no financial difficulties.4
Unfortunately, Applicant experienced difficulty finding employment in his home
state. He was unemployed from October 2002 until March 2003. In 2003, he found a
lower paying job as a salesman. He was again unemployed from April 2003 until August
2004. As a result of the unemployment, he depleted his savings. He then fell behind on
his payments and bills. His vehicle was repossessed and several credit cards were
charged off or in collection.5
The debts alleged in the SOR total approximately $36,000. Applicant admits the
debts in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. He claims that he made payments in 2007 on four of the
accounts. However, he provided no evidence or documentation. He has not paid on the
fifth debt. The debt in 1.f is not his. He reports that the $239 is not his debt, but rather
was his father’s medical bill.
Applicant’s current employment is stable and provides a steady income. Since
2004 he has been gainfully employed. He notes that he is trying to pay back his
creditors while providing for his future. He purchased several pieces of property for
3
investment purposes. He pays a total of $1,167 per month for those investment
properties. He also has a monthly car payment of $430 for his 2004 vehicle.
Applicant has not received any financial counseling according to his answer to
the SOR. He did not contact his creditors to arrange any settlements or even small
payments on any of the delinquent accounts. He is now cognizant of credit card use and
pays cash for goods. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
4
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to pay some
obligations for a period of time. His credit reports confirm that he has not paid the
charged off collection accounts. The activity for the delinquent debts ranges from 2002
until the present. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose between about 2002 and 2003. He accumulated some
delinquent debt due to unemployment and low salary. While the unemployment may
have precipitated the debt, the inquiry does not end at that point. The Applicant’s
problems have been ongoing and he has not resolved the debts. His inaction after being
employed raise concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
This potentially mitigating condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
5
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of
the financial problems arose from his unemployment and lower income. However, he
did not act responsibly in identifying and resolving his delinquent debts. I find this
potentially mitigating condition does not fully apply in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received counseling and has not resolved
the delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement. He presented no evidence or
documentation to support payment on any of his debts. He is now financially sound and
prepared for future contingencies. He even has investment properties that he pays on
monthly.  I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions do not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant disputed the sixth debt
of $239. He did not produce any documentation to support this claim. I conclude this
potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems first began,
Applicant was under great stress and caring for his father. He accumulated debt due to
circumstances largely beyond his control, including unemployment and low income.
However, he did not act responsibly under the circumstances because once he had
stable employment he did not start paying his delinquent debt. He still has the
delinquent debt. He provided no documentation to support his claim that he is paying on
some of the debts. He is, however, paying more than $1,000 a month on his investment
6
properties. He has been gainfully employed with his current employer since 2004.
However, he has not taken affirmative action to pay or resolve most of the delinquent
debts raising concerns about his good judgment. Of course, the issue is not simply
whether all his debts are paidBit is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. Applicant has not shown sufficient effort to
resolve his delinquent debts. He has not met his burden of proof in this case to
overcome the government’s case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
