  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06092
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 15, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline M for misuse of information technology systems and
Guideline E for personal conduct, both of which are based on Applicant’s misuse of a
government computer at his place of work.  
In addition, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines)
approved by the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then
modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September
1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised2
Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on October 30, 2007, and requested a hearing. The
hearing took place as scheduled on January 29, 2008, and the transcript (Tr.) was
received on February 6, 2008.
The record was left open until February 15, 2008, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional documentary evidence. Applicant timely submitted two
letters vouching for his good character. The post-hearing exhibits were forwarded by
department counsel who made no objections. The letters are marked and admitted as
Exhibits E and F. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline M, the SOR alleges that in May 2006 Applicant’s assigned
government computer had inappropriate material on it in the form of “hacker tools” and
adult-content material. Under Guideline E, the SOR cross-references the sole allegation
under Guideline M. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee for a company engaged in defense
contracting. His educational background includes a bachelor of science in electrical
engineering. He has worked for his current employer as a senior science advisor since
October 2006 (Exhibit D). He was worked in the defense industry and held a security
clearance for approximately the last 20 years. His current annual salary is about
$120,000. Based on performance reviews covering 2003–2007, Applicant is a highly
competent employee who produces high quality work (Exhibits A–D).
 On Friday, May 19, 2006, an inspection discovered that Applicant’s assigned
government computer had inappropriate material on it in the form of “hacker tools” and
adult-content material (Exhibit 3). Applicant was then an onsite company employee at a
government facility and his computer was connected to the network system (Tr. 70-71).
Applicant was escorted off the premises and interviewed. He reported that a computer
disc—obtained at a military test facility—contained the “hacker tools” (Exhibit 3).
Although Applicant’s behavior was not in compliance with the rules for using a
government computer, the Army Criminal Investigation Command (CID) determined that
the incident was not a criminal matter and should be handled internally within the
command. On Monday, May 22, 2006, Applicant returned to work at the company
3
location after he was orally reprimanded for not complying with established rules and
was re-briefed on security issues. Applicant was specifically told that he violated a
briefing he signed when he was given access to the computer and that he introduced
software onto the computer without having it approved by the company program office
(Exhibit 3 at 2). About a week later, he returned to the government facility where he
worked until joining his current employer in October 2006. 
Applicant addressed the May 2006 incident during his hearing testimony. He
previously discussed the incident in April 2007 during an investigative interview (Exhibit
2). Concerning the “hacker tools,” he explained it took place as part of his day-to-day
work and it was not an attempt by him to hack the government computer system. He
obtained the computer disc from another contractor who worked at a military test facility
located in another state. The disc had a label that suggested to Applicant that it was
appropriate to use it. Applicant understood the disc contained software to validate
whether a computer system was secure (Tr. 68–70). Applicant took the disc back to his
work location and attempted to use it. He did not load it onto his computer because he
was not a system administrator (Tr. 71). Instead, he ran the program off the disc and
immediately received a “hacker alert” alarm on his computer (Tr. 71–72). He shut the
program down and placed the disc in an overhead bin where it remained until a few
days later when the investigation commenced.
The ensuing investigation and audit of Applicant’s computer discovered the
“hacker tools” and adult-content material. Applicant agrees that he wrongfully used his
government computer to access adult-content material. One of the Web sites he visited
was for dating or match making (Tr. 74). He also admits that he visited this Web site on
several occasions because he was curious, but he never acted on it. Based on this
record, none of the Web sites involved nudity or sexually-explicit material. 
Applicant has been married to the same woman since 1974. The couple have
two adult children. His 31-year-old daughter is living on her own. His 23-year-old son is
living at home recovering from a failed marriage and an unsuccessful college
experience. Also, Applicant’s mother-in-law is living with Applicant and his wife. His wife
works as a secretary for transcription at a medical office. 
Applicant’s wife has never heard him discuss the nature of his work on  behalf of
the government. She became aware of the May 2006 incident when Applicant came
home that day and told her about it. She described Applicant as her best friend, her
rock, and they rely on each other for everything (Tr. 63).
In addition to his wife, a coworker presented favorable character evidence for
Applicant. The coworker, a retired Army officer, has seen nothing of security
significance during the 18 months he has worked with Applicant. He describes Applicant
as a high-quality person who does high-quality work. In addition, the two post-hearing
letters, one from a personal contact and the other from a professional contact, attest to
Applicant’s good character and suitability (Exhibits E and F).
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2)  revokes any5
existing security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 26–27 (setting forth the mitigating and disqualifying conditions).14
 Revised Guidelines at 26. 15
 DC 6 is the  “introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any16
information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or
regulations.”
 DC 5 is the “unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system.”17
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline M,  the security concern is that “noncompliance with rules,14
procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to information technology systems may
raise security concerns about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into
question the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer hardware,
software, firmware, and data used for the communication, transmission, processing,
manipulation, storage, or protection of information.”15
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant misused his
government computer based on the May 2006 incident. Also, the record evidence
supports application of two disqualifying conditions under Guideline M. First, by using
the disc that contained the “hacker tools,” Applicant introduced software onto an
information technology system without proper authorization.  Second, Applicant16
engaged in the unauthorized use of a government computer by using it to access Web
sites containing adult-content material.  Both  matters raise a security concern and may17
be disqualifying because the matters call into question Applicant’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Guideline M has three conditions that could mitigate the security concern, and
those conditions are as follows:
 Revised Guidelines at 26–27. 18
6
1. [S]o much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
2. [T]he misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational efficiency
and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's password or
computer when no other timely alternative was readily available; and,
3. [T]he conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a prompt,
good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of supervisor.18
 
Each MC is discussed below.
The first MC applies to the “hacker tools” aspect of the May 2006 incident. It
applies because the incident happened under circumstances where Applicant honestly
believed that the disc he was using was appropriate given (a) how he came into
possession of it and (b) his understanding of its purpose or function. These
circumstances are unusual enough to suggest that a similar incident is unlikely to recur.
It no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment because
this incident was an honest mistake. MC 1 does not, however, apply to the adult-content
material aspect of the May 2006 incident. 
The second MC applies to the “hacker tools” aspect of the May 2006 incident for
two reasons. First, it applies because it was a minor incident in the scheme of things.
The action taken against Applicant was limited to (a) losing a day of work when he was
escorted off the premises and (b) an oral reprimand. This low-level action suggests that
the matter was not viewed as a major or serious violation. Had the responsible authority
viewed it otherwise, it is likely they would have taken more serious action—such as
written reprimand, a multi-day suspension, or termination—against Applicant. Also, the
fact that he returned to work at the government facility is probative. Had officials viewed
the incident as a major violation, it is likely they would have banned Applicant from the
government facility. Second, MC 2 applies because the reason Applicant used the disc
on the government computer was because he believed, based on his visit to the military
test facility, that the disc would help him with his work. Indeed, the evidence does not
suggest Applicant was trying to hack into the system or engage in some other type of
malicious behavior. Indeed, once he received the alarm, he immediately took the disc
out and did not use it again. MC 2 does not, however, apply to the adult-content
material aspect of the May 2006 incident. 
The third MC does not apply to either aspect of the May 2006 incident. Although
Applicant’s introduction of the “hacker tools” onto the government computer was
unintentional or inadvertent, he did not report that matter after receiving the alarm.
Likewise, the adult-content material aspect does not qualify for mitigation under the
plain language of this MC. 
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the mitigating and disqualifying conditions). 19
 Revised Guidelines at 10. 20
 DC 6 is the “violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer as a21
condition of employment.”
 Revised Guidelines at 11. 22
7
Under Guideline E,  the security concern is that “conduct involving questionable19
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.”20
The record evidence raises a security concern under Guideline E, because
Applicant’s misuse of a government computer violated a briefing he had signed when he
was given access to the computer and that he introduced software onto the computer
without having it approved by the company program office (Exhibit 3 at 2). Given these
circumstances, his misuse falls within the meaning of DC 6.  This raises a security21
concern and may be disqualifying because it calls into question Applicant’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Guideline E has several mitigating conditions, but the only pertinent one is MC 3,
which provides as follows:
[T]he offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.22
MC 3 applies because, as explained above under the Guideline M discussion, his
misuse is minor in the scheme of things and it no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The record evidence shows Applicant
received the equivalent of a slap-on-the-wrist for the misuse and was allowed to return
to the government facility where he remained until he started his new job in October
2006. 
This case has also been considered under the whole-person concept, as the
record evidence is both disqualifying and mitigating. Applicant is 52 years old and
sufficiently mature to make prudent decisions about his conduct at the work place.
Overall, his misuse of the government computer was relatively minor. The “hacker tools”
aspect of the May 2006 incident was a sloppy mistake, but also an honest mistake
made without malice. The adult-content material aspect of the May 2006 incident was
not an honest mistake, and Applicant admits he was wrong. The record evidence
shows, however, that his actions in this regard did not involve nudity or sexually-explicit
8
material, which would be considered a major or serious transgression. On this basis, it
is mitigated. In addition, Applicant has approximately 20 years of work history in the
defense industry, and his recent performance reviews establish that Applicant is a
highly competent employee working in a highly technical field (Exhibits A–D). Based on
this record, it appears the May 2006 incident is the only adverse information concerning
Applicant. This circumstance suggests that Applicant has, on balance, the requisite self-
control, good judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to properly handle and
safeguard classified information. Finally, based on his testimony and demeanor during
the hearing, Applicant appeared to be contrite. Accordingly, the likelihood of
continuance or recurrence of similar conduct is assessed as remote if not nil. 
Based on the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable,
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security
concerns under both guidelines. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with national interest  to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
