1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-00852
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Holly Walker, Esquire
February 7, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on April 26,
2006. On August 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on October 2, 2007, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
November 13, 2007. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 8, 2008, and I
convened the hearing on January 28, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1
through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf
and two other witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. He submitted Exhibits A
through L, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
2
February 5, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted SOR allegations1.a., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e., and he
denied 1.b. and 2.a. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact.
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 30 years old. He is not married, and he has no children. He received
a Bachelor of Science degree in 2000. 
Applicant works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR lists 5 allegations regarding illegal drug involvement under Adjudicative
Guideline H. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as they were
listed in the SOR:
1.a. Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from approximately 1995
through October 2005. He used it one last time on July 21, 2006. 
Applicant testified that he never used marijuana in high school. He started using
it when he began attending college in 1995. It was sporadic, but for one quarter in 1998,
his usage increased to one or two times a week. When he noticed that it was affecting
his grades, his usage decreased to approximately once a month.   After he graduated in
2000, his use of marijuana decreased even more significantly to one or two times a year
until his second to last usage in October 2005.  He ceased usage in October 2005,
because he was aware that he would be applying for a SCA. However, Applicant
conceded that he used it one last time on July 21, 2006, when it was offered to him on
his birthday. 
He testified credibly that he intends to never use marijuana again. He explained
that he has committed to his girlfriend that he will not use it again. He is planning a life
with his girlfriend, and he does not want drugs to play a part in that life. He also testified
that using Marijuana would hurt his career, about which he is now more serious. Finally,
he testified that even if he did not need a security clearance, he has made a decision
that he will not use marijuana or any other illegal drug in the future. 
1.b. Applicant used marijuana in July 21, 2006, after he executed a Security
Clearance Application (SCA) on April 26, 2006. In the SOR, the Government alleged
3
that Applicant knew he could not use drugs while holding a security clearance. Applicant
denied this allegation in his RSOR, although during his testimony, he conceded that he
did use the marijuana one last time after applying for a security clearance. He described
it as “a lapse in judgement” (Tr at 103). He also concluded, “in retrospect, it was very
foolish” (Tr at 104).
1.c.  Applicant has purchased some of the marijuana that he has used. 
1.d.  Applicant used mushrooms in the Netherlands in 1999. He testified that he
purchased the mushrooms at a store, and he was under the belief that the mushrooms
were legal in the Netherlands. He never again used mushrooms or any other
hallucinogenic drug after that incident. 
1.e.  Applicant used Ecstasy in 2002. He testified that his girlfriend gave him a
third of a pill, which she identified as Ecstacy. He felt no effect from the pill. He has
never used Ecstacy since that time, and he has no intension of using it in the future.
Applicant is no longer with that girlfriend. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
2.a. As discussed in 1.b., above, Applicant executed a SCA on April 26, 2006
(Exhibit 1). He thereafter used marijuana on one occasion on July 21, 2006. The
Government alleges that Applicant’s use of marijuana after he applied for a security
clearance exhibits questionable judgement and unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations. 
Mitigation
Applicant received the very prestigious Eagle Scout Award from the Boy Scouts
of America in 1993 when he was 16. He submitted the Eagle Scout certification and a
number of Eagle Scout commendations from important public figures (Exhibit J).
He also submitted his performance evaluations form his employer for years 2004,
2005, and 2006 (Exhibit G). His evaluations were fairly positive and his work efforts
seem to be moving in the right direction. 
Finally, two witnesses, who are coworkers of Applicant, testified on his behalf.
Applicant also offered into evidence character letters from individuals who know or have
known him in his professional or private life (Exhibit E). They all were extremely
laudatory in describing  Applicant’s high integrity, reliability, and good judgement. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
4
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, including the possession, and use of
5
marijuana, and his use after applying for a security clearance is of concern, especially in
light of his desire to have access to the nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct
pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls within Drug Involvement
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25. (a) (any drug abuse), and (c) (illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution).
Based on the Applicant’s extremely limited use of any illegal substance in the last
few years, and his demonstrated intention not to continue using drugs in the future, I
conclude that Applicant’s conduct comes within Mitigating Condition (MC) 26. (b)
because of Applicant’s (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2)
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used and (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence.  
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant has used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H.
Applicant, on the other hand, has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case against
him.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1 Guideline H of the SOR is concluded for Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant executed a
SCA on April 26, 2006, and he thereafter used marijuana on July 21, 2006. 
While Applicant’s use of marijuana after completing a SCA does show poor
judgement, it was done only on one occasion, and he testified that he has realized the
folly of such conduct. 
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E, I conclude that no DCs apply.  I resolve
Paragraph 2, Guideline E, for Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
6
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines H and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s strong and credible
testimony that he will not use any illegal substance in the future, together with his
achievement of Eagle Scout and his positive employment evaluations, and the laudatory
letters of recommendation and testimony, I find that the record evidence leaves me
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
