1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-03035
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his security clearance application (e-QIP) on September 28,
2006. On June 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline J and Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended,
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 15, 2007. He answered the
SOR in writing on July 24, 2007, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 16, 2007. The case
was assigned to me on November 28, 2007, to make a decision as to whether it was
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or renew a security clearance for
Applicant. On December 10, 2007, I scheduled a hearing for January 23, 2008.
2
I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 23, 2008. Two government
exhibits (Ex. 1-2) and three Applicant exhibits (Ex. A-C, Exhibit B over the government’s
objection) were admitted, and Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.)
received by DOHA on February 1, 2008. Based on a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, pertinent federal statutes and case law, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Request for Administrative Notice
At the hearing, Department Counsel requested administrative notice of federal
statutes and case law pertinent to the Military Selective Service Act, 50 U.S.C. App. §
451 et seq., and of information published by the Selective Service System concerning
conscientious objection and alternative service, prohibitions on registering after age 26,
and federal benefits and programs available only to registrants. Applicant objected to
considering the information from the Selective Service System based on its publication
after the requirement to register for him had expired. I agreed to take administrative
notice of applicable federal statutes, the case law concerning whether the failure to
register was a continuing offense, and the information furnished by the Selective
Service System, but I will also take into account the general nature of the information
provided by the Selective Service System.
Findings of Fact
DOHA alleged under Guideline J and Guideline E that Applicant willfully failed to
register with the Selective Service Act as required by 50 U.S.C. App. § 453. Applicant
admitted he failed to register as alleged under Guideline J but denied it was willful (“I
deny that my actions were ‘willful’ because of my confusion and ignorance of the proper
way to assert conscientious objector status with the Selective Service”). Applicant
disputed the Guideline E concern on the basis that his failure to register occurred many
years ago when he was a young man. After consideration of the evidence of record, I
make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a senior imaging engineer who has worked for his current employer,
a defense contractor, since May 2004. His employer designs and manufactures
computer tomography (CT) scanners for automatic detection of explosives and
weapons, and Applicant seeks a secret-level security clearance for his complex
technical work in developing algorithms (Ex. A). He has never held a clearance (Tr. 64).
    Applicant was born in February 1961. During his youth, all males in the U.S.
between the ages of 18 and 26 were required to register with the Selective Service
System (50 U.S.C. App. § 451 et seq.):
Except as otherwise provided in this title, it shall be the duty of every male
citizen of the United States, and every other male person now or hereafter
3
in the United States, who, on the day or days fixed for the first or any
subsequent registration, is between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six,
to present himself for and submit to registration at such time or times and
place or places, and in such manner, as shall be determined by
proclamation of the President and by rules and regulations prescribed
hereunder. 
50 U.S.C. App. § 453. Effective March 29, 1975, U.S. President Ford terminated the
procedures for registration under the Military Selective Service Act. When Applicant
turned 18 in February 1979, there was no requirement to register.
On July 2, 1980, U.S. President Carter, by proclamation, ordered male citizens
and male resident aliens, who were born on or after January 1, 1960, and had attained
their 18  birthday, to register with the Selective Service System unless otherwiseth
exempt. Registration was to commence on July 21, 1980, with male persons born in
1961 to present themselves for registration on any of the six days beginning Monday,
July 28, 1980. Covered males born on or after January 1, 1963, had 60 days to register
(from 30 days before to 30 days after reaching age 18). Under 50 U.S.C. § 462(a), the
knowing failure, neglect, or refusal to perform any duty required under the Selective
Service Act was punishable by a term of imprisonment of up to five years and/or a fine
of not more than $10,000.
Applicant, then a college student on summer break, knew of his obligation to
register with the Selective Service and he did not register (Tr. 54-55, 64-65). During the
summer, he received a letter from an acquaintance encouraging him to not register.
Applicant began to consider whether he could kill someone, and he did not want to risk
being placed in a battle situation. In 1980 and 1981, Applicant contacted an
organization of conscientious objectors and inquired as to whether there was any way
that he could avoid combat. They had no answer for him (Tr. 71). Aware that the
government had not granted conscientious objector status to those who avoided the
draft (Tr. 57-58, 72), Applicant took a “wait and see attitude,” even while he feared
prosecution (“I kept saying to myself, well, if I was prosecuted, I guess I would have to, I
would have to register.” Tr. 55):
I believed that the government should have made some provisions for
registering as a conscientious objector, there was [sic] no provisions, and I
believed at the time that if I didn’t register, and maybe it would change,
there would be something that would happen over time where, you know,
they would start allowing people to register as a conscientious objector
(Tr. 59).
Applicant’s belief came from the lack of any efforts to prosecute him. He was unaware that the Government1
had a passive enforcement policy of prosecuting only those who report themselves or who were reported by
others as having violated the registration requirement (Tr. 76-77). See Wayte v. U.S., 470 U.S. 598 (1985).
4
Over the next year or so, it became clear to him there would be no criminal
consequences for his failure to register.  Applicant continued his education without1
much thought to his failure to register as the years passed, although on occasion he
was reminded through posted signs of the requirement to register for all males between
18 and 26 years of age. See Tr. 54-59, 64-65, 73, 78.
In 1982, the Selective Service Act was amended under Public Law 97-252 to
provide that those persons who fail to comply with the registration requirement are
ineligible for any form of assistance or benefit (loans, grants, or work assistance)
provided under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 for instruction beginning after
June 30, 1983 (50 U.S.C. App. § 453(f)(1)). In November 1985, a statutory bar to
employment with the executive branch of the federal government was enacted for those
persons who were required to register under the Selective Service Act and who
knowingly and willfully had not registered before the requirement terminated or became
inapplicable to them (5 U.S.C. § 3328). In November 1986, pursuant to Public Law 99-
661, the Selective Service Act was amended to make some non-registrants eligible for
educational assistance and other federal benefits: 
(g) A person may not be denied a right, privilege, or benefit under Federal
Law by reason of failure to present himself for and submit to registration
under section 3 [section 453 of this Appendix] if--
(1) the requirement for the person to so register has terminated or
become inapplicable to the person; and
(2) the person shows by the preponderance of the evidence that
the failure of the person to register was not a knowing and willful
failure to register.
50 U.S.C. App. § 462(g). 
In 1983, Applicant earned his bachelor’s degree in physics (Tr. 61, Ex. C). He
pursued graduate studies in physics through teaching and then research fellowships
(Tr. 62). When his source of funding ran out, Applicant applied for a federal guaranteed
student loan in 1990. His application was denied because he could not produce a
registration number with the Selective Service. Applicant maintains he would have
registered at that time but was not allowed to do so because he was over 26 (Tr. 45, 67,
Answer). Applicant was awarded his doctorate degree in physics in 1991 (Tr. 62, Ex. C).
In June 1991, Applicant and his spouse married. From 1992 to 1994, Applicant
was a postdoctoral research fellow at a university (Ex. C). From September 1994 to
August 1996, Applicant pursued a master’s degree in media arts and sciences while
5
starting a family.  His has two daughters, who were born in August 1995 and July 1997
(Ex. 1).
In 1997, Applicant founded a video and still image processing software start-up
business with venture capital funding. During 1998, he worked as a software engineer
for a company where he wrote special effects plug-ins for video post production. From
August 1999 to April 2004 he was employed as a senior software engineer by another
commercial firm (Ex. 1). He designed and implemented image processing filters and
optical flow algorithms (Ex. C).
Applicant began working for his present employer as a senior imaging engineer
in May 2004 (Ex. 1, Ex. C). Applicant’s work in algorithm development for X-ray and CT
scanners is largely unclassified (Tr. 64, Ex. A, Ex. C), but the resulting scanner is tested
against a classified performance standard (Ex. A). At the request of his employer,
Applicant applied for a secret clearance by completing an electronic questionnaire for
investigations processing (e-QIP) on September 28, 2006 (Ex. 1). Applicant admitted in
response to question 20.b that he had not registered with the Selective Service System,
and stated, “I chose not to register with selective service because I was a conscientious
objector to war. I was opposed to all killing because of my religious and moral beliefs.”
(Ex. 1).
Applicant now regrets his failure to register with the Selective Service System,
primarily because his conduct was unfair to those registrants who complied with their
obligation (“I’m sorry because I know it’s unfair, it’s unfair to think that I was different
than every other man of my age. If I could do it, if I could do it, if I could, if I could
register now, I certainly would, I want to serve my country.” Tr. 80). He is not proud of
his noncompliance (Tr. 66, 81).
His employer’s vice president for engineering is aware of Applicant’s
contributions since May 2004 and he has had the opportunity to assess Applicant’s
work directly since August 2006. He vouches for Applicant’s judgment, reliability,
honesty, and trustworthiness (Ex. A).
Applicant has been a member of his religious congregation for the past eight
years. He has shown himself to be a trustworthy contributor. Applicant informed his
rabbi of his failure to register with the Selective Service System when he was 19. She
considers him to be a mature and reliable adult who “recognizes his mistake and is duly
repentant” (Ex. B). 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
6
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG
¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
50 U.S.C. App. § 462(d) provides:2
No person shall be prosecuted, tried, or punished for evading, neglecting, or refusing to
perform the duty of registering imposed by section 3 of this title (section 453 of this Appendix)
unless the indictment is found within five years next after the last day before such person
attains the age of twenty-six, or within five years next after the last day before such person
does perform his duty to register, whichever shall first occur.
7
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” Every male U.S. citizen between the ages of
18 and 26 is required to register under the Selective Service Act in the manner
determined by proclamation of the President. The President determined that persons
required to register under 50 U.S.C. App. § 453, born in calendar year 1961 were
required to present themselves for registration on any of the six days beginning
Monday, July 28, 1980. Exec. Proc. 4771, 45 F.R. 45247, 94 Stat. 3775 (1980). Since
he was born in February 1961, Applicant was required to register with the Selective
Service on any of those six days. By his own admission, Applicant was notified of the
requirement to register and chose to not do so. Applicant could have registered late until
his 26  birthday in February 1987, and he did not do so.th
Citing ISCR Case No. 01-23890 (A.J. Mar. 18, 2003), Applicant proffered “a
technical argument” against violation of 50 U.S.C. App. § 453 because there was no
requirement to register in 1979 when he turned 18 (Tr. 44-45). While both he and the
applicant in ISCR Case No. 01-23890 were born in 1961 and therefore were not
required to register with the Selective Service in 1979, the government is not repeating
the mistake of ISCR Case No. 01-23890 and alleging here that Applicant violated the
Selective Service Act by not registering within 30 days of his 18  birthday. Rather, theth
government’s position is that Applicant was required to register with the Selective
Service on any of the six days beginning Monday, July 28, 1980, and that late
registration would have been accepted until he turned 26.  In ISCR Case No. 01-23890,
DOHA Administrative Judge Gales recognized this requirement to register for males
born in 1961, and concluded the applicant in his case had a “continuing duty” to register
with the Selective Service commencing July 28, 1980, until his 26  birthday, but that theth
uncharged conduct was mitigated by the passage of time and absence of willful
disregard. Applicant’s case is factually distinguishable in that he knew he had a duty to
register and did not do so.
Applicant committed serious criminal conduct by his knowing and willful
noncompliance with 50 U.S.C. App. § 453. Pursuant to 50 U.S.C. App. § 462, Applicant
could have been prosecuted for failure to register, and if convicted, sentenced to up to
five years in a prison and/or a substantial fine.   Furthermore, the statutory bars from2
federal executive agency employment under 5 U.S.C. § 3328 and from eligibility for
federal educational assistance under 50 U.S.C. App. § 462(f)(1), confirm the
seriousness with which the failure to register is viewed by the government. Under
Guideline J, disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted”) apply.
8
Even serious criminal conduct may be mitigated by the passage of time, provided
it is not likely to recur and no longer casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability,
or trustworthiness (see AG ¶ 32(a) (“so much time has elapsed since the criminal
behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment”)). As to whether the failure to register should be viewed as a completed
offense at the expiration of the six-day period established for registration by Presidential
Proclamation 4771 or as a continuing offense until he turned 26, the Selective Service
regulations effective in 1980 do not contain a provision imposing a continuing duty to
register. The Tenth Circuit has held it a single offense (see U.S. v. Harmon, 486 F.2d
363 (1973)), although other federal appellate courts have more recently interpreted §
462(d) in conjunction with § 453 to conclude that Congress intended failure to register to
be a continuing offense. See, e.g., U.S. v. Eklund, 733 F.2d 1287 (8  Cir. 1984)th
(offense is not complete until the statute of limitations begins to run, which for those who
never file is at age 26);U.S. v. Kerley, 838 F. 2d 932 (7  Cir. 1988). Even DOHAth
administrative judges have disagreed. See ISCR Case No. 01-2380, supra; ISCR Case
No. 03-02799 (A.J. Young, Jul. 26, 2004) (refusal to register for draft within 60 days of
applicant’s 18  birthday an isolated act). I am inclined to agree with those federal courtsth
that have imposed a continuing duty. Even so, 20 years have passed since the
requirement to register applied to Applicant. Moreover, the offense cannot recur as a
matter of law. AG ¶ 32(a) partially applies because of the passage of time and he is no
longer subject to the registration requirement. However, his deliberate disregard for the
law continues to cast doubt about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Successful rehabilitation encompasses several factors, including “passage of
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or rehabilitation, job training or
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.”
AG ¶ 32(d). Applicant has a record of significant educational achievement and stable
employment. He has also been involved in his religious congregation for the past eight
years. The failure to register with the Selective Service is the only blemish on his record
of productive citizenship, but it is a very serious concern. The Government recognizes
that some individuals are conscientiously opposed to fighting wars, and has made
specific provisions for avoiding combat by applying for conscientious objector status.
Applicant did not apply for conscientious objector status.
Statutory bars to federal employment and to eligibility for federal student loans
were enacted after Applicant was required to register, although before the requirement
became inapplicable to him. There is no evidence that Applicant knew of these
consequences until his student loan application was denied in 1991, but the government
must be assured that those with classified access can be counted on to fulfill their
obligations even when there are no negative consequences for failure to do so.
Applicant now expresses regret over his failure to register (“I know what I did was
wrong.” Tr. 43), and he cannot as a matter of law repeat the same criminal conduct.
However, his failure to provide a consistent, credible explanation for his failure to
register between July 28, 1980, and his 26  birthday in February 1987, precludes meth
from finding that he is successfully rehabilitated.
9
When he completed his SF 86 in September 2006, Applicant indicated that he
had made a choice in not registering with the Selective Service because he was a
conscientious objector. Yet, when he answered the SOR, Applicant denied that his
conduct was willful, and asserted “confusion and ignorance of the proper way to assert
conscientious objector status with the Selective Service.” At his hearing, Applicant never
explained why he did not register during the six days set forth for registration by
proclamation. He testified that late in summer 1980, he received a letter from an
acquaintance urging him not to register, and it was then that he began to think about
conscientious objector status (Tr. 54-55). He decided not to register because he
objected to the government’s failure to exempt or otherwise provide for registration as a
conscientious objector (see Tr. 59). As for his failure to register by his 26  birthday,th
Applicant initially indicated that during the year or so after he should have registered, he
feared prosecution (“I kept saying to myself, well, if I was prosecuted, I guess I would
have to, I would have to register.” (Tr. 55)). This suggests Applicant knew he could have
registered late. After it became clear to him that the government wasn’t going to
prosecute, Applicant claimed he gave it little thought (“completely fallen off his radar”
(Tr. 78-79)). While the requirement to register was likely not something that kept
Applicant awake at night (Tr. 80), it is difficult to believe that he never gave it another
thought, especially where he had seen publicly posted reminders of the requirement to
register (Tr. 78). His explanation for failing to register despite these reminders, “it just
didn’t occur that it applied to me . . . Well, I thought it was, it was, you know, that it was
a done deal” (Tr. 79), is inconsistent with his testimony that he would have registered to
avoid a credible threat of prosecution. Furthermore, it would require a finding of naivete
that the record does not support. By his 26  birthday, Applicant was well into histh
graduate studies toward a doctorate in physics. Had he any intent to comply with his
obligation, he would have at least inquired into the procedures.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern related to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Applicant acknowledges that he exercised poor judgment by not registering with
the Selective Service. His conduct falls within the general security concern underlying
Guideline E, but none of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 apply to his failure
to register. The government’s reliance on AG ¶ 16(c) is not well taken in the absence of
evidence of credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline. The
only adverse information of security concern is the failure to register with the Selective
10
Service, which is sufficient for an adverse determination under Guideline J in the
absence of successful rehabilitation. The record does not support any concerns of
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress (see AG ¶ 16(e)(“personal conduct,
or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known,
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing”)). Applicant
disclosed his failure to register with the Selective Service when he applied for his
security clearance (Ex. 1), and to his rabbi (Ex. B). The security concerns raised by
Applicant’s deliberate disregard of the registration requirement are more appropriately
considered under Guideline J.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is no statutory bar to holding
a security clearance by those males who deliberately defy the requirement to register
with the Selective Service. Since he was only 19 when ordered to register by
Presidential proclamation, his immaturity (see AG ¶ 2(4)) must be considered but it
does not excuse his failure to comply with his ongoing duty to rectify his misconduct by
registering before his 26  birthday. As the criminal penalties for a violation reflect, failureth
to register is viewed as very serious (see AG ¶ 2(a)). Applicant’s decision not to register
was premeditated, deliberate, and repeated over the years. He failed to comply with an
important obligation of citizenship. Congress and the President specifically emphasized
this obligation by statutory bars to federal employment and student loans. Such bars are
not in place for many felonies with similar penalties.
Applicant’s personal and work accomplishments are indicators of reform (see AG
¶ 2(a)(6)) but he has not yet shown that he can fulfill his obligations without regard to his
11
self-interest. While he provided character references who vouch for his good character,
integrity, and work ethic, I did not find his testimony at his hearing about his reasons for
not registering to be credible. His efforts to excuse or minimize his defiance of the law
show he is unwilling to accept full responsibility for his conduct. In response to the SOR,
he stated, “I believe I was poorly counseled before making my decision.” But at his
hearing, he testified that the organization for conscientious objectors that he consulted
in 1980 and 1981 “couldn’t really tell [him] what to do.” (Tr. 71). Given the concerns for
his credibility, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
________________________
ELIZABETH M. MATCHINSKI
Administrative Judge
