1
                                                             
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
         
            
In the matter of: )
)
)          ISCR Case No. 07-03096  
  SSN:          )
           )
         Applicant for Security Clearance   )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
__________
Decision
__________
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline B (Foreign
Influence). Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On October 3, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as Security Clearance Application (SF
86). On August 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended,
On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum directing1
application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made under the
Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program  (Regulation),
dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The revised
Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case.
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Nov. 7, 2007; and2
Applicant acknowledged receipt on Nov. 14, 2007, which DOHA received on Nov. 15, 2007. The DOHA
transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information.
2
modified and revised.  The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign1
Influence). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to
an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked.
On September 11, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 7, 2007, was provided to
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant did not submit any information within2
the 30-day time period after receiving a copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to
me on January 28, 2008.
PROCEDURAL RULINGS
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request in his FORM that I take
administrative notice of certain facts relating to Hong Kong. Department Counsel also
provided supporting documents to show the basis for the facts in his FORM, which are
contained in Exs. I through IX. Inasmuch as Applicant did not respond to Department
Counsel’s FORM, any objection Applicant may have had to my considering these
documents is considered waived. 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12,
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No.
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co.
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). I took administrative notice
of various facts derived from Department Counsel’s FORM and Exs. I through IX as
indicated under subheading “Hong Kong” of this decision.
3
Findings of Fact
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶
1.a to 1.d in his response to the SOR. However, he denied that he had “divided
loyalties” under ¶ 1. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of
fact.  
Applicant is a 36-year-old engineer, who has been employed by his defense
contractor employer since May 2005. Government Exhibit (GE) 4. He is a U.S.-born
citizen and does not hold dual citizenship and/or a foreign passport. GE 5. He seeks a
security clearance in conjunction with his employment.
Applicant was awarded a Master of Science Degree in Mechanical Engineering in
May 1999. Applicant married his wife in August 2005. She was born in Hong Kong in
1973 and is a citizen of Hong Kong. SOR ¶ 1.a. The U.S. Department of Homeland
Security granted her permanent residence status (green card) in June 2006. Applicant
does not list any children in his October 2006 security clearance application. In addition
to Applicant’s wife, Applicant’s immediate family members consist of his parents, and
three adult siblings. His parents are naturalized U.S. citizens, and his siblings are U.S.-
born citizens. His parents and siblings reside in the U.S. GE 4. 
Applicant’s wife came to the U.S. in “1999/2000” on a student visa and attended
college from “1999/2000 to 2000/2001.” GE 5. After attending college, she worked for a
non-profit organization after being granted a work visa. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law was born in Hong Kong in 1947 and is a citizen and
resident of Hong Kong. She is employed in a senior position for a university in Hong
Kong. Applicant’s father-in-law was born n China in 1943 and is a citizen and resident of
Hong Kong. He is a retired politician, who lost his last election in 2004. SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and
1.c. He held office under British rule and under the People’s Republic of China (PRC)
until he was defeated in 2004. Applicant’s spouse has monthly telephone contact with
her parents in Hong Kong. Applicant’s telephone contact with his in-laws averages one-
to-two times a year around holidays. His e-mail contact with his in-laws averages two-
to-three times a year also around holidays. GE 5.
Applicant and his wife traveled to Hong Kong from August 2004 to September
2004. This visit occurred before their marriage for the purpose of visiting Applicant’s
wife’s parents. Applicant and his wife traveled to Hong Kong for a second time in
December 2005 to visit Applicant’s wife’s parents. SOR ¶ 1. d.
Applicant denied the notion that he had any divided loyalties between the U.S.
and Hong Kong. He stated he witnessed the 9/11 disaster from his office in New York
The contents of the Hong Kong section are taken in whole or in part from Department Counsel’s3
FORM and its attachments.
4
City, which is where he worked at the time. This tragedy deeply affected him and he
added that he would not do anything to endanger American lives.
Hong Kong3
Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) on July 1, 1997. Hong Kong has a population of 6.9 million and 95% of
Hong Kong’s population is of Chinese descent. China has given Hong Kong a high
degree of autonomy, except the PRC has retained responsibility for defense and foreign
policy. Recently, China has taken a more active oversight role of Hong Kong’s control of
political developments.
Under Chinese law, PRC citizenship is automatic for persons of Chinese
descent, who were born in Hong Kong. The Hong Kong government generally respects
the human rights of its citizens, however, reported human rights problems include some
political restrictions on the legislature’s power, media self-censorship, violence and
discrimination against women, and restrictions on workers’ rights to collectively bargain.
China has an authoritarian, Communist government. China has a poor human
rights record, suppresses political dissent, and practices arbitrary arrest and detention,
forced confessions, torture, and other prisoner mistreatment.
China is a nuclear power with a large Army. China is geographically vast, and
has a population of over one billion people. It has significant resources, and an
economy that in recent years has expanded about 10% per year. China aggressively
competes with the United States in many areas. PRC’s competitive relationship with the
United States exacerbates the risk posed by Applicant’s Hong Kong connections.  
China actively collects military, economic and proprietary, industrial information
about the United States because of the following circumstances: (1) its position as a
global superpower; (2) its military, political, and economic investments in the Pacific Rim
and Asia; (3) its leading role in development of advanced technology that China desires
for economic growth; and (4) China considers the large number of Americans of
Chinese ancestry as intelligence targets. China’s active intelligence gathering programs
focus on sensitive and protected U.S. technologies. China maintains intelligence
operations in Hong Kong utilizing PRC nationals with Hong Kong connections.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind4
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than
the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does
not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a
preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and5
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
5
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information.
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition,
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant]
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
6
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3.
Analysis
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests”
stating:
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying in this case, including:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
7
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not,
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb.
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent
contact with his in-laws. These close relationships with these relatives create a potential
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion meriting a
close examination of all circumstances.
The Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying
conditions as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The
Government established Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of Hong Kong and resident of
the U.S.; that his in-laws are citizens and residents of Hong Kong; that his father-in-law
is a retired politician in Hong Kong, who ran for office in 2004; and that Applicant
traveled to Hong Kong in 2004 and 2005. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce
evidence and prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.
Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially
applicable to these disqualifying conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation.
Applying common sense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption
that a person has ties of affection for, and/or obligation to, the immediate family
members of the person’s spouse. ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26,
2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has
demonstrated the indicia of ties of affection for/and or obligation to his in-laws by
8
frequent telephone and e-mail contact as well as accompanying his wife to Hong Kong
to visit his in-laws in 2004 and 2005. 
The record is void of details regarding the status of Applicant’s father-in-law as a
retired politician, including the type of position he held, level of past responsibility, length
of service, and circumstances surrounding his electoral defeat in 2004. Also identified in
the record is what influence, if any, the Chinese Government could exert on Applicant’s
mother-in-law as a result of her employment in a senior position for a major university in
Hong Kong. As a result of the positions held by Applicant’s in-laws, the burden shifted to
Applicant to show his in-laws and their positions do not create security risks. 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd.
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As
noted supra under the subheading “Hong Kong,” Hong Kong is a part of the PRC, which
is ruled by a communist government that actively engages in intelligence gathering
against the U.S. The PRC also has a poor human rights record.
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this
proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one. 
[Guideline B] hinges not on what choice Applicant might make if he is
forced to choose between his loyalty to his family and the United States,
but rather hinges on the concept that Applicant should not be placed in a
position where he is forced to make such a choice. ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005).
On balance, Applicant has not met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood
that [his relationship with his in-laws] could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.” The nature of the PRC’s government and its ongoing intelligence gathering
activities against the U.S. places Applicant in just this position, given his family’s
continued presence and connection with Hong Kong and the PRC. Accordingly,
Mitigating Conditions 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) do not apply.
Whole Person Concept
 In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept,
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and
 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 (App.6
Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. Adams, 468
F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is missing when each
event is viewed in isolation).
 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the eighth7
APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 at 5 (App.
Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006)
(remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for exploitation”), but see
ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that eighth APF is exclusive
circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases).
9
circumstances.”  The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are6
used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign influence does not involve
misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the
eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.  In addition to the7
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.   
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.;
and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).
There is some mitigating evidence that weighs towards grant of Applicant’s
security clearance. Applicant is a U.S.-born citizen and has lived in the U.S. his entire
life except for brief periods of foreign travel. His parents are naturalized U.S. citizens
and his three adult siblings are U.S.-born citizens. All of his immediate family members
live in the U.S. His ties to the United States are stronger than his ties to his wife’s family
members in Hong Kong. There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken any action
which could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United
States very seriously, and he has worked diligently for a defense contractor for almost
three years. The FORM contains no derogatory record evidence about the Applicant.
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal
connections to Hong Kong.  Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole
person analysis.  First, the PRC is a nuclear power and PRC’s government is a rival of
the United States. China is an authoritarian, Communist state. More importantly for
security purposes, PRC actively seeks classified and industrial/economic information.
The PRC may attempt to use Applicant’s in-laws who live in Hong Kong to obtain such
information. Second, he had significant connections to Hong Kong vis-à-vis his wife’s
parents. Although his wife immigrated to the United States in “1999/2000,” she was born
in Hong Kong, and spent her formative years there. Her parents live and reside in Hong
Kong and held or hold visible positions in Hong Kong. Applicant and his wife have
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006). 8
10
visited Applicant’s in-laws in Hong Kong two times recently, i.e. 2004 and 2005.
Applicant did not rule out visiting Hong Kong in the future. Applicant’s wife, and to a
lesser extent Applicant, maintain frequent contact with Applicant’s wife’s parents in
Hong Kong by telephone and e-mail. These contacts are manifestations of strong
affection and regard Applicant and/or his wife have for family members in Hong Kong.  
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir.th
1990).  This Analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern
under the facts presented that the Hong Kong Government or its agents might exploit or
attempt to exploit Applicant’s family members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would
have to choose between his pledged loyalty to the U.S. and those family members.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. This is a close case, but ultimately the
evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”  and8
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude
he is not eligible for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:         
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
____________________________
Robert J. Tuider
Administrative Judge
