  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-04390
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: E. Shane Holloway, Esquire 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 16, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline H for drug involvement and Guideline J for criminal
conduct based on two drug-related offenses. 
In addition, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines)
approved by the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then
modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or
replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September
1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised2
Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on November 2, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The hearing took place as scheduled on January 31, 2008, and the transcript (Tr.) was
received on February 11, 2008.
The record was left open until February 8, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity
to submit an additional documentary exhibit. It was timely submitted and department
counsel had no objections to it. The post-hearing matter is marked and admitted as
Exhibit F–Affidavit of Applicant. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided
against Applicant. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges Applicant was arrested, charged, and
convicted of drug-related offenses in 2005 and 1988. Under Guideline J, the SOR
repeats the two drug-related offenses and adds a driving while intoxicated (DWI)
offense to the 1988 incident. In his Answer, Applicant admits all the factual allegations.
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He works as a
photo support technician. He has worked for his current employer since November
2002. He has worked in the same field at the same general location since about 1982.
He has held a security clearance as an employee of a federal contractor since about
1983. 
To retain a security clearance, Applicant completed a security-clearance
application in February 2006. In response to the relevant question about alcohol- or
drug-related offenses, Applicant disclosed the 1988 and 2005 incidents that form the
basis for the SOR allegations. In response to a question about drug use, Applicant
denied any illegal use of a controlled substance within the relevant periods. 
Concerning the 1988 incident, Applicant admits that he was arrested, charged,
and convicted of the misdemeanor offense of possession of marijuana; he was also
convicted of DWI. This incident arose when Applicant and his cousin were stopped by
police at a drunk-driving checkpoint (Tr. 86–90). Applicant admitted to the police that he
had been drinking. When the police searched his car, they found a roach (a marijuana
butt) in the ashtray located between the front seats of Applicant’s car, which he was
driving. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
3
Concerning the 2005 incident, Applicant admits that he was arrested, charged,
and convicted of the misdemeanor offense of possession of drug paraphernalia. This
incident arose when Applicant and a group of county jail inmates on a work-release
program were stopped by police (Tr. 90–98; Exhibits 2, 3). Applicant was transporting
the inmates to the county jail after they worked at a local community center. When the
police searched Applicant, they found a box used to smoke marijuana. 
With the assistance of counsel, Applicant entered a plea agreement wherein he
pleaded guilty to the paraphernalia offense (Exhibit 4). The state court imposed a
sentence that included: (1) a fine of $500 plus court costs of $310; (2) 180 days in the
county jail, all of which was suspended: (3) probation for 24 months until about April 20,
2007; and (4) completion of a court-referral program. The court records indicate that
Applicant’s guilty plea was a “best interest plea” (Exhibit 4). He completed all court-
referral program requirements in December 2005 (Exhibit 4 at 3; Exhibit B). He
completed his probation without a violation.    
Applicant has taken and passed random drug tests for his employment (Exhibits
A, C, and D). He passed a drug screen in May 2002 as well as a pre-employment drug
screen in November 2002. He recently passed a random drug screen in July 2007. 
In his post-hearing affidavit, Applicant gave his consent for the Defense
Department to revoke any security clearance that he may hold if in the future he
receives any alcohol- or drug-related charges or fails any drug tests that he might be
required to take through his employer (Exhibit F). Also, he consented to not oppose a
revocation of the security clearance and waive any rights to a hearing.  
Concerning his job performance, Applicant is a knowledgeable photographer who
produces work that is both high in quality and quantity (Exhibit E). The site supervisor
for the company describes Applicant as a professional and reliable employee. A
government employee who has worked with Applicant for 20 years also has praise for
Applicant’s work abilities. In addition, he has seen nothing to suggest that Applicant has
a problem with alcohol or drugs. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2)  revokes any5
existing security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
 Revised Guidelines at 17-18 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 14
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 15
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 16
 Revised Guidelines at 21. 17
5
Analysis
The two security guidelines will be discussed together because the SOR
allegations are factually related or connected to each other. Under Guideline H for drug
involvement,  the concern is that the “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription14
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”  Under Guideline J for15
criminal conduct,  the concern is that “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s16
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”  17
Before addressing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of the security
guidelines, it is necessary to decide a key factual dispute, which is Applicant’s culpability
or guilt for the two drug-related offenses. Applicant maintains his innocence in this
proceeding notwithstanding his convictions in state court. If his explanations are
accepted as genuine and true, all that remains is a 20-year-old DWI conviction. If his
explanations are viewed as dubious or incredible, the security concerns are self-evident.
For the 1988 incident, Applicant contends that he did not know that the marijuana
butt was in his car. He believes that his cousin or another man or both put it in the
ashtray when they borrowed his car earlier in the evening. 
For the 2005 incident, Applicant contends that he did not possess the
paraphernalia with the intent to use it, which is an element of the offense (Exhibit 4 at
6). Instead, he offered an explanation—supported by his son’s testimony—that the item
belonged to his son who left it in the truck the previous night. When stopped by the
police, Applicant saw the item, knew it didn’t belong in his truck, and put it in his pocket
where it was found by the police. This is similar to the explanation he gave the police at
the scene when he said he did not know what the box was and disclaimed ownership of
it (Exhibit 3 at 4). 
Applicant’s innocent explanations for the two drug-related incidents, although not
completely far-fetched, are dubious and not credible. It is simply too difficult to believe
that Applicant, a security-clearance holder since about 1983, had such bad luck, not
once, but twice. Although the 1988 and 2005 incidents are separated in time and are
not identical, it is highly improbable that Applicant could be the victim of accidental
circumstances on two occasions that resulted in drug-related charges and convictions.
In reaching this conclusion, consideration was given to testimony of Applicant’s son who
 DC 3 is “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or18
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”
 DC 1 is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”19
 DC 3 is “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,20
formally prosecuted or convicted.”
6
took the blame for the drug paraphernalia in the 2005 incident. The son’s testimony was
discounted, however, due to his bias for his father and his own legal troubles (Tr.
78–81).
Turning to the disqualifying conditions, DC 3  of Guideline H applies against18
Applicant based on the two possession offenses. Under Guideline J for criminal
conduct, both DC 1  and DC 3  apply based on 1988 and 2005 arrests, charges, and19 20
convictions. The totality of the disqualifying information calls into question Applicant’s
judgment as well as his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
All of the mitigating conditions under both guidelines have been considered and
none apply in Applicant’s favor. Applicant’s dubious and incredible hearing testimony
militates against any credit in mitigation.  
To conclude, I have considered the record evidence as a whole, both favorable
and unfavorable, and the record evidence raises doubt about Applicant’s suitability for a
security clearance. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden
of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support
a favorable decision. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b  Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
