                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03933 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
  Applicant had six past-due accounts totaling $43,000. When completing a security 
clearance application, she forgot to list a public intoxication charge, which had occurred 
12 years earlier. Applicant has established a repayment plan with each of her creditors. 
She has successfully mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive, 1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 20, 2007, detailing the security concerns 
Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial problems as 
evidenced by delinquent debts and Guideline E for personal conduct for falsified 
material on a Questionnaire for National Security Positions. 
 
 On October 17, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On November 8, 2007, I was assigned the case. On 
November 13, 2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing for a hearing held on November 
28, 2007. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted documents admitted into 
evidence as Exhibit A. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
matters, and they were received on December 8, 2007. Department Counsel did not 
object to the material and it was admitted into evidence as Ex. B. On December 6, 
2007, DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, dated June 25, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f. with explanation. She denied the factual allegations in 
¶¶ 1.a and 2.a of the SOR. The admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old proposal coordinator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since February 2006, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance. 
Supervisor, coworkers, and friends state Applicant is a loyal, trusted employee, 
dependable, dedicated, conscientious, intelligent, highly capable, organized, diligent, 
thorough, competent, punctual, highly efficient, hard working, has outstanding integrity, 
honesty, loyalty, an innovative self-starter who rarely needs supervision, who continually 
exceeds expectations and cares deeply about her job and doing the best she can. (Ex. 
A) She sets an extraordinary example for others in the office and has expanded her 
duties and responsibilities. One coworker stated she was better for having known and 
worked with Applicant. (Ex. A) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant was in the process of divorcing her husband when he was 
involved in a motorcycle accident while driving drunk. (Tr. 31) He suffered brain trauma 
affecting the cognitive portion of his brain. He had the cognitive thinking of a 17-year-
old. (Tr. 33) He used Applicant’s social security number to open credit and charge 
items. When she discovered the debts, she closed all credit cards and assumed 
responsibility for a $23,000 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.d.) She knew her husband could 
not pay the debt because his only income was his disability income. Since July 2005, 
Applicant has been paying $200 for this debt on the 26th of each month by direct draft 
from her checking account. (Ex. B, Ex. 2, Tr. 33, 44) 
 
 The $171 debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was Applicant’s ex-husband’s magazine debt, which 
Applicant does not intend to pay. (Tr. 40) Applicant has made an offer of $570 on the 
$1,175 debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant has established a repayment agreement on this 
 
 
 
3
debt. (Ex. B) She arranged for $200 to be paid in December 2007, $100 in January 
2008, and the balance to be paid from her income tax refund. (Ex. B, Tr. 34)  
 
The credit collection agency has offered to settle the $11,163 joint credit card 
debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c for $5,581. (Ex. 2, Tr. 43) Applicant has arranged to pay $100 
monthly on this debt. The creditor has offered to settle the $899 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e 
for $494. (Ex. 2) Applicant has arranged to make $25 monthly payments on the 11th of 
each month by bank draft this debt. (Ex B, Tr. 34) Applicant provided documents 
showing payments were made in November 2006, December 2006, February 2007, 
May 2007, and June 2007. (Ex. B) 
 
 Applicant has a joint debt with her ex-husband of $6,614 (SOR ¶ 1.f). Applicant 
has an automatic $125 monthly deduction on the 11th of each month paying this debt. 
(Ex. B, Tr. 34) The repayment agreement started on September 12, 2007. (Tr. 47, 50) 
Applicant provided documents showing payments were made in November 2006, 
December 2006, January 2007, February 2007, March 2007, May 2007, and June 
2007. (Ex. B) 
 
 Applicant had sought financial counseling from Consumer Credit Counseling 
Service (CCCS). (Tr. 56) Due to her low income, CCCS did not see how she could 
make a monthly payment on her debts.  Applicant now maintains a budget. (Tr. 57) She 
has made a number of moves during the past few years that added to her financial 
burden. (Tr. 68) 
 
 In 1994, Applicant was charged with public intoxication. Applicant and her 
husband were at a bar. Following an argument with her husband, she left the bar and 
went to a convenience store to call a friend to pick her up. (Tr. 35) When she left the 
store, her friend and the police were there. The judge dropped the charge because she 
had called someone to pick her up and was not causing problems when arrested. (Ex. 
2) She forgot about the charge when she asked a question on her Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions about alcohol related arrests.  The charge had occurred 12 
years earlier.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F (financial considerations) a security concern typically exists 
due to significant unpaid debts. Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy 
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.2 
 
 An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Additionally, an 
2 Revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) ¶ 18. 
 
 
 
5
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, 
negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owed approximately $43,000 on six past-due obligations. 
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and 
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Prior to Applicant’s divorce, her husband was involved in a motorcycle accident 
that affected his cognitive thinking. He ran up some large debts on credit cards he had 
opened. When Applicant discovered the debts she cancelled the cards and arranged 
repayment on the largest of the debts. Since July 2005, she has been paying $200 a 
month on debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. She has also been making monthly payments in on the 
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. She has arranged a repayment plan on the debts 
listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. Repayment plans without a history of payments is often of 
little value. However, having complied with the provisions of the repayment plan on the 
other three debts, it is likely she will do so on the two plans she has recently 
established. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ When Applicant discovered her 
husband was running up their debts she acted reasonably in cancelling the credit cards, 
assuming the debt, and starting a repayment plan. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
AG & 20(b), Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,@ has some applicability. She was divorced 
and her husband’s actions were beyond her control. 
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
under AG & 20(c), applies. She received counseling from CCCS and her obligations are 
under control. 
 
 
 
 
6
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has 
established repayment plans on five of the six debts. Applicant’s conduct does not raise 
concerns about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
The remaining $171 debt is her husband’s debt and not her responsibility.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The allegations under Guideline E, (Personal Conduct) are refuted. The 
Government has shown Applicant's answer to question 23 was incorrect, but this does 
not prove the Applicant deliberately failed to disclose information about her 1994 arrest. 
She was arrested for public intoxication, but the charge was dropped. The event had 
occurred 12 years before she completed her questionnaire. She forgot about the arrest 
when she completed the questionnaire. The Applicant has denied intentional 
falsification.  
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a security clearance 
is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification 
must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully. An 
omission concerning a 12 year old arrest is not deliberate if the person had forgotten 
about it when completing her form. Her actions were not a deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. After hearing her testimony, 
observing her demeanor, and evaluating all the evidence of record, I found her 
testimony credible that she will honor the two repayment plans recently established. The 
debts incurred were not the type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
7
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously by 
Applicant.  
 
Applicant has established repayment plans on her five debts. Of course, the 
issue is not simply whether all his debts are being paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. When she completed her 
security questionnaire she simply forgot about her arrest 12 years earlier. Her action did 
not show questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.f: For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
