                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03042 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Lee Griffin, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had five past due accounts totaling $25,000. Four of the debts have 
been paid. Applicant has successfully mitigated financial considerations concerns. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 23, 2007, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial problems as 
evicenced by delinquent debts. 
  
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
                                                          
 On August 21, 2007, DOHA received Applicant answered the SOR, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 2, 2007, I was 
assigned the case. On November 13, 2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing held on November 28, 2007. The government offered Exhibits 
(Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Exhibits A through H, which were admitted into evidence. The 
record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On December 14, 
2007, additional documents were received. Department Counsel did not object to the 
material and it was admitted into evidence as Ex. I. On December 6, 2007, the transcript 
(Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 25, 2007, Applicant denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d of the SOR. He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. The material provided is 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record, case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old quality control inspector who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 1979, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance. 
Coworkers and supervisors indicate Applicant is a tremendous asset at work. They 
state Applicant is trustworthy, vigilant, likable, and has integrity. (Ex. F) 
 
 In the second half of 2004, Applicant’s sister was diagnosed with Non-Hodgkin’s 
Lymphoma. (Tr. 37) From then until her death in the fall of 2005, Applicant was 
occupied by matters other than his finances. When he received a bill, he would set it 
aside and forget about it. (Tr. 40) Following her death, he began to catch up on his 
debts. However, his sister’s death started his mother’s decline with COPD (Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease2). In April 2007, his mother entered the hospital with 
breathing problems and died in May 2007. (Tr. 38) The deaths had an impact on his 
repaying his debts. (Applicant’s answer to the SOR) Applicant had been helping 
financially to support his mother. (Tr. 37) 
 
 A law firm collecting for a credit card company offered to settle the $8,924 debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.e) for $4,500. (Applicant’s answer to the SOR) Payment was made and the 
account has been settled in full. (Tr. 34, Ex. E) Applicant paid the $404.55 debt (SOR ¶ 
1.b). (Ex. B, Applicant’s answer to the SOR) Applicant paid the $9,158 debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. (Applicant’s answer to the SOR) The creditor provided a letter stating the 
account has been settled in full. (Ex. C) A credit collection service collecting for a credit 
card company offered to settle the $3,307 debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) for $1,653. (Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR) Applicant accepted the offer and paid the debt. (Tr. 34, Ex. D) 
 
 Applicant obtained a credit card account in the late 1980’s and still has an 
account with this company. The card was lost in the mail when it was renewed. 
2 A chronic obstructive airways disease. 
 
 
 
3
                                                          
Applicant obtained a new card and had the previous balance transferred to the new 
card. Applicant believes the account was paid in full as of December 2006. (Tr. 32, Ex. 
A) Applicant has not received any response to his inquiry to the creditor concerning the 
validity of the debt. (SOR ¶ 1. a) (Ex. I) The debt was written off in November 2001, 
which is beyond the state statute of limitations.3 
 
 Applicant was in the Air Force from 1975 through 1979 obtaining the grade of E4. 
He has been a volunteer blood donor since 1984. His annual salary is between $52,000 
and $55,000. (Tr. 63) Following the hearing, Applicant arranged to attend credit 
counseling with Consumer Credit Counseling Service (CCCS). Applicant has a debit 
card and a department store card with a $300 limit. (Tr. 39, Ex. I) He purchased his 
home in 1996 and is current on his mortgage payments. (Tr. 35) He owes approximately 
$40,000 on the house the county assesses at $121,000. (Tr. 45) He has $7,000 to 
$8,000 in a retirement account. (Tr. 45) His vehicle has been paid for. (Tr. 49)  
 
 Since his mother’s death, Applicant has a new prioritized system of paying his 
bills. He is paying his bills on time. (Tr. 66)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
3 See Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code §§ 16.004(c) and 16.051 (statute of limitations for contracts); 
16.004(a)(3) (statute of limitations for debts); Cont’l Casualty Co. v. Dr. Pepper Bottling Co. of Tex., 416 
F.Supp. 2d 497, 505-507 (W.D. Tex. 2006); Facility Ins. Corp. v. Employers Ins. of Wausau, 357 F.3d 
508, 513-514 (5th Cir. 2004) (discussing statute of limitations for open or revolving accounts).  Debts 
barred by the Texas statute of limitations are legally uncollectible. However, Applicant’s payments on his 
debts have reinstated them, ending the statute of limitations defense to collection. See Stine v. Stewart, 
80 S.W.3d 586, 591, 45 Tex. Sup.J. 966 (Tex. 2002).   
 
The South Carolina Court of Appeals succinctly explained the societal and judicial value of 
application of the statute of limitations: 
 
Statutes of limitations embody important public policy considerations in that they 
stimulate activity, punish negligence and promote repose by giving security and stability 
to human affairs.  The cornerstone policy consideration underlying statutes of limitations 
is the laudable goal of law to promote and achieve finality in litigation.  Significantly, 
statutes of limitations provide potential defendants with certainty that after a set period of 
time, they will not be ha[iled] into court to defend time-barred claims.  Moreover, 
limitations periods discourage plaintiffs from sitting on their rights.  Statutes of limitations 
are, indeed, fundamental to our judicial system. 
   
Carolina Marine Handling, Inc. v. Lasch, 363 S.C. 169, 175-76, 609 S.E.2d 548, 552 (S.C. Ct. App. 2005) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The reduction in the magnitude and number of debts that 
creditors can legally enforce because of the application of the Texas statute of limitations reduces the 
potential vulnerability to improper financial inducements, and the degree that a debtor is “financially 
overextended,” is also reduced. However, it does not negate the debtor’s past conduct, which failed to 
take more aggressive actions to resolve the financial jeopardy.  
 
 
 
 
4
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F (financial considerations) a security concern typically exists 
due to significant unpaid debts. Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy 
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.4 
 
 An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Additionally, an 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, 
negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required 
to be debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial 
obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owed approximately $25,000 on five past due obligations. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant=s financial problems 
were contributed to by his sister’s and mother’s illnesses and death, which are events 
that will not recur. Additionally, part of his income no longer goes for this mother’s 
support. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
under AG & 20(c), has some applicability. It was not until after the hearing Applicant 
sought financial counseling advice through CCCS. But the problem is under control. 
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant settled and 
paid four of the five debts. 
 
Applicant has inquired of the creditor holding the remaining debt ($1,986) as to 
the validity of the debt and received no answer. He believes the debt has been paid. It 
was written off in 2001 and is no longer enforceable through the courts due to the 
statute of limitation. The debt has not been reduced to a judgment, greatly diminishing 
its enforce ability and its weight as a potential basis for coercion, pressure, or duress. 
The size of the debt is such that it does not raise security concerns. 
4 Revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) ¶ 18. 
 
 
 
6
 
Applicant is current on his mortgage, does not have a car payment, has a single 
low-limit credit card, and no longer helps support his mother. It appears Applicant is in a 
position to pay this debt, if required. This debt does not raise concerns about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant has only one outstanding, which cannot be a source of improper 
pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
 
 I have also considered the record evidence as a whole in light of the whole-
person concept. Applicant is 50 years old, has worked for the same company for 28 
years, and is sufficiently mature to make thoughtful, prudent decisions about his 
financial situation. Facing the not uncommon financial and emotional strains of his 
sister’s and mother’s illnesses and deaths, Applicant let some of his financial obligations 
slide into delinquency. Plainly, he was irresponsible and exercised poor judgment in 
doing so. Nevertheless, he has presented sufficient evidence to justify a favorable 
decision for several reasons.  
First, he initiated action and resolved four of the five debts in the SOR. Second, 
he has contacted the remaining creditor and received no response. The remaining debt 
is no longer enforceable. And third, the record evidence shows a measurable 
improvement to his financial situation.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He has shown that he is 
serious about resolving his past financial problems. Although he has not presented a 
perfect case in mitigation by paying off all debts in the SOR, he has presented sufficient 
information to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the financial considerations security 
concern. Likewise, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
 
 
 
7
clearance decision. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.e: For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
  
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
