1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-02835
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA), on May 1, 2006.
On July 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). The action was taken pursuant to
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 10, 2007, DOHA sent a five-step instruction attachment (Item 2) with the
SOR, explaining that Applicant write an answer to each subparagraph and paragraph of
the SOR. In her answer dated July 28, 2007, she complied with the instructions, except
she did not write an answer to subparagraph 2.a. of the SOR. Because she did not
answer subparagraph 2.a., she was instructed by mail on August 9, 2007, (Item 4) to
answer each paragraph and subparagraph of the SOR, specifically subparagraph 2.a.
 These numbers could be the numerical number of the check she purportedly used to pay the debt. No1
additional information was provided to indicate what the numbers mean. 
2
She furnished a second answer on August 26, 2007, and complied with the instructions,
except she again did not write an answer to subparagraph 2.a. A copy of the
government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support of
the SOR) was sent to Applicant on October 19, 2007. Applicant received the FORM on
October 30, 2007. Her response was due on November 29, 2007. No response was
received. The case was assigned to me on January 28, 2008. Based upon a review of
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
There are eleven allegations under the financial considerations guideline.
Applicant supplied two answers. In her first answer, she denied subparagraph 1.b. only.
In her second answer, she denied subparagraphs 1.b. and 1.d. Also, neither answer
provides a reply to the personal conduct allegation under paragraph 2.
In a supplemental statement of her first answer to the SOR, Applicant, to her
answer, indicated she was willing to resolve her debt “if there is someone that can help
me to consolidate my debt and set up a payment plan.” She stated she was willing to do
whatever was required to repay the debts. However, she wanted to have the debt
identified in subparagraph 1.h. treated as a joint debt. 
Applicant is 44 years old and employed by a defense contractor. She is currently
separated. She seeks a security clearance. 
Financial Considerations
On March 12, 2007, DOHA sent Applicant a series of questions (GE 7,
interrogatories) related to her delinquent debts. The purpose of the questions was to
learn of any action taken by Applicant to address the debts. Applicant provided
responses on April 24, 2007. The first question directed Applicant to provide the current
status of 12 of the 14 debts listed in the SOR. Underneath the creditor list is an
explanation of appropriate documentation, including (1) a statement from the creditor
setting forth the status of the debt, (2) statement from loan consolidation or debt
management firm indicating accounts in plan and status, and (3) front or back copies of
check instruments confirming debt and date paid. Applicant wrote responses next to
each one of the creditors/collection entries. In her responses, she indicated she could
not reach some creditors while claiming she had established a payment plan with
others. Next to the creditors identified in subparagraphs 1.d. and 1.i. of the SOR, she
wrote that she paid them and included numbers  next to her written responses. No1
substantiating documentation verifying the debts were actually paid, was furnished
however. 
3
The second question of GE 7 directed Applicant to obtain and submit a credit
report addressing any adverse information. Applicant submitted a credit report dated
April 24, 2007. The report discloses most of the delinquent accounts listed in the SOR. 
Applicant also complied with question 3 of GE 7 by filling out a personal financial
statement (PFS), a one-page form indicating in chronological order, monthly income,
monthly expenses, debts, monthly remainder, and assets. Applicant reported her
monthly net income was $2,663.74, her monthly expenses were $950.00, and her
monthly debt payments of $200.00. Applicant did not write in her net remainder. To
determine her net monthly remainder, I subtracted her monthly expenses ($950.00) and
her monthly debt payments ($200.00) from her monthly income ($2,663.74). Her net
monthly remainder of $1,513.74.
The SOR lists eleven debts, mostly credit cards, two medical accounts, and a
large secured personal loan. The total overdue amount is $39,734.00. One of the debts
became delinquent in 2002. Two accounts turned into delinquent debts in 2003. The
remaining past due debts were converted to a collection or charge off status in 2005,
2006, and 2007. Even after she received the FORM in October 2007, in which she was
informed she could provide evidence about the debts, she chose to provide no
documentation to support her earlier claims of satisfying two of the listed creditors.
Applicant provided no character evidence from coworkers, family or friends, or evidence
about her job performance. 
Personal Conduct
On May 1, 2006, Applicant filled out an SCA. Section 28.a. required Applicant to
answer YES or NO to the question, “in the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days
delinquent on any debt(s)? Section 28.b. required Applicant to answer YES or NO to the
question, “are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)? Applicant
answered “NO” to both questions. Then, she certified with her signature at the end of
the SCA that these negative answers, along with her other entries on the form, were
true to the best of his knowledge. Applicant’s answer to the SOR that she submitted on
July 28, 2007, was incomplete because she had not provided an answer to
subparagraph 2.a. She was instructed by DOHA to supply an answer to subparagraph
2.a. In her second answer dated August 26, 2007, she answered all allegations except
for subparagraph 2.a. I find subparagraph 2.a. was not answered deliberately because
Applicant knew she deliberately omitted relevant information about her finances from
Section 28a. and 28b. of her May 2006 SCA.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG, the
entire process is a careful thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-
the-clock responsibility. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence
in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
Financial Considerations (FC)
Inability to pay bills on time places the individual debtor at risk of committing
illegal acts to generate funds. 
Personal Conduct (PC)
Supplying false information on a form or during an interview represents dishonest
conduct withing the purview of the PC guideline. 
5
Analysis
Applicant has more than $39,700.00 in delinquent debt. There are two medical
debts, and the rest are credit cards or loan accounts. Some debts have been delinquent
for more than three years, while other debts changed over to a delinquency status in
2007. Based on the large amount of accrued debt, and a record of not resolving her
debts, FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC 19.c. (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. The fact that
Applicant deliberately tried to conceal the debt in May 2006 when she executed her
SCA suggests she has not been willing to pay the debt. Her representations in April
2007 (GE 7) of having attempted to contact some creditors or having established a
payment plan with others indicates she is still willing to disguise her inaction with
continued fabrications. Applicant’s PFS that she filled out in April 2007 reflects a
substantial amount of discretionary income left over every month that Applicant could
have used to pay four of the smaller accounts in one payment or in a small number of
payments. Applicant’s decision to do nothing communicates through inaction an even
stronger inference of her unwillingness to address her indebtedness in a responsible
manner. 
FC mitigating condition (MC) 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s currently reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment) may
apply to excuse financial problems that are substantially dated and occurred under
peculiar circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Though Applicant provided no
explanation for her financial dilemma, the recency of some of the delinquent debts, as
well as the cumulative amount of debt, foreclose the applicability of FC MC 20.a.   
FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances) does not apply. There is no record of any kind of unanticipated event
that stopped or hindered Applicant from paying her bills. The fact that Applicant
continued to collect new, delinquent debt without handling her old overdue debt, shows
she acted irresponsibly between 2002 and 2007. 
FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
cannot be favorably considered as there is no record of counseling or evidence to
demonstrate the financial problems are under control. In view of the sizeable, monthly
remainder that has been available for Applicant to pay off several of the smaller debts in
the SOR, FC MC 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay creditors or
otherwise resolve debts) does not apply either. Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.k. are
found against Applicant.
 Although Applicant may not have known that all identified debts under subparagraph 2 were delinquent within2
the scope of both questions of Section 28 of her SCA, she still was required to answer the questions truthfully
and to the best of her knowledge. 
 The other PC mitigating conditions do not apply.3
6
Personal Conduct (PC)
The concern of this guideline is questionable judgment, a lack of candor, or
dishonesty during the security investigation. When a person declines to be forthright
and candid during all phases of an investigation, she clearly exhibits disqualifying
behavior. However, occasionally the omission is not deliberate or intentional. The
omission can occur through negligence where forgetfulness causes a person to omit
information from a security form. Alternatively, the omission can result from not
understanding the question. Another instance in which an unintentional omission can
occur is where there is a defect in the computer software that prevents an applicant
from inputting the proper information. While I could find that one of these explanations
applies to Applicant’s omission of her financial history from Section 28a. and 28b. of her
SCA, there is an inadequate foundation to support any of the proposed explanations.
Applicant’s failure to provide a written answer to subparagraph 2.a. can be attributed to
negligence or oversight, even though she completed the SCA less than a year earlier.
However, her failure to answer the same question a second time, especially after
receiving instructions that indicated she specifically answer subparagraph 2.a.,
establishes ample grounds for me to conclude she deliberately did not answer the
subparagraph because it is true.  PC disqualifying condition (DC) 16.a. (deliberate2
omission, falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire used
to determine security clearance eligibility) applies.
The only mitigating conditions (MC) available are PC MC 17.a. (the individual
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification
before being confronted with the facts) PC MC 17.c. (the offense was so minor, or so
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), PC MC 17.d. (the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur), and 17.e. (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).  Applicant’s continuing denial she3
omitted relevant information from her SCA in May 2006 precludes the application of PC
MC 17.a. Deliberately concealing 11 delinquent debts from her SCA in May 2006
cannot be characterized as minor or infrequent. In addition, the intentional falsification
continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. PC MC
17.c. is inapplicable. The other mitigating conditions under the PC guideline are not
applicable. 
7
PC MC 17.d. is not applicable to these circumstances as Applicant has not
acknowledged she deliberately omitted her dishonest conduct. PC MC 17.e. cannot be
applied for mitigation until Applicant fully comprehends the folly of her deliberate
falsification in May 2006.
Assuming that Applicant’s omission of his financial history from his SCA in May
2006 is found to be unintentional, then I would conclude that Applicant exercised bad
judgment in not explaining her omission of relevant financial information from Section
28a. and 28b. Her questionable judgment warrants a finding against Applicant under the
PC guideline. 
Applicant’s various explanations on April 24, 2007 (GE 7), of the status of the
listed debts convince me she was sufficiently aware of her old and recent delinquent
debts. After placing numbers, i.e., check numbers, next to her claims that she paid two
of the creditors, Applicant could have easily provided documentation, e.g., a ledger or
bank statement, showing these debts were satisfied. Instead, the lack of documentation
undermines her credibility even further. 
Whole Person Concept
As explained on page 18 of Enclosure 2 of Directive 5220.6, the decision
whether to grant or deny a security clearance depends on a common sense
assessment of the FC and PC guidelines evaluated in the context of the whole person. I
have carefully evaluated both guidelines in the context of the general factors of the
whole person. Applicant was 43 years old when she completed her SCA in May 2006.
Less than a year later, she submitted information about each one of the listed debts in
her answers to interrogatories. Though she did not recognize a few creditors, she
seemed to be fully aware of her liability to others. Regarding two accounts, Applicant
claimed she had paid the accounts and even entered numbers next to the handwritten
information. Her PFS displays a net remainder that would have allowed her to pay some
of the past due debt. Instead, the record shows only a statement of her intention to
enroll in a debt consolidation plan. Applicant’s current financial problems and her
deliberate effort to conceal them has not been mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
