 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06408
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Franklin J. McElhaney, Union Representative
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
On January 17, 2006, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF
86) to request a security clearance as part of her employment with a defense contractor.
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to give Applicant1
a security clearance. On October 1, 2007, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline G (alcohol consumption).2
2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 6, 2007, and I scheduled a hearing to be held on
December 13, 2007. The parties appeared as scheduled. Without objection, I admitted
six exhibits offered by the government (Gx. 1 - 6). Applicant testified in her own behalf,
and offered one exhibit, which was admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit
(Ax.) A. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2008. Based upon a review of
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s request to renew her
security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant consumed alcohol between
1999 and 2007, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication. In SOR ¶ 1.b, the
government alleged Applicant was arrested in April 1999 and charged with driving while
intoxicated, as a result of which she was fined and her driving privileges were
suspended for one year. In SOR ¶ 1.c, the government alleged Applicant was arrested
in March 2007 and charged with driving under the influence, for which she was
sentenced to 33 days in jail (30 of which were suspended for five years), her driving
privileges were restricted for one year, she was fined, and she was ordered to complete
a 10-week alcohol safety awareness program (ASAP).
In response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, but admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b
and 1.c. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the
following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 44 years old and has worked since 2004 as a security guard for a
defense contractor at a NASA facility. She attended college at a large state university
from September 1981 until June 1982, and is a single mother of two, ages 12 and 20. At
works, she also serves as a union shop steward at work. Applicant is generally well-
regarded by her co-workers, especially for her work in support of diversity workshops
and other issues of importance to her constituents. (Ax. A) Applicant carries a firearm as
part of her duties. (Tr., 52) 
On or about April 18, 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving
under the influence of alcohol. It was her birthday and she had been out celebrating.
Applicant estimated she had about four glasses of wine that evening and that her blood
alcohol content (BAC) was at least .10%. (Tr., 36 - 37) She was found guilty, fined, and
her driving privileges were revoked for one year. (Answer; Tr, 39)
On March 2, 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the
influence of alcohol with a BAC of .21%. (Gx. 6) Applicant had been at a club on the
base where she works and was driving home. She testified she had two glasses of wine
and two beers over a five hour period. The BAC was based on a blood test, but the vials
were not admitted at her trial because of defective chain of custody. However, based on
her admissions at trial, she was convicted and sentenced to 33 days in jail. The judge
suspended 30 days of her sentence. However, the suspended sentence was
conditioned for five years on good behavior, completion of ASAP, payment of her fines
 Directive. 6.3.3
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and4
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
3
and costs, and that she have no further arrests for DUI, or arrests for reckless or
aggressive driving, or arrests for driving while drinking. (Gx. 3; Gx. 6)
On June 15, 2007, Applicant submitted a notarized response to DOHA
interrogatories about her consumption of alcohol and her alcohol-related arrests.
Applicant acknowledged she consumes alcohol; that her drink of choice is wine; that
she had last consumed alcohol on June 2, 2007; that she at times drinks to the point of
intoxication; and that she was last intoxicated the night she was arrested for DUI in
March 2007. (Gx. 2) As to her admission in response to the interrogatories that she at
times drinks to the point of intoxication, Applicant insists she did not understand the
question as it was drafted and did not know she could elaborate. Had she known that,
she “would have filled in something totally different...” (Tr., 22 - 23, 32)
When Applicant was hired in 2004, she initially denied she had ever been in
trouble. Upon being asked by the company security officer a second time, she disclosed
her 1999 DUI. She was told that a single offense would probably not prevent her from
getting a security clearance. (Tr., 20) Applicant further testified that she would not have
gotten her second DUI in 2007 had anyone told her it would adversely impact her
suitability for a security clearance. (Tr., 20 - 21)
Applicant first used alcohol in her early 20's. She primarily drinks wine, but was
evasive in her testimony when asked how often she has been intoxicated, preferring to
debate the definition of “intoxicated” rather than give straightforward answers to
questions about how often she has been intoxicated. (Tr., 26, 33 - 35) At one point in
her testimony, she stated she has only been intoxicated twice, on the dates she was
arrested for DUI in 1999 and 2000. (Tr., 23) On cross-examination, she admitted she
has been intoxicated more than twice. (Tr., 34 - 35) Applicant also testified she attends
a weekly karaoke event at the club where she was drinking before her most recent DUI,
but if she drinks she has someone else drive her home. She was leaving the same
event when she was arrested in March 2007. (Tr., 31, 53 - 54) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or4
mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties at hearing require consideration of the security concerns and
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline G (alcohol consumption) at AG ¶ 21.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.7
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption. 
Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21) The government alleged
Applicant has consumed alcohol since 1997, at times to excess, and that her alcohol
consumption has resulted in two arrests and convictions in the last 10 years for driving
under the influence of alcohol. Available information is sufficient to support the SOR
allegations. Applicant’s testimony about her use of alcohol in support of her denial of
SOR ¶ 1.a was not credible. In addition to the two arrests, she begrudgingly admitted
she has been intoxicated at other times. She continues to consume alcohol, and intends
to do so in the future. As to whether she has engaged in excessive use of alcohol, I
conclude it is more likely than not that she has done so more often than she will admit.
Despite the fact the evidence of a .21% BAC was not used to convict her of her March
2007 DUI charge, the court nonetheless had enough information to convict and was
sufficiently concerned about her drinking to impose a five-year condition on the
suspension of most of her 33-day jail sentence.
 See footnote 4, supra.8
 See footnote 3, supra.9
 See footnote 7, supra. 10
5
Based on the foregoing, the Guideline G disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(a)
(alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under  the influence,
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent) and 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent) must be considered. By contrast, the recency of her latest arrest,
and her evasiveness about the true scope of her drinking habits preclude consideration
of any of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 23.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guideline G. I have also reviewed
the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG 2(a).8
Applicant is a mature adult, a single mother of two, and is well-respected at work.
However, her unwillingness to be forthcoming about her use of alcohol precludes a
conclusion she is rehabilitated and unlikely to engage in such conduct in the future. Of
particular concern is her assertion that, after having worked in her current job as an
armed security guard at a sensitive facility for nearly three years, she needed someone
to explain to her the security significance of having a second alcohol-related arrest in
2007. Such a response to the government’s concerns reflects an inability or
unwillingness to accept responsibility for her actions. A fair and commonsense
assessment  of all of the information bearing on Applicant’s use of alcohol shows there9
are still doubts about her ability to protect the government’s interests as her own.
Because the protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations,
such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national interest.10
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
