 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-09825 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his history of not 
meeting his financial obligations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 30, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 3, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 14, 2008, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on January 30, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
 
2 
 
 
through 6, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and submitted Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on February 7, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 30, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended a 
vocational school and college but did not obtain a degree. He remarried in 2001 after a 
divorce. He has one child from his previous marriage. He is current on his child support 
payments of about $960 per month.1  
 
 Applicant has several delinquent debts. He attributed his financial problems to 
him and his wife being laid off at the same time in about 2001. His employment was 
sporadic until he was hired by his current employer in 2005.2 The SOR alleges three 
delinquent debts totaling approximately $14,163. There is no evidence that any of the 
listed debts have been paid. Individual debts are discussed below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a debt of $4,539 to a financial institution that was charged off 
in about February 2006. This is a debt for a credit card that was used mostly by 
Applicant’s current wife. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a debt of $1,797 to another financial 
institution that was charged off in about July 2004. This is a debt for a credit card that 
Applicant used for a side business. Applicant’s wife sold her house in about 2004. He 
stated that the debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was supposed to be paid off as part of the 
closing on the sale of the house. According to Applicant, the debt was listed on the 
documents that estimated the closing costs, but was not listed on the actual closing 
documents. Applicant stated he did not notice that it was not paid until his debts 
became an issue for his security clearance. He just forgot about the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
In his response to Interrogatories dated September 13, 2007, he stated that the debts 
were transferred to collection agencies, but that one agency had not yet received their 
debt and the other agency had not returned his calls. Applicant also stated that he and 
his wife were refinancing the two mortgages on their house and they would repay the 
two debts in the process. The house was refinanced in about November 2007, but it 
was just changed from an adjustable rate to a fixed rate mortgage and no equity was 
pulled out. Applicant testified that he finally received a letter from one company, and he 
plans on starting to make payments on both accounts.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 54-55; GE 1-2. 
 
2 Tr. at 14, 20, 30-35; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-19, 29, 41-46, 53-54; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b of $7,827 to a credit card company was charged off in 
about September 2004. Applicant stated that this was an old account that he had with 
his ex-wife. The balance was about $1,000 before she used the card to pay for her 
wedding to her new husband. He stated that he closed the account and she promised to 
pay the balance, but after a few payments, she stopped paying on the account. 
Applicant does not intend to pay this debt since most of it was from his ex-wife’s 
wedding to her new husband.4 
 
 Applicant admitted that he needs to get better on his finances, and that it was 
forgetfulness more than an intentional design that caused him to disregard his debts. 
Applicant and his wife’s current mortgage payments are locked in at a fixed rate totaling 
about $4,500 per month. They also have real estate tax payments of about $5,890 
every six months. They use assets in a retirement account to pay the real estate taxes. 
He and his wife have car expenses of about $1,650 per month. He drives an upscale 
car that he bought in 2005 for about $32,000. Applicant had a truck with low gas 
mileage and a large payment. He felt it was better financially to trade to a car. His wife 
drives a leased luxury car.5 
 
 Applicant obtained a part-time job and rented a room in his house for about $600 
per month in an attempt to better his finances. He makes about $57,000 per year 
through his full-time job and his wife earns about $100,000 per year. He testified that if it 
was necessary for him to obtain a clearance, that he could pay his delinquent debts with 
money from his retirement account, but that it would incur a tax consequence. 
Applicant’s personal financial statement, submitted with his response to Interrogatories, 
shows assets of $57,000 in retirement accounts. It shows a remainder of $5 after his 
monthly expenses and mortgage. It does not reflect the additional income generated by 
his part-time job and his renter. It also does not reflect the real estate tax payments of 
about $5,890 which are due every six months. Applicant has not received financial 
counseling.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 15-16, 28-29; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 15-16, 21-28, 51; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 19 36, 46, 51; GE 2; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.  
 
 Applicant accumulated several delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to 
pay his obligations for a period of time. Applicant has what amounts to a negative cash 
flow. His monthly expenses are greater than his monthly income. His personal financial 
statement reflects a $5 remainder every month. It does not reflect the additional income 
generated by his renter and part-time job, but it also does not reflect the $5,890 in real 
estate taxes due every six months. It also does not leave any excess to pay the debts 
alleged in the SOR. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
 
6 
 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant currently has delinquent debt totaling more than $14,000. He and his 
wife were both unemployed in 2001, causing financial problems. That constitutes 
conditions that were largely beyond Applicant’s control. He has done nothing to pay the 
debts since they both started working again. That is not acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. He states he will start paying at least some of the debts but has done 
nothing to show that he will follow up on those statements. He will not pay the one 
account because he believes his ex-wife should be responsible for the debt. However, 
the credit card was in both their names, and the company was fully justified in looking to 
Applicant for payment. Applicant has not received financial counseling. There are not 
clear indications the financial problem is being resolved or is under control. His overall 
conduct with his creditors casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude 
no mitigating condition is fully applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and his wife were both 
unemployed in 2001. However, they have been employed continuously since at least 
2005, and he has done nothing to pay his debts. Applicant admitted that he is forgetful 
when it comes to his finances. Applicant and his wife like many couples in today’s 
market, particularly those in high cost areas, spend a good chunk of their disposable 
income on their house. That in itself is not a bad thing, as they have to live somewhere 
and a house can also serve as an investment. They also drive and pay for expensive 
cars while Applicant is neglecting his delinquent debts. That is not acting financially 
responsible. 
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
