 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-05304 
 SSN: ---------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden E. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Personal and 
Criminal Conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF-86), on October 
6, 2005. On September 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 29, 2007. He 
answered the SOR in writing on October 17, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on October 18, 2007. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 29, 2007, and I 
 2
received the case assignment on December 3, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on December 18, 2007, scheduling the case to be heard on January 16, 
2008. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered 
Applicant Exhibits A through I, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 30, 2007.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 17, 2007, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d. He denied the factual allegations in ¶ 
2.a. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old senior consultant, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since February 2005. He seeks to retain the security clearance 
he obtained fraudulently in June 1994. Tr. 101-103, GE 4.  
 
Applicant attended junior college from September 1986 to December 1989, 
and attended a four-year college from September 1991 to June 1996. Tr. 92. He 
was awarded a bachelor of science degree, majoring in mechanical engineering, 
in June 1996. He has never been married and has no dependents. 
 
When Applicant first applied for an industrial clearance in January 1994, he 
deliberately concealed his prior marijuana usage to 1994 by answering “No” to 
Question: 
 
20. DRUG/ALCOHOL USE AND MENTAL HEALTH a. Have you 
ever tried or used or possessed any narcotic (to include heroin or 
cocaine), depressant (to include quaaludes), stimulant, hallucinogen 
(to include LSD or PCP), or cannabis (to include marijuana or 
hashish) or any mind-altering substance (to include glue or paint); 
even one-time or on an experimental basis, except as prescribed by 
a licensed physician? GE 3. 
 
Applicant admitted he falsified this answer in his Answer to SOR and 
reconfirmed this falsification during his testimony. His explanation for falsifying his 
response supra was: 
 
Again, it was fear. When I was filling out this application, I had 
already been inside this co-operative position for a few months now, 
and then suddenly I was filling out an application. Again, it was fear 
– at this point it was definitely not taking the process seriously, 
because prior to this, a security clearance was not something I was 
really familiar with. And it was foolish, but it was also a matter of I 
was – it was bad judgment. I was younger, and didn’t understand 
what I was doing. It was a mistake. Tr. 77. 
 3
 
Applicant was granted a secret clearance in June 1994. GE 4. 
 
When Applicant submitted his SF-86 for the renewal of his industrial 
clearance in October 2005, he again deliberately concealed his prior marijuana 
usage by answering “No” to Sections 24a. and b. 
 
Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity The 
following questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. 
You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and 
your failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse employment 
decision or action against you, but neither your truthful responses 
nor information derived from your responses will be used as 
evidence against you in any subsequent criminal proceeding.  
 
a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, 
have you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, 
marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants 
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics 
(LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
b. Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom 
official; while possessing a security clearance; or while in a position 
directly and immediately affecting public safety? 
 
Applicant admitted he falsified this answer in his Answer to SOR and 
reconfirmed this falsification during his testimony. His explanation for falsifying his 
response infra was: 
 
MS. VOELKER: Now, I’d like to call your attention to Government Exhibit 1, 
which is a security clearance application which was submitted by you in October 
of 2005. Do you recall completing that application? 
 
Applicant: I do. 
 
MS. VOELKER: Did you truthfully answer question A in Section 24, 
regarding illegal use of controlled substances in the previous 7 years? 
 
Applicant: I did not answer it truthfully. 
 
MS. VOELKER: What would the truthful answer have been? 
 
Applicant: That yes, I had used marijuana in the previous 7 years. 
 
MS. VOELKER: Now, as of today, when is the last time you used 
marijuana? 
 4
 
Applicant: It was on a trip to Europe in Amsterdam in April 2004. 
 
MS. VOELKER: All right. And prior to that, when had you last used 
marijuana? 
 
Applicant: It was almost a year earlier, in July 2003. At approximately the 
time I left to go move in with my mom. 
 
MS. VOELKER: Okay. Prior to 2003, how frequently had you been using 
marijuana, up until then? 
 
Applicant: It went through difference phases, you know, there was (sic) 
times when I would – if I had it and it was available, I would use it, you know, a 
few times a week. There were times when I would go without it for months at a 
time, and it’s hard to recall exactly what the – which timeframes I was using and 
was not, but you know, when I had it I was probably using it a few times a week. 
Tr. 71-73. 
 
MS. VOELKER: So, in the same application that I just showed you a 
moment ago, which is Government’s Exhibit 1, did you truthfully answer question 
B in Section 24, regarding whether you’d ever used illegal drugs while holding a 
security clearance? 
 
Applicant: No, I did not answer that truthfully. 
 
MS. VOELKER: And why didn’t you answer these questions truthfully? 
 
Applicant: I was definitely concerned about, you know, I was scared. It was 
– realizing now, where I am now, it was a big mistake to not answer this truthfully, 
but I was scared about my job situation, I was scared about having already held a 
clearance and having used marijuana at that time. I was concerned about getting 
in trouble, you know. It was a mistake. Tr. 75-76. 
 
Applicant described his marijuana usage as beginning in the 12th grade. He 
continued to use marijuana in junior college and in college and intermittently until 
about July 2003. And, as indicated above, the last time he used marijuana was 
while on vacation in Amsterdam in April 2004. He never received any drug 
treatment or participated in any drug treatment program. Tr. 78-81, 91-93. 
Applicant did reveal his past drug use during his background investigation 
interview in March 2006. Tr. 83-87, 100-101, GE 2.  
 
Three witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. One was his former 
manager and the remaining two witnesses were individuals who knew Applicant 
on a social basis. These individuals consider Applicant an excellent employee 
and/or friend and praise his honesty and integrity. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence included favorable work-related and commendatory correspondence. AE 
A through H. Applicant is a home owner and established in his community. AE I. 
 5
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as 
to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 6
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG & 15: 
    
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) 
while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that 
country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States 
and may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign 
security or intelligence service or other group.  
 
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of this disqualifying 
condition through Applicant’s admission. The burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
Five Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 17 are 
potentially applicable to this disqualifying condition: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; 
 
 7
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security 
clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully 
and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
AG ¶ 17(e) partially applies because Applicant quit using marijuana in 2004. 
However, he is unable to receive full credit under this AG because the falsification of his 
security clearance applications concealed drug use which in all likelihood would have 
precluded him from being granted a clearance. What is certain, however, is the 
concealment of Applicant’s past drug use seriously undermined the security clearance 
application process.  None of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. The concealed 
information was relevant to a clearance decision.  
 
Applicant’s falsifications prohibited the Government from evaluating his illegal 
drug use in a timely fashion, and at a time when such recent drug use might have raised 
significant security concerns. In addition, the Government detrimentally relied on 
Applicant’s falsifications in granting his clearance. Once granted a clearance, Applicant 
continued to violate the trust the Government placed in him by using marijuana. 
 
Finally, while his disclosure of illegal drug use in March 2006 may have been 
forthright, it cannot be considered prompt. While I give Applicant some credit for coming 
forward, that credit is diluted by several factors. It is irrelevant that no Government 
records would have otherwise disclosed his drug use. Applicants are expected to tell the 
Government the truth as part of the security clearance vetting process.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the Guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
 
8 
 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Record evidence clearly established that Applicant intended to conceal his illegal 
drug from the Government and effect the course of his background investigation. This 
conduct violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001, whether or not he was successful in effecting the 
course of his investigation. However, in this case his falsifications did alter the 
investigation, as he was granted his clearance in 1994. 
 
 Three Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. Applicant’s failure to disclose his 
illegal drug use demonstrates lack of candor required of cleared personnel. The 
Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse information 
about an Applicant before making a clearance decision. The Government relies on 
applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it 
is perceived to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report 
adverse information about himself provides some indication of his willingness to report 
inadvertent security violations or other security concerns in the future, something the 
Government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of 
classified information. Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal 
needs ahead of legitimate Government interests. 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
Whole Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Falsifications are a core security 
concern. His behavior was deliberate and not due to circumstances beyond his control. 
His misconduct was both recent and frequent. I note Applicant’s drug use began in 12th 
grade and continued into his mid-30s. He failed to disclose his drug use by falsifying his 
1994 SF-86 in his early 20s, and compounded his first falsification by falsifying his 2005 
SF-86 in his mid 30s. I have considered Applicant’s relative youth at the time of his first 
falsification, but that does not overcome the adverse inferences of his misconduct, 
honesty being a core requirement for access, and not a difficult concept to understand 
or expect Applicant to comply with.  
 
Rehabilitation or behavioral changes are difficult to measure under these 
circumstances, given the scrutiny Applicant has been under since his drug use came to 
light. He clearly sought to mislead the Government about his drug record, or was at 
least willing to benefit form his misconduct. Applicant’s willingness to put his personal 
needs ahead of legitimate Government interests increases his potential vulnerability and 
he has not demonstrated that the misconduct is unlikely to recur. The concern is 
whether Applicant would disclose situations or circumstances, whether deliberated or 
inadvertent, that raise security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and/or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole person factors”1 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the 
Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information.  
1See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
10 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – d.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied). 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
