 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-03528
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
On April 2, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application(SF 86) to
request a security clearance as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to give Applicant1
a security clearance. On August 22, 2007, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline E, (personal conduct), Guideline F2
(financial considerations), and Guideline J (criminal conduct).
2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 19, 2007, and I scheduled a hearing to be held on
December 13, 2007. The parties appeared as scheduled. Without objection, I admitted
five exhibits offered by the government (Gx. 1 - 5). Applicant testified in his own behalf,
and offered three exhibits, which were admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits
(Ax.) A - C. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a - 1.r that Applicant
owes approximately $28,678.83 in delinquent debts accrued since January 2000.
Applicant admitted all of the SOR ¶ 1 allegations. Seven of the listed debts are unpaid
medical bills (SOR 1.k - 1.q) totaling $378 (an average of $54 each). Another is an
unpaid municipal tax bill for $234 in collection since 2003 (SOR 1.f), and one is a debt
referred for collection from a defaulted auto loan for $19,219.83 (SOR 1.q). The
remaining debts are for unpaid credit cards or other consumer credit accounts.
Under Guideline E, the government alleged in SOR 2 that Applicant deliberately
falsified his SF 86 by failing to list one of his delinquent debts that was being enforced
through an as yet unpaid civil judgment (SOR 2.a); and that he also deliberately failed to
list in the same SF 86 that he was, at the time he completed the form, more than 90
days past due on the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.f, which were accrued before he
completed the SF 86. (SOR 2.b) Applicant also admitted these allegations.
Under Guideline J, the government cross-alleged his false answers from SOR 2
as potential violations of federal law under 18 U.S.C. §1001 (SOR 3.a); that he was
arrested in September 2000 and charged with 3  degree assault and violation ofrd
probation from an earlier offense (SOR 3.b); and that he was arrested in January 2002
and charged with risk of injury, breach of the peace, and 3  degree criminal mischiefrd
(SOR 3.c). Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR 3.b and 3.c, but did not provide an
answer to SOR 3.a. After a brief discussion at hearing, I entered a denial of this
allegation on his behalf. (Tr., 15 - 19) After a thorough review of the pleadings,
transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 32 years old and employed as a pipefitter by a defense contractor
that supports a Navy shipyard. He is a single father of two children, a high school
graduate, and is attending company-sponsored courses in industrial management at a
nearby community college. Applicant has worked for his current employer since
December 2003. Around the time he was hired, he also started working part-time at a
retail warehouse to bring in extra money.
Applicant was born and raised in New England, but moved to his current state
around August 2003. (Tr., 73) From 1994 until 2002, he worked in a hospital in his
home state, but was either unemployed or worked sporadically from about June 2002
until he moved to his current locale. 
3
From 1994 until 2001, Applicant lived with a girlfriend with whom he fathered two
children, now ages 12 and 7. In May 2002, he was given primary custody of the children
and initially received $400 in child support from their mother each month. In February
2007, he successfully petitioned for more child support based on the cost of living in his
current locale. (Ax. A and B) He now receives $672 each month in child support. (Tr.,
52)
Applicant’s relationship with his girlfriend ended acrimoniously. In September
2000, he was arrested and charged with assault after an argument with his girlfriend
turned physical. He was given a suspended sentence of one year in jail and placed on
probation for two years. (Tr., 61 - 62) 
In January 2002, while still on probation, he was arrested and charged with
reckless endangerment, breach of the peace, and 3  degree criminal mischief. After anrd
argument with his then estranged girlfriend, Applicant threw a rock at her car, shattering
a window as she drove away with one of their children in the car. He was found guilty of
the breach of peace charge, thereby violating his probation. Applicant served four
months of a six-month jail sentence, and completed two months of probation. (Tr., 66 -
69)
During their relationship, Applicant and his girlfriend together made about $5,500
each month. Applicant opened several credit accounts and was able to stay current with
them until his girlfriend left in 2001. (Tr., 44 - 45) Thereafter, both before and after he
moved, he accrued the delinquencies listed in the SOR. Despite the fact he lives as
frugally as possible, he acknowledged he does not have the means to pay his debts
(Tr., 80 - 81). He has not taken any action to pay or otherwise resolve them. (Gx. 2; Tr.,
44) Despite an increase in income and child support since February 2007 (Ax. C),
Applicant still has a negative monthly cash flow of several hundred dollars. (Tr., 51 - 53)
He has not sought help from credit counseling services or other financial resources.
When Applicant submitted his SF 86, he answered “no” to question 37, which
asked if he had any unpaid judgments against him in the preceding seven years. At the
time, there was an unpaid judgment against him in favor of the Capitol One credit card
company for a $927 delinquency. The judgment had been entered in November 2003,
about three months after he moved to his current state. Applicant’s explanation that he
did not know about the judgment when he submitted the SF 86 (Tr., 60) is plausible.
In response to question 38, which asked if, in the preceding seven years, he had
ever been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt, he answered “yes” and listed
one unpaid credit card debt for $976. Applicant then answered “no” to question 39,
which asked if he was, at the time he submitted the SF 86, more than 90 days past due
on any debt. Applicant asserted that he was told simply to list whatever debts he was
aware of. (Tr., 60)
The unpaid medical bills listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.k - 1.q were incurred for emergency
room treatments for one of his children, who has allergies that arise on the spring and
fall. The amounts owed represent the remainder above his medical insurance coverage.
(Tr., 79) The $19,219 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.r was a loan for a motorcycle he and his
 Directive. 6.3.3
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and4
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
4
ex-girlfriend purchased. She has the bike and he still owes about $5,000 for his portion
of the loan. (Tr., 82)
Applicant moved away from his home state to make a fresh start. He is trying to
be a good father for his children and to improve is station in life. The community college
courses his employer is paying for will, hopefully, help him advance in his profession so
that he may be better able to resolve his financial problems and provide for his children.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or4
mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties at hearing require consideration of the security concerns and
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations) at AG ¶ 18,
Guideline E (personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15, and Guideline J (criminal conduct) at AG ¶
30.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
5
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
Under Guideline F, “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.” (AG ¶ 18) The government’s exhibits, along with Applicant’s
admissions and testimony, are sufficient to support the SOR allegations. Since about
2002, Applicant has accrued significant unpaid debts consisting of credit cards, a
municipal tax bill, an auto loan, telephone and television accounts, and several unpaid
medical bills. Before he moved in 2003, his debts were the result of his overuse of
personal credit, which he was unable to pay back after he no longer had his girlfriend’s
income to use. His debts, which total between $14,000 and $28,000 (depending on how
much he actually owes on the motorcycle), have not been paid or otherwise resolved.
Applicant lacks the means to resolve them as he has a significant negative monthly
cash flow and has not enlisted any outside help to overcome his financial problems. 
These facts require consideration of the disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations), and 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis). Because there is no record of
repayment or other action to resolve his debts, and because his financial problems are
prolonged by his current lack of sufficient income to meet his monthly expenses, much
less pay off his past debts, none of the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20 may be
considered based on this record. Applicant has not mitigated the government’s security
concerns about his financial problems.
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in AG ¶
15, is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” The
government presented sufficient information to show that Applicant’s answers to SF 86
questions 37 (unpaid judgments) and 39 (debts more than 90 days past due) were
incorrect. As to question 37, Applicant had moved out the state where he incurred the
debt underlying that judgment three months before it was entered. I accept his
6
explanation that he was unaware of the judgment when he answered question 37, and I
resolve SOR ¶ 3.b in his favor. 
As to question 39, Applicant knew in April 2004 that he had debts but asserted
did not know their full extent. SOR ¶ 3.c cites the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.f as
those debts he knew or should have known were more than 90 days past due when he
completed the SF 86 in April 2004. However, as discussed above, the debt in SOR ¶
1.e was the judgment at issue in SOR ¶ 3.b. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f also appears to have
gone to collection after Applicant moved in August 2003. However, the debts in SOR ¶¶
1.a - 1.d were delinquent for between one and three years before Applicant moved.
While SOR ¶ 1.a is only a $66 debt, the other three are each significant debts, together
totaling nearly $6,000. It is untenable for Applicant to claim he did not know about these
delinquencies. The fact he disclosed a single debt (not listed in the SOR) in response to
question 38 (debts more than 180 days delinquent) might, under some circumstances,
be insufficient to put the government on notice of his financial problems. However, given
the extent of his financial problems even before he moved in August 2003, he should
have at least answered “yes” and provided some information about the other debts. The
totality of the available information bearing on the issue of Applicant’s intent at the time
he answered SF 86 question 39 shows he deliberately withheld relevant information
about his debts as alleged in SOR ¶ 3.c.
These facts require consideration of the disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶
16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance  eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities). Further, of the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 17, the record
supports consideration of AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) (emphasis added). Applicant submitted his
SF 86 more than three years ago, and this is the only known instance of dishonesty in
his background. Since then, he has worked without incident for his employer while doing
his best to start over. On balance, the security concerns arising from his deliberate false
statements about his debts are mitigated.
Criminal Conduct.
Under Guideline J, “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” (AG ¶ 30) The government’s
exhibits, along with Applicant’s admissions and testimony, are sufficient to support the
SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.b and 3.c. Applicant was arrested for and convicted of
assaulting his ex-girlfriend during an argument in September 2000. In 2003, while he
was still on probation from that conviction, he was convicted of breach of the peace
after he threw a rock through her car window after an argument. For that offense, he
served four months of a six month jail sentence. Because of the passage of time since
those offenses, Applicant’s criminal conduct would not likely be an issue in this case.
 See footnote 4, supra.8
 See footnote 3, supra.9
 See footnote 7, supra. 10
7
However, the government also showed that Applicant deliberately made a false
statement to the government when he withheld information about his debts by
answering “no” to SF 86 question 39. When Applicant signed his SF 86, he certified his
answers were true, and he so certified having been advised that to “knowingly and
willfully make a false statement on [the SF 86] can be punished by fine or imprisonment
or both.” (Gx. 1) 
These facts require consideration of the disqualifying condition listed in AG ¶¶
31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 31(c) (allegation or
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
formally prosecuted or convicted). Of the mitigating conditions listed in AG 32, I have
considered AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
would be available to Applicant. As to his two arrests, Applicant’s circumstances have
completely changed. Aside from negotiating child visitation and support issues with his
ex-girlfriend, he has no contact with here. As to the criminal conduct associated with his
falsification of his SF 86, for the same reasons discussed under Guideline E, above, I
conclude he is unlikely to engage in criminal conduct in the future, and the security
concerns under this guideline are mitigated
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guidelines E, F, and J. I have also
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG
2(a).  Applicant is a mature adult, and a responsible single father of two. He is trying to8
improve his personal and professional circumstances and is progressing toward his
goals. For those reasons, the personal conduct and criminal conduct concerns are no
longer a security concern. Nonetheless, his financial problems are significant and were
brought about by his own poor judgement. Applicant continues to struggle with debt and
his routine expenses, and he has not incurred new delinquencies. However, despite his
best intentions to resolve these matters in the near future, the facts about Applicant’s
finances present an unacceptable risk to the national interest were he to be granted
access to classified information at this time. Without tangible signs of payment or other
resolution of his debts, a fair and commonsense assessment  of all of the information9
bearing on Applicant’s finances shows there are still doubts about his ability to protect
the government’s interests as his own. The protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, and such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
national interest.10
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.r: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a - 3.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
