  
  
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-01512 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas M. Abbott, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 2, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another Administrative 
Judge on November 1, 2007, and reassigned to me on November 28, 2007. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on November 28, 2007, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on December 18, 2007, at Woodland Hills, California. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 10, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
  
  
2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Stipulation 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant stipulated to the admissibility of government 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A through V, and the exhibits 
were admitted. The stipulation was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) XII.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant’s counsel did not object. The request and the 
attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as 
HE I through XI. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in Iran. 
Applicant came to the United States when he was in his early 20s to attend college. He 
has a Bachelor of Science degree and a Master’s degree from American universities. 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1980. He has held a security clearance for about 20 
years without incident.1 
 
 When he was a young man, Applicant served his mandatory two years in the 
Iranian military under the Shah’s regime, when Iran was an ally of the United States. He 
came to the U.S. after his military commitment to attend college. He met and married 
his wife while in college. They have been married for more than 30 years. His wife is a 
native born U.S. citizen. They have a 29-year-old son born in the United States while 
Applicant was at graduate school. He is also an engineer and has worked for the same 
company as Applicant and holds a security clearance. He does not speak Farsi, and 
has never been to Iran.2 
 
 Applicant’s father passed away in Iran in the early 1990s. His mother is in her 
late 70s. She has never worked outside the home. She is an Iranian citizen but has U.S. 
permanent residence status. For about the last 20 years she has split her time between 
the U.S. and Iran. She is presently living in Iran. Her last stay in the U.S. was in 2006. 
She lives in a condominium in Iran close to two of Applicant’s sisters. She receives a 
pension from the company in Iran that Applicant’s father worked for before he retired.3  
 
 Applicant was one of ten children. Eight of his brothers and sisters are still alive. 
Five of his siblings are living in the U.S. They and their families are all U.S. citizens.  
Applicant has three sisters who remain as citizens and residents of Iran. His oldest 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 13-16, 45-47, 68; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-27, 44-47; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-30, 35, 41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
  
  
3
sister is in her early 60s. She does not work outside the home. Her husband is retired. 
They have four children; three still live in Iran. One child lives in a country that is a U.S. 
ally. Applicant has periodic telephonic communication with this sister. He does not 
provide her any financial support. She has never visited Applicant in the U.S.4 
 
 Applicant’s second sister living in Iran is in her mid-40s. Her husband works for a 
private company. She does not work. They have two children.  His third sister in Iran is 
in her early 40s. Her husband is retired from a private company. They have three 
children. Applicant communicates with these two sisters about two to three times a year. 
He does not provide financial support to either of these sisters. Neither of these sisters 
have ever met or spoken with Applicant’s son. They do not speak English and he does 
not speak Farsi.5 
 
 Applicant’s mother and sisters in Iran do not know what he does for a living or 
that he has a security clearance. No one in Applicant’s family has ever worked directly 
for the Iranian government or has any connection to any terrorist organization.6  
 
 Applicant has returned to Iran on four occasions since he first came to the U.S. 
His first return was in the 1970s when his brother died. His next trip to Iran was in the 
early 1990s when his father passed away. Applicant was working for a defense 
contractor holding a security clearance at the time. His travel to Iran was discussed at 
the highest level of his company. He was told to speak with the State Department. 
Applicant was visited by a State Department representative. He was briefed for about 
two and a half hours. Applicant’s Iranian passport was long expired at that point. He 
was instructed to obtain an Iranian passport and was told not to carry his U.S passport 
to Iran. He was given instructions on what to say if asked where he works. He was 
given a letter and instructions to travel to Iran via an allied country. Applicant was met 
upon arrival at the allied country by a representative of that country and he provided the 
representative with the letter from the State Department. The representative held 
Applicant’s U.S. passport while he traveled to Iran. No one in Iran showed any special 
interest in Applicant. When Applicant returned from Iran, he again flew through the 
same allied country. He was again met at the airport by representatives of that country 
who returned his U.S. passport.7 
 
 As the oldest son, Applicant inherited his father’s property. He returned to Iran 
about one year after his father died and signed everything over to his mother. Security 
personnel from his company made the same arrangements for Applicant to travel 
through the allied country, leaving his U.S. passport with personnel from the allied 
government until he returned. He again attracted no special interest.8  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30-35; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 35-41; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 41-42; 70. 
 
7 Tr. at 48-54. 
 
8 Tr. at 54-56. 
 
  
  
4
 
 Applicant’s last visit to Iran was in the early 2000s. His wife had never met his 
sisters or seen his country of origin and wanted to visit. He consulted with his security 
personnel. He was told that he should obtain another Iranian passport as the last one 
expired. His wife obtained an Iranian passport as the wife of an Iranian citizen. They 
again flew through the allied country but were not met by representatives of that 
country.9 
 
When Applicant discovered that possession of a foreign passport was a security 
concern, he surrendered his Iranian passport to his company’s security officer in July 
2007. The security officer destroyed the passport. Applicant does not intend to renew or 
obtain another Iranian passport under any circumstance. He has decided that he will not 
return to Iran. His mother may return to the U.S. to live. He has resigned himself to the 
fact that he will not be able to visit his mother if she becomes sick in Iran and he will not 
return to Iran if she dies there. He does not consider himself a dual citizen. To the 
extent that Iran considers him an Iranian citizen, he would be more than willing to 
renounce his Iranian citizenship.10  
 
Applicant does not have any Iranian assets. His U.S. assets are worth well over 
$1,000,000. He votes in U.S. elections and has never voted in an Iranian election. He is 
involved in community and charitable events.11 
 
 Applicant’s counsel submitted numerous character letters on Applicant’s behalf. 
He is described as a man of integrity, honest, trustworthy, truthful, hard-working, 
talented, dedicated, professional, responsible, strong-willed, independent, and not 
someone who could be easily manipulated. They believe he is a loyal, proud, U.S. 
citizen who should be granted a security clearance. One reference stated he would trust 
his life to Applicant. Another stated he trusted his son to Applicant by naming him the 
child’s godfather. Applicant has been regularly promoted in his company to a high 
executive level position and supervises more than 1,000 employees. He is very highly 
regarded and considered a valuable asset. He has received excellent performance 
evaluation and various awards and accolades.12 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.” The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
  
                                                          
9 Tr. at 56-59. 
 
10 Tr. at 59-60, 68-69, 79-80; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. at 47, 61-63; AE N-U. 
 
12 AE A-K, M. 
  
  
5
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its dismal human rights record. 
 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq is also a concern. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor 
of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens—even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian- 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
 
6 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
7 
 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 Applicant possessed and used an Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) applied at one point. The renewal of his Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen could 
raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his Iranian 
citizenship. Applicant’s mandatory service in the Iranian military before he became a 
U.S. citizen does not raise any disqualifying condition.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Iran continued to consider Applicant an Iranian citizen after he was naturalized as 
a U.S. citizen. He followed the advice of security personnel and the U.S. State 
Department and renewed his Iranian passport to travel to Iran twice in the early 1990s, 
and again in the early 2000s. His use of the Iranian passport was at the 
recommendation of the U.S. State Department.  He does not consider himself a dual 
national, but to the extent that Iran considers him an Iranian citizen, he is very willing to 
 
8 
 
 
renounce that citizenship. When he became aware that the passport was a security 
concern, he surrendered it to his company’s security officer who destroyed it. 
Applicant’s foreign military service occurred before he became a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
11(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable. AG ¶ 11(d) is at least 
partially applicable. AG ¶ 11(c) would be applicable if it was necessary to mitigate 
Applicant’s foreign military service. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), Acontact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. Applicant’s mother and three sisters are in 
Iran, a country that is clearly hostile to the United States.13 It is considered the most 
active state sponsor of terrorism, and the government of Iran has committed numerous, 
serious human rights abuses against its people. Applicant’s family in Iran creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the 
evidence. 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); HE I-XI. 
 
9 
 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant came to the U.S. as a young man to pursue his education. While here 
he obtained two loves, his wife and his new country. He met his U.S. citizen wife while 
he was in college and his son was born while he was in graduate school. He obtained a 
job as an engineer for a defense contractor and has held a security clearance for about 
20 years without incident. He is committed to his wife and son. He has five siblings and 
their families who are American citizens. His life, career, assets, and allegiance all lie in 
the United States, as does much of his family. His mother and sisters in Iran have no 
connection to the Iranian government and are unaware of what Applicant does for a 
living or that he holds a security clearance. Under those circumstances, it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
Iranian government, a terrorist organization, or his family members in Iran and the 
interests of the United States. I further find there is no conflict of interest, because 
Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in America, that 
he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 
8(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 8 (b) is applicable. No other mitigating condition is 
applicable. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Iran. He came 
to the U.S. to attend college. He met a U.S. citizen and married her. They have a son 
who was born in the U.S. 29 years ago. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1980, and 
his life and immediate family are now here. Applicant is an established, highly regarded 
engineer, with considerable U.S. ties and assets. Since Applicant left Iran more than 35 
years ago, he has only returned four times.  When he returned to Iran, he followed the 
advice and the elaborate arrangements put in place by the State Department and 
traveled on an Iranian passport. The renewal of his Iranian passport was not because 
Applicant maintained a sense of loyalty or allegiance to Iran; it was the only viable 
option for Applicant to travel to Iran, and the method suggested by the State 
Department. He has surrendered the passport to his security officer who destroyed it. 
He does not consider himself an Iranian citizen. To the extent that Iran considers him 
one of its citizens, he is very willing to renounce that citizenship. He has no intention on 
returning to Iran for any purpose, even if his elderly mother becomes ill or passes away.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. Iran is the most active state sponsor of 
terrorism and has a dismal human rights record. That is not a good combination. I also 
note that Applicant left Iran more than 35 years ago and only returned four times. He 
has been a U.S. citizen for more than 27 years. His wife is a native born U.S. citizen. 
His son was born in the United States, does not speak Farsi, and has never been to 
Iran. He has a high level job, the respect of colleagues, and U.S. assets of well over 
$1,000,000. His elderly mother has permanent residence status in the U.S., and splits 
her time between the U.S. and Iran. She is currently living in Iran. His mother and 
sisters have no connection to the Iranian government. These facts minimize any 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. Applicant was sincere, open, 
and honest at the hearing. In the unlikely event that his mother or sisters were subjected 
to coercion or duress from the Iranian government or terrorist groups, I find that 
because of his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., including 
his uncompromising commitment to his country, wife, and son, that Applicant would 
resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the 
United States.  
 
11 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his Foreign 
Preference and Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
