                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-07208 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:   B. Daniel Lynch, Esquire 
                
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BRAEMAN, Kathryn M., Administrative Judge: 
 
History of the Case 
 
           The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant on October 28, 2007.  The SOR detailed reasons why 
the Government could not make the preliminary positive finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the 
Applicant.1 The SOR alleges specific concerns over alcohol consumption (Guideline G) 
based on the revised Adjudicative Guidelines issued on December 29, 2005, and 
implemented by the Department of Defense, effective September 1, 2006. Applicant 
responded to these SOR allegations in an Answer dated November 13, 2007, where he 
admitted all the allegations and requested a hearing for which he retained counsel on 
December 18, 2007.  As discussed below, Applicant established his case in mitigation; 
clearance is granted. 
 
1 This procedure is required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992 (Directive), as amended and revised.   
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
            Department Counsel on December 20, 2007, indicated the case was ready to 
proceed.  The matter was assigned to me on December 20, 2007. Subsequently, a 
mutually convenient date for hearing was agreed to. A Notice of Hearing, issued on 
January 2, 2008, set the hearing for January 25, 2008, at a location near where 
Applicant works and lives. 
 
            At the hearing the Government offered three exhibits (Exhibit 1-3), which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant’s counsel offered seven exhibits (Exhibits A 
through G) which were admitted without objection, and called four witnesses including 
Applicant. The transcript (TR) was received on February 4, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
           After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon 
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
   
            Applicant, who is 37 years old, has been employed as a software consultant by 
a defense contractor from March 2000 to present. He currently is doing product 
management and software sales engineering. He completed a Security Clearance 
Application (SF-86), signed in December 2005. He reported he previously was granted 
a Top Secret clearance and Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) access in 2001 
and had a Secret clearance granted in 1990.  He served in the Reserve Officers 
Training Corps (ROTC) from 1988 to August 1989.  (Exhibit 1; TR 66)  
 
            Applicant was granted a degree in mechanical engineering from a university in 
June 1993.  (TR 67)  He married in July 1997.  (Exhibit 1) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
           Applicant is now abstinent from alcohol consumption, but acknowledges he was 
an alcoholic because of his history of having difficulty stopping his drinking and having 
no control over alcohol.  (TR 67)  He has only one alcohol-related arrest when he was 
arrested for Driving under the Influence (DWI) in 1992.  He then was found guilty and 
fined $500; he was sentenced to one month in jail, suspended, and required to attend 
an alcohol safety awareness class. He successfully completed the program and 
probation.  (SOR 1.a.)  Applicant has not had any subsequent alcohol-related incidents. 
(Exhibits 1, 3; TR 88-89)   
 
            Applicant subsequently resumed his use of alcohol to excess which led to 
excessive absences from a job. He was terminated from this position because of the 
absences.  He recognized that he needed to address his alcohol issues as he was 
drinking four to five times a week. From 1998 to 1999, he voluntarily sought treatment 
from Dr. H, a medical doctor (M.D.) who is certified in addiction medicine.  (SOR 1.b.) 
(Exhibit 1, Answer; TR 69-71; 76-78) Dr. H diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent 
and recommended abstinence. After that treatment Applicant remained abstinent and 
attended some Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings for approximately a year.  (TR 70-
71; 78-80) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
            In December 2000 he went to a celebration and had three or four drinks.  (TR 
70-71; 78-80) After he resumed drinking alcohol, he drank usually in moderation, but at 
times to excess from late 2004 to September 2006.  He drank almost exclusively at 
home, but he began to notice the adverse physical effects of alcohol.  For example, 
drinking contributed to him being physically exhausted.  (TR 71-72; 82-88; 90) 
 
            Applicant’s concerns over his use of alcohol led him to decide voluntarily again 
to consult Dr. H in August 2006.  Dr. H diagnosed him with alcohol dependence and 
recommended total abstinence. Also, Dr. H recommended a hospital comprehensive 
alcohol treatment services (CATS) program.  Applicant had his last drink of alcohol in 
September 2006 when he voluntarily sought alcohol detoxification at a hospital. He then 
began outpatient treatment at the hospital for alcohol dependence in September 2006. 
He attended some AA meetings. (SOR 1.c.) However, his office travel schedule did not 
allow him to attend aftercare consistently, so he returned to seeing Dr. H on a monthly 
basis from October 2006 to present. (SOR 1.d.) At the recommendation of Dr. H, 
Applicant and his wife also received psychotherapy from a licensed clinical social 
worker (LCSW) for alcoholism beginning in May 2007 for six months.  Dr. H concluded 
that the family counseling with Applicant and his wife accomplished its purpose and is 
no longer needed.  (SOR 1.e.) Applicant also completed his counseling with the LCSW. 
Applicant expressed his intention to remain abstinent. Nevertheless, Applicant has 
voluntarily remained in treatment with Dr. H. This doctor monitors Applicant to ensure 
compliance with his abstinence and provides support for him to continue his 
abstinence.  (Exhibits 2, 3; Answer; TR 72-76; 86-89; 91-94; Exhibit E)  Applicant has 
attested that since quitting alcohol in September 2006, his life and health have improved 
dramatically.  His compensation at work has gone up to recognize his improved 
performance.  He is happy with and committed to his sobriety.  (Answer) In sum, 
Applicant has acknowledged his alcoholism, taken actions to overcome this problem, 
and has established a consistent pattern of abstinence for sixteen months.   (Exhibit E)  
             
Expert Opinion and Prognosis 
 
            Dr. H was accepted as an expert in alcohol treatment as he has substantial 
expertise and over 20 years experience in treating patients with alcohol addiction.  As 
indicated previously, his credentials include a M.D. degree; and he is certified in 
addiction medicine.  As an addictionologist, he has a comprehensive approach to 
treatment. (Exhibit E; TR 97-98)   
 
            Dr. H established that Applicant now was “entirely abstinent from alcohol” and is 
determined to remain so.  He confirmed that Applicant voluntarily sought treatment -- 
initially from April 1998 to April 1999 and again from August 2006 to present.  He 
offered his professional opinion that Applicant’s “prognosis is good because he has fully 
accepted and is comfortable with diagnosis of the disease of addiction to alcohol.”  He 
confirmed that Applicant continues to “work his program of recovery.”  He concluded 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
that Applicant is “entirely able to comply with the requirements of a holder of a security 
clearance.”2    
 
 
References 
 
            Applicant’s friend since 2002 is a policy analyst for a state legislature. He and 
 Applicant met at an athletic meet, and they became friends.  He only observed 
Applicant intoxicated one time in 2006; subsequently, Applicant told him he consulted a 
doctor because of his concern over his drinking to excess.  Since that time, he has 
never seen Applicant drink alcohol.  He considers Applicant reliable, trustworthy, and 
supportive.  (TR 21-27; 28-34) 
 
            Applicant’s former supervisor, Mr. S, now with a different company, testified on 
his behalf and recommended him for a security clearance.  He was the manager who 
reviewed Applicant’s software analysis work from 2004 to 2006.  All of the customers 
were happy with Applicant’s work. This supervisor knows their views as he surveyed 
them to make sure the employees were delivering quality work.  Also, Applicant 
provided weekly status reports.  He assessed Applicant’s judgment as being very good; 
and he was very reliable and trustworthy.  Applicant consulted with this manager before 
he entered the alcohol treatment program.  This supervisor had never seen any 
2 Dr. H’s opinion concerning Applicant’s diagnosis and prognosis is admissible because such 
information is applicable in AG ¶¶ 21 and 22. However, his opinion and the opinions of his character 
witnesses about whether Applicant should have a security clearance receives minimal weight. I have 
carefully applied the Appeal Board’s instructive comments in ISCR Case No. 03-22167 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 6, 2006) in my conclusions and whole person analysis.  The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 03-
22167 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 6, 2006) states: 
 
Expert opinion as to witness credibility is generally inadmissible in judicial proceedings 
subject to the Federal Rules of Evidence. See, for example, United States v. Schaffer, 
523 U.S. 303, 317 (1998); Nimely v. City of New York, 414 F.2d 381, 398 (2d Cir 
2005)(“[E]xpert opinions that constitute evaluations of witness credibility, even when such 
evaluations are rooted in scientific or technical expertise, are inadmissible . . .”); United 
States v. Solomonson, 908 F2d 358, 362 (8th Cir. 1990); Morris v. Burnett, 319 F3d 
1254, 1276 (10th Cir. 2003). The reason for this rule is that evaluation of witness 
credibility is the exclusive provenance of the finder of fact. See Nimely at 397. Although 
the Federal Rules of Evidence do not strictly apply in hearings conducted in accordance 
with the Directive, they do serve as a guide. Directive ¶ E3.1.19. Because factual findings 
are the responsibility of the Administrative Judge, we conclude that it was improper for 
her to rely on this aspect of the expert’s testimony. In doing so, she appeared to 
substitute the expert’s opinion for her own duty to identify and analyze those facts which 
support her credibility determination. This does not mean that the Administrative Judge 
should discount the expert’s testimony in toto, insofar as the expert did testify as to his 
personal observations of Applicant’s demeanor. Nor does it mean that an expert is 
precluded from testifying as to his or her opinion as to a witness’s character for 
truthfulness. However, we conclude that the Judge’s deferral to the expert witness on the 
issue of Applicant’s credibility with respect to the arrests was arbitrary, capricious, and 
contrary to law. In totality, the record does not contain sufficient credible evidence to 
permit the Judge to make a finding of fact supporting Applicant’s credibility that satisfies 
the substantial evidence test. See ISCR Case No. 02-02892 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 28, 
2004).  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
indications of an alcohol abuse issue at work and had never even seen Applicant take a 
drink.  Mr. S continues to view Applicant as a friend and has continued to see him since 
he moved to a different company.  (TR 35-44; 45-51) 
 
            Applicant’s mother-in-law, who herself has had a top secret clearance, testified 
on his behalf.  She sees him a couple of times a month and on special occasions. In the 
14 years she has known him, she has seen him drink alcoholic beverages but never 
seen him intoxicated.  He has been “a little tipsy” on a handful of occasions and did not 
drive in that condition.  She assessed Applicant as a reliable person with good judgment 
and recommended him for a security clearance.  (TR 53-58; 58-59)  She has never 
seen him drink alcohol since September 2006.  (TR 58-60) 
 
            His supervisor for ten months, Mr. W, who has known Applicant for three years, 
praised Applicant’s “sincerity, integrity, and his innate sensitivity” to company proprietary 
and government classified information.  While he observed some problem with 
absences which he later learned were related to Applicant’s alcohol consumption, he 
had no indication of an alcohol issue while Applicant was under his supervision.  
(Exhibit A) 
 
            The father of one of Applicant’s high school friends who has know Applicant 
since 1984 assessed him as “a very responsible and loyal citizen” who should be 
entrusted with classified information.  He never observed Applicant abuse alcohol.  
 (Exhibit B) 
 
            A family friend who has known Applicant’s father since their joint military service 
in 1962 praised Applicant’s integrity, honesty and level of intelligence.  He views 
Applicant as “a responsible human being whose honesty, integrity, diligent work habits 
and moral character are above reproach.”  He observed Applicant in 2007 when he did 
not drink any alcohol.  Having experience in the intelligence community, he assessed 
Applicant as someone who should be permitted to retain his security clearance.   
(Exhibit C) 
 
            Mr. B, the president of a company, has known Applicant since 2001 when he 
 was hired to work on a project with Mr. B.  He worked with him on a daily basis from 
2001 to 2003.   He described Applicant in that period as having a professional approach 
to technical aspects of the project as well as in his dealings with the people involved.  
He maintains contact with him several times a year.  He recommends he be able to 
maintain his clearance.  (Exhibit D) 
 
            His brother-in-law who has known Applicant for more than a decade was aware 
of Applicant’s struggle with alcoholism.  However, Applicant’s “challenges with alcohol 
never interfered with his dedication to his family and his professionalism.” He respected 
Applicant’s willingness to recognize the “problem independently” and to deal with it 
“proactively.”  He recommended him for a security clearance.  (Exhibit E) 
 
            A friend of Applicant’s since 1984 (which has continued from high school, to 
college, to their adult lives) evaluates Applicant as a person of integrity and fidelity who 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
has a strong work ethic.  He confirmed that Applicant had been abstinent for 18 
months.  He recommended him for a security clearance.  (Exhibit F) 
 
Policies 
 
            As set forth in the regulation, every recommended personnel security decision 
must be a fair and impartial overall common sense decision based on all available 
evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The decision must be arrived at by applying 
the standard that the grant or continuance of a security clearance or access to classified 
information is clearly within the interests of national security.  
 
            The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the person is eligible for a security clearance. Indeed the adjudicative process is a 
careful weighing of a number of variables in considering the “whole person” concept. It 
recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions, 
motivations and various other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis. 
 
            In all adjudications, national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information must be 
resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the 
record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or 
conjecture. 
 
            In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts by “substantial evidence,”3 [1] demonstrating that it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an Appellant’s access to 
classified information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a 
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Appellant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts.  Ultimately, Appellant has the burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
            AG ¶ 21 raises the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption stating, 
 “[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
3“Substantial evidence” is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of 
drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence. Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. 
Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  
[1]  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.”  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions may raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and, 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
AG ¶ 22(a) applies as Appellant was found guilty of one DUI in 1993. AG ¶ 22(b) 
applies because alcohol use led to excessive absences from work, and eventually he 
was terminated from his position due to the absences.  AG ¶ 22(c) applies as he 
engaged in habitual moderate to binge drinking from 2000 to 2006.  AG ¶ 22(d) applies 
because a physician diagnosed him as alcohol dependent. AG ¶ 22(e) does not apply 
because the Licensed Clinical Social Worker did not provide a diagnosis, however, if 
one were solicited she would have provided a diagnosis of alcohol dependence.  AG ¶ 
22(f) applies because he had a relapse after completing treatment with Dr. H in 1999. 
AG ¶ does not apply because he did not violate any court orders.   
          All four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) 
potentially apply to mitigate the Aggravating Conditions listed above:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
  
To his credit Applicant voluntarily sought treatment from 1998 to 1999.  However, 
he began to drink again in 2000 and continued to drink to excess until September 2006.  
Again, he voluntarily sought and completed his treatment program in 2006.  Indeed, he 
now has sixteen months of abstinence from alcohol.  The expert addictionologist, an 
M.D., reported that Applicant voluntarily sought help both in 1998-1999 and again from 
2006 to present.  He diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent [AG ¶ 22(d)].  Applicant 
has chosen not to drink and drive since he completed the September 2006 treatment 
program as he subsequently chose abstinence. After successfully completing the 
treatment program, he has chosen to continue to receive treatment for his alcoholism.  
Clearly, all mitigating conditions except for AG ¶ 22(c) apply.  AG ¶ 22(c) does not apply 
because Applicant has a “previous treatment and relapse,” although as indicated 
previously he is making satisfactory progress. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s expert gave him a favorable prognosis and highly 
commended Applicant’s commitment to sobriety.  Applicant’s supervisors never saw 
any indications of alcohol abuse at work and attested to his trustworthiness and 
reliability.  His supervisors praise the quality of his work. To his credit Applicant 
voluntarily addressed his alcohol issues.  For over fifteen years he has not driven after 
consuming alcohol.  He has not had any alcohol-related incidents whatsoever since July 
1992, over fifteen years ago. He has demonstrated he has significantly changed his 
consumption of alcohol and now has a commitment to sobriety and abstinence for over 
sixteen months. Because of his extensive efforts at rehabilitation, his alcoholism “does 
not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
AG ¶ 22 (a). 
 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Whole Person 
 
            I considered the specific factors listed in AG ¶ 2: “(1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence” of the conduct at issue.   
 
Applicant’s 1992 DUI (15 years ago) was a misdemeanor. This is the sole 
criminal offense resulting from his alcoholism. He also lost a job because of alcohol 
abuse. He received treatment in 1999 and then had a relapse, as he continued to 
consume alcohol, occasionally to excess. 
 
In 2006, Applicant acknowledged his problem with alcohol and voluntarily sought 
treatment which he is still continuing.  Although he successfully completed his treatment 
program, he continues to attend treatment in order to reinforce sobriety. He has 
alleviated the circumstances or factors to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress with respect to committing DUIs and other alcohol-
related problems. He has completely abstained from alcohol consumption. He provided 
a solid presentation of his character and loyalty in the endorsements of his supervisors 
and other family friends and relatives who have known him over a substantial period of 
time. With his ongoing support from his treating physician, it is very unlikely he will have 
another DUI or lose his abstinence. He focused his efforts and made substantial 
progress on correction of his alcohol abuse. Having reviewed the guidelines and 
assessed him as a “whole person” in order to evaluate Appellant’s risk and vulnerability 
in protecting our national interests, I find Appellant has mitigated all security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:             FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e.                  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
            In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the 
Applicant.  Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
KATHRYN MOEN BRAEMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
