1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-02160
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 21, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on March 2,
2006. On August 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J, G,
H, and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on September 10, 2007.  He
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On October 11, 2007, Department Counsel submitted the Department's written
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
Applicant, and he was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on November 10, 2007.
2
Applicant did not submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on February 5, 2007.
In the FORM, Department Counsel offered 10 documentary exhibits (Items 1-10).
No documents were offered by Applicant. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR (Item 4) Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations under
Guidelines J, G, and H, and he denied 4.a., under Guideline E. The admitted allegations
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including the
FORM, Applicant's RSOR and the other admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 59 years old. He works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The SOR lists 7 allegations, 1.a. through 1.g., regarding criminal conduct under
Adjudicative Guideline J. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as
they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. On June 25, 2000, Applicant was arrested for Possession of a Controlled
Substance, crack cocaine, and Appearing in Public in an Intoxicated Condition.
Applicant was granted First Offender Status, but on April 2, 2002, his First Offender
Status was revoked and he was found guilty of Violating the Drug Control Act, which is
a felony. He was sentenced to five years incarceration with five years suspended,
conditioned upon good behavior and supervised probation. His driver’s licence was also
suspended for 6 months. 
1.b. On November 6, 2000, Applicant was arrested for Contempt of Court for
failing to appear in court on October 24, 2000. Applicant was found not guilty, and the
charge was dismissed.
 
1.c.  On May 1, 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of a
Controlled Substance Violating the Drug Control Act, a felony, Driving Under the
Influence-2nd offense, and Driving After Forfeiture of License. Applicant  was sentenced
to five years incarceration with five years suspended, conditioned upon good behavior
and supervised probation, which was also part of the sentence under 1.a., above. 
 
3
1.d. On April 6, 2003, Applicant was charged with Driving After License Revoked.
On July 28, 2003, he was found guilty and ordered to pay a fine of $100 and court costs
of $74. 
1.e.  It is alleged in the SOR that on April 17, 2003, Applicant was charged with
Possession of Alcohol in a Park. The evidence indicates that this incident actually
occurred on May 13, 2005 (Item 7). Applicant was ordered to pay a fine and court costs
of $91. 
1.f.  On January 28, 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving with
a Restricted License/DUI Related. He was found guilty and sentenced to serve 12
months in jail, with 9 months suspended. Applicant was also ordered to pay a fine of
$300 and court costs of $161. 
1.g.  It is also alleged in the SOR that on January 28, 2006, Applicant was again
charged with Possession of Alcohol in a Park. The evidence indicates that this incident
actually occurred on February 13, 2006 (Item 7). Applicant was ordered to pay a fine
and court costs of $91. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Alcohol Consumption) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he abuses alcohol to excess.  
2.a. Applicant's conduct which has been alleged in the SOR as 1.c., is included in
this paragraph under alcohol consumption. 
2.b.  Applicant's conduct which has been alleged in the SOR as 1.e., is included
in this paragraph under alcohol consumption. 
2.c.  Applicant's conduct which has been alleged in the SOR as 1.g., is included
in this paragraph under alcohol consumption. 
Paragraph 3 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has abused illegal substances. 
3.a. Applicant's conduct which has been alleged in the SOR as 1.a., is included
in this paragraph under drug involvement.
3.b. Applicant's conduct which has been alleged in the SOR as 1.c., is included in
this paragraph under drug involvement.
4
Paragraph 4 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because when Applicant completed a signed, sworn Security Clearance
Application (SCA) on March 2, 2006 (Item 5), he furnished untruthful information to the
Government. 
4.a. Applicant answered a series of questions under Section 23, regarding his
police record. Applicant failed to identify his conviction on April 2, 2002, of Violating the
Drug Control Act, as alleged in 1.a., and the charges for Possession of Alcohol on April
17, 2003, and January 28, 2006, as alleged in 1.e. and 1.g., above.  
While it is not alleged in the SOR, I note Applicant also failed to identify his
January 28, 2006 arrest and charge of Driving with a Restricted License/DUI Related,
for which he was found guilty and sentenced to serve 12 months in jail, with 9 months
suspended, as alleged in 1.f., above. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
The Government has established by substantial evidence that Applicant engaged
in criminal conduct, as he was arrested for, and convicted of criminal offenses from
2000 to 2006, related to illegal alcohol and drug usage and to operating a vehicle after
forfeiture of his license. 
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline J, DC 31. (a), a
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this case. Under Mitigation
Conditions (MC), I can not find that MC 32. (d) applies to this Applicant, as there is no
evidence of successful rehabilitation because the last criminal conduct occurred in
2006, only two years ago, and I have seen no evidence of sincere remorse.  Applicant
has not mitigated this allegation. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption
Applicant's alcohol consumption has resulted in four alcohol related incidents,
occurring in 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2006.
The Government established, by substantial evidence, that Applicant was
involved in alcohol-related incidents away from work, and binge alcohol consumption to
the point of impaired judgement, specifically  DUIs in 2001 and 2003, and possession of
Alcohol in a Park in 2005 and 2006. DC 22. (a) and 22 (c) apply to this case.  
In his response to interrogatories (Item 6), Applicant admitted to currently
drinking “about a 6 pack [of beer] between Saturday and Sunday” but he indicated that
he did not intend to drink alcoholic beverages in the future. Since no independent
evidence was introduced as to Applicant’s past or current alcohol consumption, I can
not find that any MC applies under Guideline G.  Paragraph 2 is found against
Applicant.        
6
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case. Applicant
has been convicted on two occasions of possessing illegal drugs in 2000 and 2001,
both felonies. While Applicant denied ever using drugs in his response to interrogatories
(Item 6), he was found guilty on both of these possession charges, including the
incident in 2001 for which Applicant pled guilty. Based on these two convictions, I can
not find credible Applicant's denial of drug usage. Pursuant to Applicant’s SCA (Item 5),
he has possessed a security clearance since 1982, and his drug convictions occurred
after he was granted a security clearance. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his
illegal substance abuse falls within Drug Involvement DC 25. (a) (any drug abuse), (c)
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale,
or distribution), and (g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance).
After considering the lack of any independent evidence as to Applicant’s past or
current drug usage, together with Applicant’s lack of credibility, I can not conclude that
any MC applies under this Guideline.
Accordingly, Paragraph 3 Guideline H of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant furnished to
the Government untruthful, incomplete information, regarding his arrests for drug and
alcohol usage in a SCA, executed on March 2, 2006.
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to the Government, it is extremely difficult to
conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty necessary for an
individual given a clearance. In this case, based on Applicant’s overall history of criminal
conduct, my inability to see the Applicant and judge his veracity in person, and the lack
of any witness to provide testimony regarding Applicant’s character, I can find no
reasonable explanation for Applicant’s failure to provide this very significant information
to the Government on the SCA, and I must conclude that Applicant knowingly and
willingly failed to give complete, honest information to the Government. 
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline E, I conclude that
DC16. (a) applies because Applicant deliberately provided false and misleading
information to the Government in a SCA.   No Mitigating Condition applies under this
Guideline.  As a result of the misinformation that Applicant  provided to the Government,
his conduct exhibits questionable judgement, unreliability, and a lack of candor. I
resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not overcome the
Government's evidence opposing his request for a security clearance. Accordingly, the
7
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the allegations expressed in
Paragraphs 1 through 4 of the Government's SOR. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines J, G, H, and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this
case. Based on all of the reasons cited above, including the questionable credibility of
Applicant and the lack of any independent evidence on his behalf, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with serious doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance under the whole person concept. For these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against  Applicant
8
Paragraph 3, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against  Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 4.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
