                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-00553 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had five past due debts totaling in excess of $ 23,000. He has sent his 
creditors a single $100 post dated check. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, the record evidence is insufficient to mitigate or 
extenuate the negative security concerns. Applicant has not successfully mitigated 
financial considerations concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 3, 2007, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial problems as 
evicenced by delinquent debts. 
 
 
 
                                                          
  
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 On August 28, 2007, DOHA received Applicant’s answer to the SOR that 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. On October 11, 2007, I was 
assigned the case. On October 17, 2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling 
the hearing held on November 14, 2007. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 
through 4, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits A and B, which were admitted into evidence.  
 
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. 
Additional documents were received on November 30, 2007. Department Counsel did 
not object to the material and the items were admitted into evidence as Exs. C and D. 
On November 26, 2007, DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 25, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e of the SOR. The admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record, case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old systems engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2003, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance.  
 
 In July 1998, Applicant married. Within days of his marriage he purchased a time 
share. (Tr. 42) A credit collection agency is attempting to collect the $9,396 foreclosure 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) now increased to $17,000 due to interest, late fees, charges, and 
attorney fees. In October 2007, Applicant sent the law firm that was attempting to collect 
the debt a letter stating he did not owe the debt. (Ex. A) Applicant sent a second letter 
(Ex. B) stating he believed the debt was incurred due to “grossly false and extremely 
misleading information” from the seller. The law firm sent a letter stating $17,000 was 
owed and they were continuing with foreclosure. (Ex. D) The beginning loan balance 
was $9,508. Monthly payments were $158.68. Payments were made between August 
1999 and March 2002 during which time $1,131 in principal had been paid.  
 
 In March 2002, Applicant’s first child was born and he realized he would no 
longer be taking vacations or using the time share. He was told he could not use the 
property unless he was current on his payments. (Tr. 42) Applicant believed he did not 
have to make payments on the time share if he was not using it. (Tr. 26) The balance as 
of March 2002, when the Applicant made his last payment, was $8,376. Since the last 
payment interest continues to accrue. (Ex. D) 
 
 In April 2000, Applicant purchased a home for $150,000 on which is owed 
$135,000. (Tr. 50) He has two loans on the home. He pays 9.3 percent interest on one 
note and 13.2 percent interest on the second. (Tr. 34) Two months before the hearing 
he was late on paying the second note. (Tr. 35) In 2005, he was more than two months 
late on his payments, but was able to bring them current.  
 
 
 
 
 In May 2000, he purchased a refrigerator, washer, and dryer for his new house. 
Since the purchase, Applicant made no payments on the refrigerator debt. (Tr. 23) A 
credit collection agency is attempting to collect $1,965 on the debt (SOR ¶ 1.b). Another 
credit collection agency is attempting to collect a $3,081 debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) for a washer 
and dryer purchase. In May 2007, Applicant answered interrogatories about his 
finances. (Ex 2) At that time, he stated he did not know the collection agencies and 
would be contacting them to attempt to make a repayment arrangement. 
 
 A credit collection agency is attempting to collect a $417 debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) on 
behalf of a telephone company. Applicant stated he did have a delinquent account 
several years ago, but thought he had paid it. (Tr. 23) Applicant is unsure of this debt for 
he has his telephone service with this company. A credit collection agency is attempting 
to collect a $740 debt (SOR ¶ 1.e). In November 2007, Applicant agreed to pay $100 
per month on the debt until it is paid. He provided a post dated check for the first 
payment. (Ex. C) 
 
 Applicant is married and has two children, ages three and five. (Tr. 44, Ex 2) His 
salary is $78,000 per year (Tr. 37) and his take home pay is $54,600. His wife did work 
as a case coordinator bringing home $800 every two weeks.(Tr. 44) Due to medical 
issues and taking care of their young children, she no longer works. Applicant 
anticipates his wife will return to work when the children start school. Applicant has no 
car payments and does not live extravagantly. Applicant hopes to use his next tax 
refund to address his debts. His tax refund last year was $9,000. (Tr. 49) He has money 
in his 401(k) company retirement fund, but does not know how much is in it and does 
not wish to touch it. (Tr. 38) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
 
 
                                                          
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F for financial considerations a security concern typically exists 
due to significant unpaid debts. Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy 
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.2 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required 
to be debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial 
obligations. 
 
 Financial considerations become a security concern when a person has 
significant delinquent debts. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial 
2 Revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) ¶ 18. 
 
 
 
obligations. Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owes approximately $23,000 on five past due debts. Disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19a inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and AG ¶ 19c a history of 
not meeting financial obligations, apply.  
 
 In May 2000, Applicant purchased a refrigerator and has yet to make a single 
payment on the purchase. He also purchased a washer and dryer on which he owes 
approximately $3,000. He disputes the $17,000 debt on the time share. He was told he 
had to be current on his payments or could not use the time share. He interprets the 
comment to mean he does not have to make any payment on the debt if he chose not to 
use the time share. The debt is owed. He acknowledged he was delinquent a few years 
ago on his telephone bill, believes he paid the bill, but provided no documents 
supporting such. He was asked about his debts in May 2007 and said he would contact 
the creditors and arrange payment. The only debt he has made any payment on was a 
$740 debt on which he sent the creditor a $100 post-dated check.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F apply. AG ¶ 20a the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment, does not apply. The debts remain unpaid so the 
behavior did not happen long ago, was not infrequent, or occurred under circumstance 
that it is unlikely to recur. Buying appliances and having telephone service are not 
unusual events. There is no showing the debts were incurred by factors beyond 
Applicant’s control. AG ¶ 20b the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances, does not apply. 
 
  There is no evidence Applicant has sought financial counseling or demonstrated 
a positive change in his financial management. It is not clear the problem is being 
resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20c the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control, does not apply nor does AG ¶ 20d the individual initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 For AG ¶ 20d to apply there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” 
to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of 
handling his debts is needed, which is not present here. One post-dated check is 
insufficient.  
 
 Applicant has made few efforts to resolve the delinquent indebtedness nor made 
any real progress in addressing his debts. Given these circumstances, in light of the 
 
 
 
unaddressed delinquent debts, his efforts do not amount to a good-faith effort within the 
meaning of the guideline.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 35 years old and 
sufficiently mature to make prudent decisions about his finances. He knows if one buys 
a refrigerator, washer, dryer, or has telephone service, he must pay the debt. He 
disagrees with the time share debt, but he entered into a contract and has provided no 
documentation to establish the contract allowed him to stop making payments if he was 
not going to use the time share. He has done little to resolve his financial problems. 
What is missing is: (1) a realistic and workable plan to clean up his past due obligations, 
(2) documented actions taken in furtherance of the plan, and (3) a measurable 
improvement in the situation. Given the current circumstances, it is likely that the 
financial problems will be resolved 
 
 To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concern. Applicant did not meet his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. I find against Applicant as to financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-e: Against Applicant 
   
     
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
