 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04307 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Casey J. LeClair, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her financial history. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On September 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 19, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 3, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 14, 2008, as amended on January 
15, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 29, 2008. The government 
 
2 
 
 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through H, without objection. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 11, 2007, to submit 
additional matters.  Applicant’s counsel submitted AE J though M, without objection.1 
The attorney’s letter is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Department Counsel’s memo is 
HE II. The record closed on February 11, 2007. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on February 6, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated October 19, 2007, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e. and 1.h of the SOR, with explanations. She 
admitted in part and denied in part the allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g of the SOR, 
with explanations. She also provided additional information to support her request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She attended 
college but did not obtain a degree. She is remarried after a divorce. Her husband is a 
senior enlisted member of the U.S. military. She is pregnant and has an 11-year-old 
child and two step-children, ages 18 and 17.2  
 
 Applicant has several delinquent debts. Applicant and her former husband 
started a business selling items over the internet in about 1998. In 2000, Applicant went 
to work for her current employer at a low wage. She also continued to assist her 
husband with the internet business. The inventory was purchased with credit cards in 
Applicant’s name. Although the cards were in her name, Applicant’s husband took care 
of the finances and paid all the bills. He let many of the bills go unpaid without 
Applicant’s knowledge. Her husband was physically and mentally abusive. They 
separated in 2002 and divorced in 2003. Applicant and her husband were awarded joint 
custody of their child. The child stayed most of the time with Applicant but would visit 
the father during the summers and every other weekend. There was no child or spousal 
support ordered.3  
                                                          
1 The exhibits were pre-marked by Applicant’s counsel. I did not re-mark them. There was no AE I 
submitted. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-25, 93; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 20, 27- 33, 66-68; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was employed after the separation, but she earned a relatively low 
salary. She had child care and basic living expenses that equaled or exceeded her 
salary. From 2002 through 2005, she was unable to pay all the debts that had 
accumulated prior to the divorce and she accrued some additional delinquent debts.4   
 
 In 2005, Applicant moved to the state where her current husband is stationed. 
She was able to obtain another job with the same company in the new state. Her child 
remained in the original state with her former husband. Applicant incurred about 
$20,000 in legal fees attempting to obtain custody of her child. In 2007, her original 
state granted Applicant custody of her child and permitted the child to move to 
Applicant’s current state of residence. The court also ordered her former husband to 
pay $200 per month in child support.5   
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, signed on May 25, 
2006. She listed several financial issues on the questionnaire. In the summer of 2006, 
Applicant was interviewed by an investigator for her background investigation.  
Applicant discussed her delinquent debts with the investigating agent. Applicant told him 
that she wanted to pay her delinquent debts. The agent advised her that she should pay 
her largest debts first and then work downward to the smallest debts. Applicant had 
already started repaying her creditors in about 2005. She decided to follow the agent’s 
advice and worked on paying the largest debts first. Applicant and her husband 
instituted a budget where she would use a large part of her salary to pay her delinquent 
debts.6 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $38,306. She 
paid or settled four debts. Two payments were made on one debt which either cleared 
the debt or left a balance of about $163. Applicant has payment plans on two of the 
debts and has paid approximately $1,800 toward those debts. Applicant plans on paying 
the last debt in about August 2008, with a loan from her retirement account. Applicant 
has cleared approximately $19,400 of the total amount owed of $38,306, leaving 
approximately $18,900 still owed. Individual debts are discussed below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a judgment of $6,369 awarded in 2005, for delinquent credit 
card debt. The debt was incurred in 1998 to 2002, as part of the expenses for Applicant 
and her ex-husband’s internet company. Court documents submitted by Applicant show 
the $6,369 judgment plus $236 court costs and $955 in attorney’s fees. Applicant 
admitted to this debt and has instituted a payment plan. She has made payments of 
$250 in July, August and October, 2007. She paid $50 in January 2008. Two payments 
of $125 each are pending.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 35-37. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-38, 94. 
 
6 Tr. at 24, 40-43, 53; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 47-51; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2; AE A, L. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt of $469 in SOR ¶ 1.b is for wireless telephone service. After the 
hearing, Applicant made a payment of $153 on February 8, 2008, and scheduled a 
payment of $153 for February 21, 2008. Applicant submitted payment records from her 
credit union to substantiate the payments. Handwritten on the credit union document 
are the words, “acct paid.” Applicant either settled the debt with these two payments or 
still owes a small amount.8 
 
 Applicant admitted to the $2,862 debt to a university, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
Applicant chose to address her larger debts first. She plans on paying this debt in about 
August 2008, with a loan from her retirement fund.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent debt of approximately $16,231 for a credit card 
debt. The debt was incurred in 1998 to 2002, as part of the expenses for the failed 
internet company. The creditor agreed to settle the debt for half the amount owed if 
Applicant adhered to a payment plan of $500 per month. Applicant made $500 
payments each month from about September 2005 through September 2007. The 
creditor lists this debt on the most recent credit bureau reports (CBR) as paid with a 
zero balance.10  
 
 Applicant admitted to the debt of $11,352 to a financial institution, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. This is a credit card debt that was incurred prior to 2002. Applicant has a 
payment plan with the creditor in which $150 is automatically deducted from her credit 
union each month. Applicant submitted evidence of $150 payments in August, 
September, October, November, and December 2007.11 
 
 Applicant paid the debt of $126 to a collection company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
The debt was paid before January 2007.12 The CBR of June 14, 2006 lists a debt of 
$776. The original amount of the debt is listed as $1,455. This debt was for an 
apartment that Applicant lived in after she separated from her husband. Applicant 
settled this debt for $990.13 In October and November 2006, Applicant made two 
payments of $10 each and two payments of $25 each to the cable company, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.h. She paid the remaining $121 owed to the cable company on January 30, 
2008.14 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 59-60; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 5; AE B, E. 
 
9 Tr. at 56-58; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. at 49-50; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 5; AE B, E. 
 
11 Tr. at 55-56; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; AE C, K. 
 
12 Tr. at 59-60; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4, 5; AE D. 
 
13 Tr. at 60, 69; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; AE F. 
 
14 Tr. at 60-61, 81-84; AE G, H, L. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant plans on paying all her delinquent debts. She chose not to file for 
bankruptcy because she felt a moral obligation to pay her debts. She has not received 
financial counseling.15 
 
 Applicant received raises, promotions, and positive performance evaluations at 
her company. Her security manager has known her for two years and works with her on 
a daily basis. He described Applicant as a person of high moral character, organized, 
efficient, extremely competent, professional, solid, law abiding, responsible, and 
trustworthy.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 70, 95; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
16 Tr. at 21-22; AE M. 
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated several delinquent debts and was unable to pay her 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
7 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and her former husband accumulated credit card debt in an 
unsuccessful internet business. He was physically and mentally abusive and they 
separated in 2002, leaving her accountable for the credit card debt.  From 2002 to 2005, 
Applicant was a single mother and barely made ends meet. She moved to another state 
in 2005, where her new husband was stationed, leaving her child with her former 
husband. She spent $20,000 in legal fees and obtained custody of her child in 2007. 
Applicant chose not to file for bankruptcy and felt a moral obligation to pay her debts. 
Her husband is supportive of her endeavor to pay her delinquent debts. She started 
repaying her debts in 2005, before she applied for a security clearance in 2006.  
 
 The SOR listed $38,306 in delinquent debts. Applicant’s legal expenses slowed 
her ability to repay the debts, but she still managed to clear approximately $19,400 of 
that amount. She has approximately $18,900 left to pay. She has payment plans in 
effect with two of the remaining debts and has made regular payments on those debts. 
The only remaining debt that Applicant has not acted on is the $2,862 debt to her 
college. Applicant credibly testified that she will pay this debt in full in about August 
2008, with a loan from her retirement fund. Applicant’s financial problems were related 
to a failed business, her husband not accepting responsibility for the business debts, 
and her living on low wages as a single mother after her divorce.  These are conditions 
that were largely beyond Applicant’s control. She met her new husband and started 
repaying her debts in 2005, before they became an issue for her security clearance. 
That is acting responsibly under the circumstances and constitutes a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) are applicable. She has not received 
counseling but there are clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved 
and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant went through a difficult 
marriage and an unsuccessful internet business. After her divorce she barely made 
enough money to cover her living expenses as a single mother. She met her new 
husband who is supportive of her intent to pay her delinquent debts. She started paying 
back her delinquent debts in 2005. She has established a proven track record that she 
will adhere to her payment plans to address her remaining debts. Applicant is well 
regarded by her company. Her finances are now in order and no longer a security 
concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1h:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN 
Administrative Judge 
