 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-03485 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on July 19, 2004.  
On September 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E 
(Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 1, 2007; answered it on 
November 9, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on November 14, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on December 7, 2007.  The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2007. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 8, 2008, and an amended notice of 
 
2 
 
 
hearing on January 23, 2008, changing the time of the hearing at the request of 
Applicant’s counsel, but not the date or place. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
January 28, 2008. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented the testimony of two 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through Z, which were admitted 
without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 
8, 2008, to enable him to submit additional evidence.  Applicant timely submitted AX 
AA, BB, and CC, and they were admitted without objection.  Applicant’s email 
transmitting the documents is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.  
Department Counsel’s response to AX AA, BB, and CC is attached to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit II.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 7, 
2008. The record closed on February 8, 2008.  Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to the 
evidence by substituting the date “July 19, 2004” for “June 16, 2004 in the SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b.  Applicant did not object to the amendment, and I granted the motion (Tr. 23-
24). 
 
Authentication of Report of Investigation 
 
 GX 4 is a personal subject interview extracted from a report of investigation.  
Applicant, represented by counsel, affirmatively waived the authentication requirement 
of Directive ¶ E3.1.20 (Tr. 22-23).   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all the allegations.  However, at the 
hearing he admitted most of the debts alleged.  His admissions at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old information security consultant employed by a federal 
contractor.  He has worked for his current employer since March 2004.  He served in 
the U.S. Army from July 1982 to June 1998.  He qualified for an early retirement 
program and retired as a sergeant first class (pay grade E-7). His military specialty was 
in communications.  He received a security clearance in 1994, while in the Army, and in 
August 1998, as a civilian contractor.  He has worked for federal contractors since his 
Army service.  He was married in July 1983 and has four children: a 27-year-old son 
from a previous relationship (Tr. 79); and three daughters from his current marriage, 
ages 23, 22, and 13 (Tr. 53).   
 
 
3 
 
 
 An Army Reserve lieutenant colonel, who served with Applicant in Saudi Arabia 
for six months in 1992 and then remained in contact with him until the present, testified 
on his behalf.  She testified they both worked in a classified environment (Tr. 33).  She 
called Applicant “a genius” because of his ability.  She trusts him unqualifiedly (Tr. 37-
38).  In a written letter of support, she described Applicant as “intelligent, motivated, 
focused, purpose-driven and reliable.”  She regards him as “an astute businessman, an 
experienced engineer, a selfless, courageous soldier, . . . a devoted father, son, and a 
loyal friend.” (AX C.) 
 
 Applicant presented letters from nine additional character witnesses who have 
known him as supervisors, coworkers and acquaintances.  Applicant solicited these 
letters and sent each character witness a sample letter, resulting in similarities among 
some of the letters (Tr. 156).  The authors of AX D, E, G, H, I, and J had not seen the 
statement of reasons and were unaware of Applicant’s financial problems.  Applicant did 
not disclose his financial situation to them because it was embarrassing (Tr. 157).  Only 
the authors of AX C, J, and K knew about the allegations of falsifying the SF 86 (Tr. 
158).  The authors of AX D, E, F, G, K, and L describe him as conscientious about 
security.  The authors of AX D, F, J, K, and L describe him as “trustworthy, dependable, 
and stable.”  All regard him as a person of high character and considerable technical 
skill. 
 
 Applicant’s oldest daughter testified and described Applicant as “a good man” 
and a caring father who takes care of the family financially.  She testified when he finds 
something wrong, he takes care of it as soon as he is able (Tr. 51-52).   
 
Since 1998 Applicant has maintained two residences.  His family lives in the 
Southeast U.S., and he has maintained a second residence near his workplace in the 
Northeast U.S. (Tr. 80).  He visits his family about every two weeks, sorts through the 
accumulated mail, and takes care of matters requiring his attention (Tr. 58).  As far back 
as his deployment to Saudi Arabia in the 1990s, his wife has been “sloppy and dilatory” 
in managing the family finances, and their marriage has been “tumultuous” because of 
financial disagreements (AX A at 2-3; Tr. 150).  He testified he relied on his wife to take 
care of the finances until 2005 or 2006, when he took over (Tr. 154).   
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was on a joint credit card account. The 
statements were sent to his residence in the Southeast (Tr. 82).  Applicant believed his 
wife was making payments on the account, and he did not know the account was 
delinquent until the security investigator showed him the credit reports (Tr. 82-83).  The 
account has been closed and the debt paid in full (AX M; Tr. 147). 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b arose because Applicant did not pay state income 
taxes in his Northeast residence.  His Southeast state of residence does not have a 
state income tax.  He testified he was unaware that he was required to pay state income 
taxes in the Northeast state (Tr. 83-84).  The delinquent taxes have been paid (AX N). 
 
 
4 
 
 
About two or three years ago, Applicant gave his middle daughter a car that 
turned out to be unreliable.  The middle daughter asked Applicant to cosign a loan for a 
new car, and stopped making payments on the old car.  She did not tell Applicant the 
loan on the old car had not been paid off (Tr. 46).  A judgment was entered against 
Applicant, but he was unaware of it until he attempted to rent a car and found out his 
driver’s license was suspended (Tr. 90).  This delinquent debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, 
has been paid off (AX P). 
 
 In 2003, Applicant’s oldest daughter was involved in an automobile accident.  A 
lawsuit was filed against Applicant, the daughter, and the mother; and a judgment was 
entered against all three of them, but the daughter and mother did not inform Applicant.  
The judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  The daughter erroneously believed her mother 
had taken care of the incident (Tr. 47-49).  Applicant was unaware of the debt until he 
received a copy of his credit report from DOHA (Tr. 92). The judgment has been 
satisfied (AX Q). 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g were incurred when Applicant closed a 
business but his telephone and broad band provider did not terminate service.  He 
learned that the provider was continuing to charge him when the DOHA provided him 
with a copy of his credit report (Tr. 101-02).  The two accounts have been settled (AX R, 
S, and AA-CC). 
 
 The medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a(1) arose when Applicant was treated for 
vertigo in January 2001. He received a bill from his doctor, and was involved in a 
dispute with his insurance company about it.  Eventually, he went to the doctor’s office 
to pay it, but he found the office closed and a notice on the door stating the doctor had 
died.  No contact information was posted (Tr. 138-39).  He decided to wait for a bill but 
never received one from the doctor’s office.  He told a security investigator he never 
heard from any collection agencies about the bill (GX 4 at 1).  However, at the hearing 
he admitted he received a bill from a collection agency some time in 2003 (Tr. 139). He 
learned the debt had been reported as delinquent when he received his credit report 
from DOHA (Tr. 104-06).  The debt has been paid (AX U). 
 
 The two delinquent payday loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a(2) and (4) occurred 
when Applicant paid the loans with a check that subsequently was dishonored because 
his wife had drawn down the account without his knowledge (Tr. 121-22; 152-54).  Both 
loans have been repaid (AX U, X). 
 
 The medical bill alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a(3) was for psychological services after 
Applicant underwent serious abdominal surgery.  While he was recovering, he was 
engaged in conversation by the psychologist.  He later learned he was assigned a 
psychologist because of the seriousness of his condition. Applicant told the psychologist 
he would not pay the bill because he had not asked for his services.  The psychologist 
told him he would report the debt to the credit bureau, but Applicant refused to pay it as 
a matter of principle.  He knew the debt would be reported as overdue, but felt it was 
 
5 
 
 
unfair and refused to pay it (Tr. 122).  He paid the debt in April 2007, after he learned it 
was a security concern (AX W; Tr. 110). 
 
 Applicant has taken steps to minimize recurrence of his financial problems.  He 
closed the delinquent joint credit card account and assumed responsibility for the family 
finances. His daughters now have their own automobile insurance.  He has engaged 
certified public accountants near each of his residences to handle his taxes.  He utilizes 
on-line banking to monitor his accounts, and he has engaged two credit report 
monitoring services (Tr. 125-28).   
 
 Applicant executed a security clearance application (SF 86) on July 19, 2004.  
He disclosed some potentially derogatory information, including consulting with a mental 
health professional and two traffic tickets in 2000 and 2004.  In response to question 38, 
asking if he had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts during the past 
seven years, he answered “yes” and disclosed one $500 debt, but he did not disclose 
the five debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a(1)-(4).  In response to question 39, asking 
if he was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debts, he answered “no” and 
did not disclose the five debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a(1)-(4) (Government Exhibit 
(GX) 1 at 6).   
 
The debt disclosed on the July 2004 SF 86 was not alleged in the SOR.  It arose 
from a mortgage company’s failure to credit Applicant with payments, and it was 
resolved in his favor (AX T). 
 
On a previous SF 86 executed on May 29, 1999, Applicant answered “no” to 
question 38, but utilized the “General Remarks” section and explained. “I may have 
items over 180 days but I am not sure as I cannot verify.”  He also used the remarks 
section to disclose two disputed debts and describe the circumstances of the debts and 
the basis for the dispute.  (GX 2 at 11-12). 
 
 Applicant testified he did not disclose the delinquent credit card account on his 
July 2004 SF 86 because he was unaware of it (Tr. 123).  He did not disclose the 
delinquent medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a(1) on his SF 86 because he intended to 
pay it, did not know it was reported as delinquent, did not know how many days it was 
late, and did not know how to answer the question (Tr. 141).  He also testified he 
completed his SF 86 in a rush and did not have time to check his records (Tr. 146). 
 
 Applicant testified he did not disclose the delinquent payday loans alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a(2) and 2.a(4), because he did not know the checks he uttered to repay 
them had been dishonored (Tr. 124). Finally, he testified he did not disclose the 
delinquent medical bill from the psychologist because he was disputing it (Tr. 124).  He 
admitted knowing the debt was outstanding, but thought it was “illegally outstanding.”  
He knew the creditor considered the bill delinquent (Tr. 184).  He testified he believed 
he could have successfully disputed it if he had the funds to hire a lawyer (Tr. 166-67, 
184-85). 
 
 
6 
 
 
The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized in the 
table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Credit card $2,293 Paid in full, 1-22-08 AX M 
1.b State taxes $2,312 Paid in full, 11-1-07 AX N 
1.c Medical $63 Paid in full, 10-31-07 AX O 
1.d Car loan $5,200 Paid in full, 1-7-08 AX P 
1.e Judgment $6,538 Resolved, 11-20-07 AX Q 
1.f Telephone $95 Paid in full, 11-2-07 AX R 
1.g Telephone $343 Paid in full, 11-2-07 AX S; AX AA-CC 
2.a(1) Medical $735 Paid in full, 4-27-07 AX U 
2.a(2) Payday Loan $698 Paid in full, 4-27-06 AX V 
2.a(3) Medical $250 Paid in full, 4-27-07 AX W 
2.a(4) Payday Loan $647 Paid in full, 4-27-06 AX X 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . 
. . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether 
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person 
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information.  This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
 
7 
 
 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information.  The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-
0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g alleges seven delinquent debts.  Applicant admitted all 
seven debts at the hearing and presented evidence showing they had been resolved. 
The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts.@  This condition is not raised for any of the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g, because Applicant’s failure to pay these debts was due to the 
financial disarray in his household, not an inability or unwillingness to pay them.  The 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a(3) was the result of Applicant’s unwillingness to pay what he 
considered an unfair and illegal debt, but this debt was alleged only under Guidelines E 
and J. 
 
8 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is raised where there is Aindebtedness 
caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any evidence of 
willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt.@  This 
condition is not raised because there is no evidence of frivolous or irresponsible 
spending. 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.  
Applicant’s financial history raises this condition.   
 
AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending beyond one=s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  This condition is not raised, 
because Applicant’s spending was not beyond his means.   
 
AG ¶ 19(g) is raised by Afailure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.@  Applicant’s failure to file state 
income tax returns raises this condition. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(c) and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@  AG ¶ 20(a).  This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@  If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established, because most of the debts were 
not resolved until recently. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established 
because Applicant had numerous delinquent debts.  The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) 
is established, because Applicant has taken corrective measures to resolve his chaotic 
family finances.  The fourth prong (“does not cast doubt . . . .”) is established for the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established for these debts.  
The impact of the debts alleged under Guidelines E and J on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment is discussed below. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@  AG ¶ 20(b).  Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established.  Applicant’s wife’s 
financial neglect was a circumstance beyond his control.  However, he knew after his 
deployment to Saudi Arabia in the 1990s that she could not be trusted with managing 
the family finances, but he did not take over the finances or institute monitoring 
measures until around 2005.  Because he did not act responsibly for several years after 
he learned of his wife’s financial neglect, I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant was unaware of the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g until a 
security investigator showed him his credit report.  Although two of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.d) were resolved only days before the hearing, he began resolving his 
delinquent debts in April 2006, long before the SOR was issued.  He has now resolved 
all the debts.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to list the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 2.a(1)-(4) on his SF 86 executed in July 2004.  The concern under this guideline 
is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”  AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 
10 
 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it.  An omission, standing alone, does not prove an 
applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred.  An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 Applicant testified he was unaware of the two delinquent payday loans alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a(2) and (4) until after he executed his SF 86.  His testimony regarding these 
loans was plausible and credible.  Accordingly, I conclude he has refuted the allegations 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.a(2) and 2.a(4). 
 
 Applicant was aware, however, of the unpaid medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 
2.a(1).  He admitted receiving a letter from a collection agency concerning the debt 
around 2003.  He testified he did not tell many of the individuals who supported him with 
character letters about his debts because he found it embarrassing.  The only debt he 
disclosed on his SF 86 was one that had been resolved in his favor.  He has held a 
clearance for much of his professional life and is familiar with the security clearance 
application process.  He knew how to handle a situation where he had incomplete 
information, because he had done so on his previous SF 86 in May 1999.  
Notwithstanding his claim that he was rushed while completing his July 2004 
application, he included considerable detail, including derogatory information, on that 
Application.  I found his explanations for not disclosing this medical bill (that he intended 
to pay it, did not know it was reported as delinquent, did not know how many days it was 
late, did not know how to answer the question) implausible and not credible.   
 
 Applicant also was aware of the unpaid bill from the psychologist.  He had been 
informed it would be reported as delinquent. He knew the correct way to handle a 
disputed debt on his SF 86, because he had disclosed and explained two disputed 
debts in his May 1999 application.  I find his explanation for not disclosing the debt in 
SOR ¶ 2.a(3) implausible and not credible.   
 
Based on his deliberate omissions of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.a(1) and 2.a(3) from 
his SF 86, I conclude the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is raised, shifting the 
burden to Applicant to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.”  AG ¶ 17(a).  Applicant did not correct the omissions from his SF 86 until 
questioned by a security investigator.  I conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
 
11 
 
 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”  AG 17(c).  This mitigating 
condition, like AG 20(a) under Guideline F, consists of three disjunctive prongs and one 
conjunctive prong.  The first prong (“so minor”) is not established because Applicant’s 
falsification was a felony, as discussed below under Guideline J.  The second prong 
(“so much time has passed”) is not established because the falsification involves 
Applicant’s current application for continuation of his clearance.  The third prong is not 
established because the falsification did not happen under “unique circumstances” but 
during a routine reapplication for a clearance.  Finally, the fourth prong is not 
established because Applicant’s lack of candor on his application raises doubt about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  I conclude AG 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Conduct under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence showing “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.”  AG 17(d).  Applicant has resolved all his delinquent debts, 
thereby eliminating the circumstances that motivated the falsification, but he has not 
acknowledged his falsification.  I conclude AG 17(d) is not established. 
 
 Finally, conduct under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual has taken 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress.” AG 17(e).  Applicant has resolved his delinquent debts, thereby reducing his 
vulnerability.  I conclude AG 17(e) is established. 
 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant committed a felony by intentionally not disclosing the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a(1)-(4) in his SF 86.  The concern raised by criminal 
conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶ 30.  Conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single serious crime or multiple 
lesser offenses.”  AG 31(a). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States.  18 U.S.C. § 1001.  Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States.  A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J. The statute encompasses deliberate 
concealment of information as well as affirmative misstatements.  See United States v. 
Beck, 615 F. 2d 441, 453 (7th Cir. 1980).  Applicant’s intentional omissions on his SF 86 
raise the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 31(a), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  AG ¶ 32(a).  This mitigating 
condition is not established, because Applicant’s falsification was recent, did not happen 
under unusual circumstances, and casts doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness.  No 
other enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult and a retired Army noncommissioned officer who has 
held a clearance for many years, apparently without incident. He is talented and highly 
respected by his colleagues and former supervisors. His long-standing financial 
problems were disclosed in his 1999 security clearance application.  His problems were 
exacerbated by geographical separation from his family and his wife’s financial 
irresponsibility.  Based on his military service and years of service as a federal 
contractor, he was aware of the security clearance process and the importance of 
candor.  Nevertheless, he was embarrassed by his financial situation and did not 
disclose it to many of his colleagues and professional acquaintances.  Most importantly, 
he intentionally did not disclose two significant medical debts on his SF 86.  Confronted 
at the hearing with the intentional omissions from his SF 86, he persisted in rationalizing 
and attempting to justify his action.   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, E, 
and J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations, but he 
has not mitigated the security concerns under Guidelines E and J for his intentional 
 
13 
 
 
failure to disclose the two medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a(1) and 2.a(3). I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a(1):    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.a(2):    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.a(3):    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.a(4):    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
