 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-05051 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) (GE 1) on June 27, 2005. On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
Government’s security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 6, 2007. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 14, 2007. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 7, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted exhibit (AE) 1 post-hearing, which was received without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until January 25, 2008, to submit additional 
matters. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 10, 2008. The 
record closed on January 25, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 24, 2007, Applicant denied all SOR 
allegations. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old network engineer. In September 1968, he enlisted in 
the U.S. Coast Guard where he served as a Communication Specialist for 29 years. He 
retired from the Coast Guard in June 1997 at the rank of Chief Warrant Officer 3 (Tr. 5-
7). His service in the Coast Guard was characterized as honorable. He married his wife 
in September 1973, and they have two adult children, ages 29 and 26 (GE 1). 
 
Thirty days after his retirement, Applicant began working for his current 
employer, a defense contractor, and has been working for the same employer ever 
since (Tr. 8). Applicant was granted access to classified information at the secret level 
around 1969 after completion of Radioman school. His access to classified information, 
at times at the top secret level, continued throughout his 29 years of service in the 
Coast Guard. After he retired, his access to classified information at the secret level was 
continued to the present time as a result of his employment by a defense contractor (Tr. 
5). Applicant explained he does not handle classified information. He manages 
contractor personnel providing information technology (IT) support to government 
agencies and needs access to classified areas to provide IT support. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has ever compromised classified information or that he has 
failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the protection of classified 
information. 
 
In his June 2005 e-QIP (GE 1), Applicant answered “No” to question 28(a) 
(asking whether in the last seven years he had been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debts), and to question 28(b) (asking whether he was currently 90 days delinquent on 
any debts). However, he failed to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included his interview by a government agent in March 2006, his August 2007 response 
to DOHA interrogatories (GE 2), and the review of credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 
July 2005 (GE 4), May 2007 (GE 5), and September 2007 (GE 3). At his hearing, 
 
3 
 
 
consistent with his answers to the DOHA interrogatories, Applicant claimed he did not 
disclose the alleged debts because he believed both debts were either paid or settled. 
 
The delinquent $6,264 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1a concerns a time share Applicant 
and his wife purchased in April 1999. After approximately one year making payments, 
Applicant realized he could not afford the payments and returned the property to the 
seller. He claimed he was assessed no penalties or charges after breaking his contract 
and returning the property. He believed the debt was settled in full. Applicant claimed he 
first realized the time share debt was delinquent when he was confronted with it by a 
government background investigator during his March 2006 interview. He averred that 
since returning the property in 1999, he had no contact with the creditor and received no 
collection notices regarding the time share debt. He further claimed that if he had known 
the time share debt was outstanding, he would have paid it during one of the three 
times he refinanced his home (Tr. 22-24). 
 
Applicant stated that after he was confronted with the delinquent debt in March 
2006, his wife attempted to contact the creditor several times to resolve the debt. He 
averred the creditor never returned her calls or correspondence (Tr. 31-35). Other than 
his testimony, and a letter he mailed to the creditor on January 2008 (AE 1) (asking for 
information on the account), Applicant presented no evidence to support his claims that 
he was allowed to return the time share without financial penalties, that the account was 
settled in full upon his return of the time share, and that he made attempts to settle or 
resolve this debt between March 2006 and his hearing date. 
 
The delinquent $10,440 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1b concern student loans made 
by Applicant to pay for his daughter’s college education. Applicant’s daughter attended 
college from October 1996 to December 1997. At his hearing, Applicant admitted he 
obtained four student loans to pay for his daughter’s education (Tr. 36-44). Based on 
the July 2005 CBR (GE 4), he took out the first loan in November 1996 for $14,852. 
Between approximately August 2000 and August 2002, when the loan was paid off, it 
was over 120 days delinquent for five consecutive moths (GE 4 at p. 9). The second 
loan was obtained in July 1997 for $8,918. The loan has been delinquent and in 
collection since around January 2000. The third loan was obtained in January 2000 for 
$10,440. The loan has been in collection since around May 2005. The fourth loan was 
obtained in August 2003, for $23,270. The loan was in collection when it was paid off in 
February 2004. 
 
Applicant claimed he paid all four of his daughter’s student loans during one of 
the three times he refinanced his home. He further claimed that when he submitted his 
June 2005 security clearance application, he believed some of the loans were 
outstanding, but not delinquent because they were in forbearance. At his hearing, 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to corroborate his claim that all four 
loans were paid. He explained that since the student loans were no longer reflected in 
his last two 2007 CBRs (GE 4 and 5), he believed the CBR were sufficient to 
established he paid the student loans. After the hearing, I granted Applicant additional 
time to submit documents to corroborate his claims that he settled the time share debt 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
in 1999, that he attempted to contact the creditor of the time share loan to resolve the 
debt, and that he paid the two remaining student loans. Applicant failed to present any 
documentary evidence to corroborate his claims. 
 
Applicant testified his financial problems were caused by his wife not being able 
to work due to an accident (Tr. 83). She broke her shoulder in 2003 and underwent 
extensive medical treatment and rehabilitation. She started to work again in the spring 
of 2007. When she was working, she made approximately $35,000 a year, which she 
contributed to the household finances. Applicant believes that since his wife is working 
again he will be able to resolve any possible financial problems.  
 
Applicant bought his home in 1996 for approximately $190,000. His mortgage 
payment was around $1,700. He has refinanced his home three times, the last two 
times were in February 2004 and May 2005. He refinanced twice to pay loans, credit 
cards, and other debts. The last time he took some equity out, and paid some debts (Tr. 
69-74). Applicant’s most recent CBR, from September 2007, shows 33 accounts, four of 
which were in collection or charged off. He paid two of the debts after they were 
charged off (one of the student loans). Two debts remain which are identified as 
charged off in the CBR, a Military Star credit card debt owing $1,016, and the debt to 
Plantation Resort, owing $6,264 (GE 3). 
 
Applicant is a valuable employee with a good record working for a defense 
contractor providing support to numerous federal agencies. There is no evidence to 
show he has ever failed to comply with the rules and regulations required to handle 
classified information. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has three delinquent debts that have been charged off or in collection 
since 1997, 1999, and 2000, totaling approximately $25,600. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG & 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions (MC), I find that only 
AG ¶ 20(g) partially applies – Applicant paid two student loans and other debts after 
they were in collection or charged off. Concerning the other mitigating conditions, none 
apply. More specifically, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply, because Applicant’s behavior is 
recent as his debts are still outstanding.  
 
 Applicant presented some evidence attempting to establish a circumstance 
beyond his control contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his wife’s 2003 
injury, her inability to work, and the resulting deficiency to the household income. 
However, all three debts were already delinquent prior to his wife’s injury. There is no 
record evidence to suggest Applicant had any other circumstances beyond his control 
that contributed to his financial problems (AG ¶ 20(b)). The record evidence is not 
sufficient to fully establish that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
inability to pay his debts, that he received financial counseling and/or that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control (AG ¶ 20(c)), or that he properly disputed the 
legitimacy of any of the debts (AG ¶ 20(e)). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG & 15.  
 
Applicant failed to disclose relevant information in his answers to questions 
28(a), and 28(b) of his security clearance application. Considering the record as a 
whole, I am convinced Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the information. 
Numerous factors weighed in my analysis to reach that conclusion, including: 
Applicant=s maturity, his employment history, his demeanor and testimony, the number 
and value of the debts, his long term disregard of the debts, and the lack of credibility of 
his explanations.  
 
Moreover, Applicant was provided ample opportunity to corroborate all his claims 
and explanations, and he failed to do so. Because of his extensive experience in the 
Coast Guard and applying for and holding a security clearance, Applicant knew the 
importance of accurately completing his security clearance application, and 
nevertheless failed to provide information that was material to making an informed 
security decision. AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,” applies. 
 
 
7 
 
 
  AG & 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none of the mitigating 
conditions apply to this case. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find it does not 
apply since his behavior is recent and shows Applicant’s lack of reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well trained 
man. He honorably served 29 years in the Coast Guard, and has been successful 
working for a defense contractor for around nine years. He has held access to classified 
information at the secret level for approximately 38 years. There is no evidence to show 
Applicant has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
Because of his rank and years of service in the Coast Guard, and his many years 
holding access to classified information, Applicant knew or should have known the 
importance of the trust placed on him by the government. He failed to be candid and 
honest, in his security clearance application, and broke the trust placed on him. His 
behavior shows he lacks judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a & 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
