                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06126 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines C and B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 1, 2007, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on November 20, 2007. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
mailed to Applicant on November 28, 2007, and it was received on December 3, 2007. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation of the allegations. Applicant did not object to the FORM and 
did not submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on January 28, 
2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with comments. They are 
incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old architect who has worked for a federal contractor since 
2004. He was born in the U.S. in 1977 to Nigerian parents. In 1981 he moved to Nigeria 
with his parents. He remained in Nigeria where he was educated until he completed 
high school in 1996. He returned to the U.S. in 1996 and attended college where he 
received a bachelor’s degree in architect in 2001. He returned to Nigeria in December 
2002 and August 2003 to visit his family. 
 
 Applicant applied for and was issued a Nigeria passport on December 27, 2002. 
The passport was to expire on December 27, 2007. Applicant provided a statement in 
his answer that he did not intend to renew it.1 He traveled to Nigeria and used his 
Nigerian passport on the two occasions he returned there. He used his Nigerian 
passport for convenience and so he would not have to obtain a visa from the Nigerian 
government. Applicant is a dual citizen of Nigeria and the United States.2 It is unclear if 
Applicant is willing to renounce his dual citizenship status. In a result of interview 
document it appears he is willing to renounce his passport and dual citizenship status 
should it be requested or required.  
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. He is employed as an 
engineer for the state-run housing department. In June 2007, Applicant filed an 
immigrant petition for his father to reside in the U.S. No subsequent information was 
provided to update the status of that petition. The petition is merely an application and it 
does not grant any immigration status nor guarantee that the alien will subsequently be 
eligible for a visa.3 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Nigeria currently residing in 
the U.S. She is retired from the Nigerian Water Company as an accountant. No 
information was provided as to what income she subsists on or whether she receives 
any benefits or pension from the Nigerian government or the Nigerian Water Company.  
 
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Id. at 2. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Administrative notice is taken of the facts about Nigeria described in the 
government’s FORM. Four of the six source documents included in the FORM are 
reports by the U.S. Department of State, the fifth document is from the Congressional 
Research Service, and the sixth document is a United Nations map of Nigeria.4 The 
following facts about Nigeria are highlighted.  
 
• Nigeria is a federal republic in western Africa. Since gaining independence from 
the British in 1960, Nigeria has experienced periods of political instability. In 
1999, Nigeria returned to civilian rule after years of military rule. 
• The Nigerian government’s record on human rights is poor.  
• Violent crime, committed by ordinary criminals as well as by persons in police 
and military uniforms, can occur throughout the country. Kidnapping for ransom 
of persons associated with the petroleum section, including U.S. citizens, 
remains common in the Niger Delta region.  
• A travel warning issued in October 2007 warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of 
travel to Nigeria and of further deterioration of the security situation in the Niger 
Delta region.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
4 Items 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered AG ¶ 10 (a) (“exercise of any right, privilege 
or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a 
current foreign passport… (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, 
or other such benefits from a foreign country”) and (b) (“action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen”). Applicant was a U.S. 
citizen when he applied for and was granted a Nigerian passport, based on his dual 
citizenship status in that country. He then used that Nigerian passport on two occasions 
to enter Nigeria. He did so for his convenience and so he would not have to obtain a 
visa. The facts raise both these disqualifying conditions.  
I have considered all the mitigating conditions applicable under this guideline. 
Specifically I have considered AG ¶ 11 (a) (“dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ 
citizenship or birth in a foreign country”); (b) (“the individual has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship”); (c) (“exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of 
foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
 
5 
 
 
individual was a minor”) and (e) (“the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated”). Applicant is a dual citizen of 
Nigeria and the U.S. Although his duality was originally based on his parents’ 
citizenship, he obtained a Nigerian passport and used it when he became an adult, thus 
exercising his Nigerian citizenship. Consequently, Applicant’s dual citizenship is not 
based solely on his parent’s citizenship. Therefore, mitigating condition (a) and (c) do 
not apply.  
Applicant has expressed a “qualified” willingness to renounce his dual citizenship 
and give up his passport if it was requested or required. I find this qualified renunciation 
does not fall within the parameters of (b) and does not apply. Applicant’s passport was 
to expire on December 27, 2007. Although Applicant expressed his intention not to 
renew it at the time he provided his answer to the SOR, no subsequent information was 
provided by him as to its status after its impending expiration or whether he changed his 
mind and did renew it. There was also no information provided whether he surrendered 
it, destroyed it, or otherwise invalidated it. Hence, I find (e) does not apply.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: Foreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7. I have 
especially considered AG ¶ (a) (“contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion”). Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of 
Nigeria and works for its government. His mother is a dual citizen of the U.S. and 
Nigeria. It is unknown if she receives a pension or subsidy from the Nigerian 
government or the Nigerian company she worked for before retirement. I find this 
disqualifying condition applies.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for this security concern under 
AG ¶ 8 and especially considered (a) (“the nature of the relationship with foreign 
persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization and interests of the U.S.”), (b) (“there is no conflict of interest, either 
 
6 
 
 
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests”), and (c) (“contact or communication 
with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation”). Nigeria is a country that has 
considerable internal strife, human rights difficulties, and a turbulent criminal element. 
Americans are warned of the dangers of traveling in the country due to the turmoil and 
risk to their safely. Applicant failed to provide sufficient information about his relationship 
with his father, who is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. It is presumed it is a close 
relationship because he is sponsoring his father for admission to the U.S. Applicant 
failed to provide any other amplifying information about his father’s work, relationship 
with the Nigerian government, whether he will receive a pension when he retires, and 
information as to any other contacts he may have. He failed to provide similar 
information about his mother. No information was provided as to how much contact he 
has with either his father or mother. Applicant lived most of his life in Nigeria and is a 
dual citizen. There is insufficient information to determine if there is a conflict of interests 
and if there was if it would be resolved in favor of the U.S. The facts provided do not 
support application of mitigating conditions (b) or (c).   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a dual citizen of Nigeria 
and the U.S. He applied for a Nigerian passport after he was a U.S. citizen. He failed to 
provide information as to the current status of his passport, so it could not be 
determined whether it was destroyed, surrendered, invalidated, or, in fact, renewed. His 
father is a Nigerian citizen and resident who is employed by the government. No other 
information was provided. Applicant has submitted immigration papers for his father to 
come to the U.S., but no information was provided as to whether they were approved. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant did not provide enough information to meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns raised.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline C, 
foreign preference, and Guideline B, foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO 
Administrative Judge 
