1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-10804
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 4, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), dated January 5,
2007.  On October 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the
Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on October 30, 2007, and
requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on December 6, 2007.  A notice of hearing was issued on December
17, 2007, scheduling the hearing for January 15, 2008.  At the hearing the Government
presented four exhibits.  The Applicant presented no exhibits, nor called any witnesses.
He did testify on his own behalf.  The record remained open after the hearing to allow
2
the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  He submitted one
Post-Hearing Exhibit consisting of five pages.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on January 23, 2008.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of an excerpt on Marijuana from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration dated
November 27, 2007, and a publication on Marijuana from the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, National Institute of Heath, National Institute on Drug Abuse
dated July 2005.  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record as Government Exhibits 3 and 4.  The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 38 years old and married.  He has a Bachelors Degree in
Chemical Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Quality Engineer,
and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted that he has used marijuana approximately on an annual
or bi-annual basis from 1988 until the summer of 2006.  He has never purchased or sold
marijuana or used any other illegal drug.  (See Government Exhibit 2).   
The Applicant explained that he first used marijuana while in college, in 1988.  He
used it at parties or social gatherings several times a year.  This use continued, once or
twice a year, until he graduated in 1994.  From 1994 to 1999, he does not remember if
he used it, but at the most it was once or twice a year.  From 1999 until his last use in
2005 or 2006, he used it once every other year, or at least seven times.  His college
friends that he used marijuana with have moved away and so he only sees them when
they visit about once every three years or so.  (Tr. pp. 22-25).     
In January 5, 2007, the Applicant completed a security clearance application
wherein he revealed his illegal marijuana use.  (See Government Exhibit 1).  A
statement of an interview of the Applicant conducted on June 25, 2007, prepared by the
Special Agent from the Defense Security Service, indicates that the Applicant intends
on continuing his pattern of marijuana use in the future.  The Applicant explained that he
was very uncomfortable during the interview and in response to the question said, “I
guess so” in the affirmative instead of clarifying himself.  (See Government Exhibit 2).  
3
In his answer to the SOR, dated October 30, 2007, however, the Applicant
denied the fact that he intends to continue using marijuana.      
The Applicant stopped using marijuana in 2006, about the time he started
working for a defense contractor.  He understands the law and DoD policy that prohibits
the use of illegal drugs.  (See Government Exhibits 3 and 4).  He has decided to commit
himself to a drug free lifestyle.    
The Applicant married in 1999.  He has a five year old daughter and another
child on the way.  He regrets using marijuana in the past, is embarrassed by it, and has
no intentions of ever using it again.
The Applicant’s performance appraisal for the period from January 2007 through
December 2007 reflects that he either “meets performance requirements” or “exceeds
performance requirements” in every category.  (See Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
4
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about th his performance evaluation reflects
that he is a valuable asset to his company e person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
5
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, disqualifying conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 22(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  However, mitigating condition
26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment also applies.  Applicant’s history of
marijuana use started in college and continued until 2006, on an annual or semi-annual
basis until he became employed in his field of study, that of an Engineer.  Applicant’s
last use of  marijuana occurred in 2006, over two years ago.  He credibly testified that
he has no intentions of ever using any illegal drug in the future.  
I have also considered the “whole person” concept by considering the totality of
the Applicant’s conduct and all of the circumstances, using the nine adjudicative
process factors listed above.  Over the past two years, the Applicant has grown up,
matured and realizes his mistakes of the past.  He has a family now and the
responsibilities that go along with it.  His performance evaluation reflects that he is a
valuable asset to his company.  He now understands the privilege and seriousness of
holding a security clearance and will do nothing to jeopardize it.  Under the particular
facts of this case, I do not find his past use of marijuana to be recent or of security
significance (factor A(3)), and that the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil (factor
A(8)).      
6
 This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and that he meets the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
