 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13797 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Scott M. Badami, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on April 24, 2007.  He submitted an additional e-QIP on July 10, 2007, after he 
changed employment. On October 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 13, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
December 12, 2007. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
December 20, 2008. On January 2, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling 
the hearing for January 31, 2008. On January 28, 2008, the case was transferred to me. 
The hearing was held on January 31, 2008. The Government offered Government 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s counsel 
called three witnesses, including the Applicant, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A 
through F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
hearing on February 11, 2008. The record closed on that date. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 13, 2007, Applicant admitted to all 
the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old aerospace engineer employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with the 
defense contractor since June 2007. From 1999-2007, he worked for a previous 
defense contractor. He was awarded a Bachelor of Science in Aerospace Engineering 
in 1994. He currently is studying for his Masters in Engineering Management. From 
1995 to 1997, he served in the Peace Corps. He is married and has no children. (Tr at 
22-24, 81; Gov 2; AE A.)   
 
In March 2003, Applicant was visiting a friend during Mardi Gras.  He went out 
during the day, and when he returned, he discovered that his friend invited a few people 
over.  A casual buffet was set up in the kitchen. Among the items were fresh baked 
cookies. Applicant ate some of the cookies. After he ate the cookies, he was told that 
there was marijuana in the cookies.  Some time later, as he walked by the cookies, he 
grabbed another cookie. He ate part of the cookie but stopped himself thinking “if you 
want a cookie so badly, find one that doesn’t have drugs in it.” He later felt some effects 
from the marijuana. (Tr at 91-92; Answer to SOR.)  Applicant no longer associates with 
anyone who was at the party. (Tr at 92.) 
 
In February 2007, Applicant and his wife (then fiancée) spent a ski weekend with 
several friends at a friend’s cabin.  One of their friends stated that she was going to try 
marijuana for the first time. His wife decided that she would try marijuana for the first 
time as well.  Applicant decided to do it too.  The marijuana was baked in corn bread 
which was served with dinner.  Both Applicant and his wife had a terrible experience. 
They both became sick and agreed that they would never do it again. (Tr at 26-27, 92-
94, Answer to SOR.) 
 
On April 24, 2007, Applicant submitted an e-QIP application to his previous 
employer.  The request was for a National Agency Check (NAC), not a request for a 
security clearance. (Tr at 66-67, 102; Response to SOR.) He answered “No,” in 
response to question 21a on the application which asks: “In the last year, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, 
hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, 
etc.), or prescription drugs?” (Gov 1.) He admits that he understood the question and 
was aware that he should have listed his February 2007 marijuana use. He rationalized 
 
3 
 
 
that the question was not looking for someone who tried it one time, and was not going 
to use it again but for regular users of illegal drugs. (Tr at 117-120.)  When signing the 
document, he certified that “My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are 
true, complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in 
good faith. I understand a knowing and willful false statement on this form can be 
punished by fine or imprisonment or both.” (Gov 1, Signature Forms.)  
     
In June 2007, Applicant accepted a job with his current employer.  Shortly after 
he started his new job, he was asked to fill out a new e-QIP application in order to apply 
for a SECRET security clearance. Question 24a on the application asks: “ Since the age 
of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroine, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbituates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription 
drugs?”  In response to this question, Applicant answered “Yes” and listed his March 
2003 and February 2007 marijuana use. (Gov 2.) 
 
Before submitting the second e-QIP application, he had a discussion with his 
wife. They had recently got engaged. He told her that he intended to list his drug use on 
this current form. He told her that he omitted his drug use on the last form, and by listing 
it on the current form there could be trouble. (Tr at 122-123.) Applicant thought the 
second questionnaire would supersede the prior questionnaire.   
 
Applicant and his wife have not used marijuana since the February 2007 incident. 
Neither intends to use marijuana again. They have told their friends that they cannot be 
present when marijuana is used. They have not been present while people were using 
marijuana since February 2007. He is willing to submit to random drug tests. (Tr at 25, 
28, 101-102, 132.)  In his response to the SOR, Applicant submitted a signed 
statement, dated November 8, 2007, indicating that he intends to refrain from drug 
abuse now and in the future.  Should he fail to refrain from any and all drug abuse, he 
expects the automatic and immediate revocation of any and all security clearances he 
may possess. (Tr at 96-100; Response to SOR.)  
 
Applicant states that he will never use marijuana again because: “I have too 
much at risk. My relationship, you know, with my wife, my career. I’m hoping to have a 
family soon.  All of this would be put at risk by such a stupid move as to try marijuana 
again.” (Tr at 101-102.)   
 
Applicant’s second level supervisor, Mr. W., testified that he has known Applicant 
since 1999.  They first were co-workers. Mr. W. was recently promoted. He indicates 
that Applicant is an important part of the division’s leadership and technical team.  He 
notes that Applicant is a first rate engineer who is honest and trustworthy.  He is aware 
of the all of the allegations in the SOR. He first learned from his superiors because 
Applicant had previously informed them. In early January 2008,   Applicant personally 
approached him and told him of the allegations. He does not condone Applicant’s 
conduct, and believes he should have known better. He discussed this with Applicant. 
 
4 
 
 
However, he acknowledges that Applicant voluntarily told the truth when he filled out his 
second e-QIP application. Applicant assured him that this conduct will not be repeated 
and he believes him. Applicant has offered to take a drug test at any time that is 
requested of him.  He strongly endorses his application for a security clearance. (Tr at 
45-75; AE E.) 
 
Applicant’s most recent performance report indicates that Applicant “has proven 
to be exceptionally competent in his assigned duties. He demonstrates a high level of 
expertise and is relied upon by the customer to keep the procedure development 
process on schedule to meet the Projects milestones. He excels in promoting team 
efforts and works well across operational boundaries . . . He is a valued asset to the 
[company’s] engineering team.” (AE B.) Applicant’s past performance evaluations with 
previous employers have been favorable. To summarize, he either met or exceeded 
standards in past performance evaluations. He has also received several awards 
throughout his career. (AE F.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DI DC) & 25(a) (any drug 
abuse) applies to Applicant’s case. He illegally used marijuana on two occasions. The 
first occasion was in March 2003. The second occasion was in February 2007.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Two apply to Applicant’s case. Drug 
Involvement Mitigating Condition (DI MC) ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies. The record evidence indicates that Applicant used marijuana on two 
separate and isolated occasions.  Although the last use occurred in February 2007, a 
year has passed. Although, Applicant did not use the best judgment when he decided to 
use marijuana, there is no evidence he is a habitual user. Applicant and his wife are 
adamant that they will never use marijuana again. Applicant has learned a difficult 
lesson pertaining to his marijuana use and future use is not likely to recur.  
 
 The second mitigating condition that applies is FC MC & 26(b) (a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using 
 
6 
 
 
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.) Applicant does not intend to use 
marijuana ever again. He and his wife have told their friends that they can longer be 
present when marijuana is used. They have not observed illegal drug use since the 
February 2007 incident.  He has not used marijuana since the February 2007 incident.  
His two time use of marijuana was experimental.  He is not a habitual user.  He 
submitted a statement with his response to the SOR, indicating his intentions to refrain 
from future illegal drug use. He acknowledges that if he is caught using illegal drugs in 
the future that it will result in his automatic revocation of his security clearance.  
Applicant has taken sufficient steps demonstrating that he does not intend to abuse any 
drugs in the future.  Applicant has met his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There are specific disqualifying conditions which may be raised. Applicant’s 
deliberate omission of his February 2007 marijuana use in response to question 21a on 
his April 24, 2007, e-QIP application raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition 
(PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities).  Applicant admits he deliberately omitted his February 2007 marijuana 
use in response to question 21a.  Although he rationalized to himself why he did not 
have to list the marijuana use on the application, it was a deliberate omission.  He 
understood the question.  Although this was his first time filling out an e-QIP application, 
Applicant is a college-educated aerospace engineer.   
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and 
may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
 
7 
 
 
service or other group) applies with respect to subparagraph 1. Applicant’s concealment 
of his marijuana use made him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation or duress.    
 
 The personal conduct concern may be mitigated.  Personal Conduct Mitigating 
Condition (PC MC) ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) applies.  
Applicant fully disclosed his marijuana use on his second e-QIP application, which was 
submitted a little over two months after his first e-QIP application.  Applicant’s marijuana 
use was not discovered through a third party. He was not confronted about his 
marijuana use during a security clearance background investigation.  He disclosed his 
marijuana use on his second application because he knew it was the right thing to do.    
When he accepted his new position, he was required to submit a new e-QIP application 
for a security clearance. It is unlikely the Government would have discovered 
Applicant’s marijuana use had he not disclosed it.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) applies.  Applicant fully disclosed 
his past marijuana use on his July 10, 2007, security clearance application.  He also 
fully disclosed his past marijuana use to his wife and work supervisors.  He is no longer 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress due to his past marijuana use. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although Applicant was a mature 
adult during the time each of the SOR allegations occurred, he accepted full 
responsibility for his actions and made no excuses for his behavior. Although his last 
use of marijuana occurred a little over a year ago, his use was experimental. It is 
unlikely that he will use marijuana again. He understands that future illegal drug use will 
result in the automatic revocation of his security clearance. He understands the severity 
of his earlier omission on his security clearance application.  He is well respected in his 
 
8 
 
 
field and he fully disclosed his SOR issues to his chain of command, even though he 
was not required to do so.  
 
While the Applicant’s past conduct justified the concerns raised under Drug 
Involvement and Personal Conduct, he has met his burden of mitigating the security 
concerns arising under these guidelines. 
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
