 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12219 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on September 29, 2006. On October 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations; Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On November 27, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
December 27, 2007. The case was assigned to me on January 3, 2008. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on January 22, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
February 3, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Gov Ex) 1 through 9, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted no 
 
2 
 
 
documents. His wife served as a witness/personal representative. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr) on February 14, 2008. The record closed on that date. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
The Notice of Hearing was sent out exactly 15 days prior to the hearing date. Applicant 
signed for receipt of the Notice of Hearing on January 29, 2008 which is less than 15 
days from the hearing date.  Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural Guidance, of the 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.8 states the Applicant will be notified at least 15 days in advance of the 
time and place of the hearing.  Applicant waived the 15 day notice requirement.  The 
Government noted that Applicant agreed to the February 6, 2008, hearing date on 
January 16, 2008. (Tr at 9-11.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 27, 2007, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d -1.j, 1.l, 1.n, 2.a-2.g, and 2.j.  He denied the allegations 
in ¶¶1.b, 1.c, 1.m, 2.h, 2.i, 2.k, and 3.a – 3.c.  During the hearing he admitted to the 
allegations in ¶¶ 2.h, 2.i, and 2.k. (Tr at 55-57.) 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old paint foreman employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor seeking a security clearance.  This is his first time applying for a security 
clearance.  He has worked for his current employer since October 2002. He is a high 
school graduate. He is married and has a 16-year-old daughter and a 12-year-old step 
daughter. (Tr at 5-7, 22, 26; Gov 1.)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent debts: an 
$18,106 collection account for a deficiency amount from a truck which was repossessed 
in November 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a $960 medical account placed for collection in May 
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a $214 account placed for collection in March 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c); a 
$96 account placed for collection in May 2005 ( SOR ¶ 1.d); a $199 utility bill placed for 
collection in March 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.e); a $1,691 credit card account, charged off in       
(SOR ¶ 1.f); a $639 department store credit account placed for collection in 2002 (SOR 
¶ 1.g); a $3,017 bank loan that was charged off in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.h); a $16,583 mobile 
home loan account that was charged off in 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.i); a  $25 cell phone account 
placed for collection in July 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.j); a $198 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.k); a 
$11,420 child support account placed for collection in December 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.l); a 
$4,990 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.m); and a $105 water service account placed for 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.n). (Gov 2; Gov 3.) 
 
Applicant experienced financial problems as a result of a nine-month period of 
unemployment in 2002.  During this time, he collected $700 every two weeks in 
unemployment checks but it was not enough to keep up with his bills. (Tr at 24-25.) 
Applicant’s truck (SOR ¶ 1.a), five wheel trailer (SOR ¶ 1.h), and mobile home (SOR ¶ 
 
3 
 
 
1.i) were repossessed as a result. He also incurred additional delinquent debts. The 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b should have been paid by insurance.  Applicant was 
involved in a car accident where the other driver was at fault in 2004. The bill was for 
Applicant’s medical treatment as a result of the accident. (Tr at 31-33.) He either does 
not recognize or disputes the bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.k, 1.m. He took no 
official action to dispute these debts. (Tr at 33-35, 40.)  He has made no efforts to pay 
or resolve the remaining consumer debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 
1.m, and 1.n. (Tr at 27-46.) 
 
In 1998, Applicant stopped paying child support because he was unable to pay it. 
The court garnished his wages in 2002. In December 2003, he owed approximately 
$11,420 in delinquent child support (SOR ¶ 1.l; Gov 2 at 5.)  Applicant currently pays 
$426 in child support and is current on all child support payments. (Tr at 26, 40-42.) A 
credit report, dated September 8, 2007, verifies this. (Gov 3 at 2.)   
 
Applicant has not attended financial counseling.  He makes $20.87 an hour with 
time and half for overtime. (Tr at 22.) His wife earns approximately $800 per month. 
Their monthly rent is $1,000 a month. (Tr at 49.) They still owe $2,000 in income taxes 
for tax year 2006.  They have not entered into a payment agreement with the Internal 
Revenue Service. (Tr at 49-50.)  In 2006, he received a $30,000 insurance settlement.  
The settlement was applied to other bills and extensive dental work he and his wife 
needed done. (Tr at 65-67.) 
 
Between June 11, 1989 and February 8, 2003, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with numerous offenses on eleven occasions.  The offenses include two driving 
while intoxicated offenses in 1989 and 1999; eight offenses of driving while his license 
was revoked and/or under restraint. 
 
On June 11, 1989, he was arrested and charged with Drive a Vehicle when BAC 
0.10 or more; Driving a Vehicle While Under the Influence; No Liability Insurance; and 
Defective Vehicle. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 26.)  
 
On December 13, 1989, he was charged with Driving a Vehicle While His 
License was Revoked. (Gov 5 at 2-7.)  
 
On February 17, 1996 he was charged with Harassment via Telephone.  The 
charge was later dismissed. (Gov 5 at 21-25; Gov 9 at 16-17.) 
 
On April 31, 1997, he was charged with Use of a Foreign License During 
Suspension; Operating a Vehicle Without Insurance; Operation of Unsafe Vehicle; 
Careless Driving.  The first charge was dismissed and Applicant pled guilty to the 
remaining charges. Part of his sentence included 48 hours of useful public service.  
Applicant did not complete the 48 hours of public service and a bench warrant was 
issued.  He was ordered to spend 10 additional days in confinement in lieu of public 
service. (Gov 9 at 18-20.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
On April 17, 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with Drove Motor Vehicle 
When License Under Restraint (Revoked). Applicant pled to the charge of Driving 
Without a Valid License.  He paid a fine and court costs totaling $57. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 9 
at 25-26.) He was also charged with Failure to Comply – Contempt of Court for failure to 
perform 48 hours of useful public service. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 15-20; Gov 7.) 
 
On April 27, 1998, Applicant was charged with Permit Unauthorized Person to 
Drive; Driving When License Under Restraint; and Safety Belt Violation. He pled to the 
first tow charges and paid $155 in fines and court costs. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 19; Gov 9 
at 23-26.) 
 
On May 8, 1998, Applicant was charged with Driving When License Under 
Restraint. He pled guilty and was ordered to perform 24 hours of useful public service, 
spend 90 days in jail and paid $188 in fines and court costs.  He failed to complete the 
24 hours of useful public service. A bench warrant was issued and he was arrested on 
April 26, 1999. He was resentenced to five days in jail in lieu of completing public 
service. (Gov 9 at 1-3.) 
 
On January 24, 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with Failure to Drive 
in a Single Lane; Drove a Vehicle While License Under Revocation; Operated 
Uninsured Motor Vehicle on a Public Roadway; Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol – 
Second Offense; Driving While Ability Impaired. He pled guilty to Driving While Ability 
Impaired and all other charges were dismissed.  He was sentenced to six days in jail, 24 
months supervised probation, 48 hours useful public service, attend alcohol therapy and 
pay $474 in fines, fees, and court costs. He failed to comply with court-ordered alcohol 
treatment. A bench warrant was issued and Applicant was taken into custody pursuant 
to this warrant.  He was sentenced to 24 months probation and six days in jail; and 48 
hours of additional useful public service. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 7; Gov 9 at 4-15.) 
 
On March 21, 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with Drove Vehicle 
When Licensed Revoked as a Habitual Offender; Drove Vehicle When License Under 
Restraint (Revoked) and Improper Lane Use. He pled guilty to Improper Lane change 
and the other charges were dismissed. He paid $86 in fines, fees, and court costs and 
was ordered to refrain from driving until his license was reinstated. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 
8-14; Gov 9 at 27-28.) 
 
On February 8, 2003, Applicant was arrested for Driving After Revocation – 
Prohibited.  He was found guilty and ordered to pay $139 in fines, fees, and court costs 
and ordered to spend 75 days in confinement in a work release facility. (Gov 4 at 4; Gov 
6; Gov 8.) 
 
Applicant has not been arrested since 2003.  He has completed all of his court-
ordered requirements and probation. (Tr at 62-63.) He admits to driving to work and to 
the grocery store while his license was revoked.  He did not seek the court’s permission 
to drive to work or to the grocery store. His driver’s license was re-instated in the 
summer 2006. (Tr at 53-55.) 
 
5 
 
 
          
 
When Applicant completed his September 29, 2006, e-QIP application, in 
response to question 23(d) which asks “Have you ever been charged with or convicted 
of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?,” he listed his January 1999 DUI offense 
but not his June 1989 DUI offense.  He also did not list his arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.j 
and 2.k in response to question 23(f), “In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, 
charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e 
above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was alcohol or 
drug related.).” (Gov 1.) In response to question 28(a), “In the last 7 years, have you 
been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?,” Applicant listed the debts that are 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.h, and 1.i.  He did not list the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b -1.g, 
and 1.j – 1.n. (Gov 1).   
 
Applicant states that he did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP application.  He did 
not recall the details of his 1989 DUI arrest and the two other offenses. He listed the 
debts that he knew were over 180 days old. (Tr at 21, 52, 59, 61; Response to SOR.)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified that Applicant has worked for him since 2002. He 
trusts him to do a good job. He has no concerns with Applicant having a security 
clearance. (Tr at 69-73.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC & 19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case due to his history of not meeting financial 
obligations. At the close of the record, 13 unresolved delinquent debts remain, an 
approximate total balance of over $28,000.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
 
7 
 
 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. Aside 
from his child support obligation, all of the other delinquent debts remain unresolved. In 
addition, Applicant has a $2,000 unresolved tax debt for tax year 2006. His financial 
issues are current. 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part, due to Applicant’s nine 
month period of unemployment in 2002. However, Applicant has been employed 
continuously since November 2002 and has taken no action to resolve or dispute his 
delinquent accounts. I cannot conclude that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
  
FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply.  Applicant has not attended financial counseling and his 
delinquent debts remain unresolved. It is unlikely that the debts will be resolved in the 
near future.  
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies, with respect to the Applicant’s delinquent 
child support but not the other unresolved debts.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) had the potential to apply to several debts which Applicant disputes. However, he 
took no action to resolve the disputed debts.  As such, it does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
 
8 
 
 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply.  From 1989 to 
2003, Applicant was arrested or charged with offenses on 11 occasions, including two 
DUI arrests and eight charges of driving while his license was revoked. Repeatedly 
violating court orders which revoked his license raise a concern about Applicant’s ability 
to follow rules and regulations.    
 
The criminal conduct concern can be mitigated. I find that Criminal Conduct 
Mitigating Condition (CC MC) ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal 
behavior happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) applies.  Applicant has not been arrested or charged with an offense since 
February 2003.  He has become more responsible over the five year period since his 
last offense.  CC MC ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including 
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) applies.  More than five years have passed since Applicant’s 
last arrest. He completed the terms of his sentences and his license was reinstated in 
2006.  He has a good employment record. 
 
Applicant has mitigated the criminal conduct concern. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Applicant’s omissions on his September 29, 2006, e-QIP application raises the 
potential applications of Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) 
(deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities).  Applicant’s explanation that he did not list his 1989 DUI arrest in 
response to question 23(d) and some of his delinquent debts in response to question 
28(a) because he could not recall the information is credible. He listed the most recent 
DUI arrest in response to question 23(d).  He listed the debts which have the highest 
delinquent balances in response to question 28(a).  
 
 
9 
 
 
 I also find that Applicant did not deliberately omit his March 21, 2000 arrest for 
Drove Vehicle While License Revoked as a Habitual Offender; Drove Vehicle When 
License Under Restraint (Revoked); and Improper Lane Use in response to question 
23(f) on his e-QIP application.  The end result of the arrest was a guilty plea to Improper 
Lane Use with a minimal fine that was under $150.  The plain language of question 23(f) 
tells Applicants to leave off traffic offenses that were under $150. A reasonable person 
could understand that they were not required to list the offense considering that it was a 
traffic offense with a fine under $150. More problematic is Applicant’s omission of his 
February 8, 2003, arrest for Driving After Revocation Prohibited. Not only was he fined 
but he was sentenced to 75 days confinement on a work release program. The 
disposition of this charge was much more serious and it is unlikely that Applicant forgot 
about this offense. His license was not reinstated until the summer 2006, just a few 
months prior to the completion of his e-QIP application. I find his explanation that he 
forgot this arrest less credible. FC DC ¶ 16(a) applies with respect to this allegation. 
 
 The personal conduct concern may be mitigated.  Personal Conduct Mitigating 
Condition (PC MC) ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) has the 
potential to apply.  It does not apply because Applicant did not disclose the omission 
before being confronted with the facts.  None of the other PC MCs are relevant to the 
facts of Applicant’s case. He has not mitigated the concerns raised under personal 
conduct.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
work history and his clean record of no subsequent criminal conduct over a period of 
five years.  While some of Applicant’s delinquent debts occurred due to circumstances 
beyond his control due to a nine month period of unemployment, he took no steps to 
resolve his delinquent accounts, even though he has been employed full time since 
 
10 
 
 
November 2002.  He did not meet his burden to mitigate his omission of his February 8, 
2003, arrest in response to question 23(f) on his September 29, 2006 e-QIP application.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under financial considerations, and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant    
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant    
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
