 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05597 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that his financial problems are under control. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
November 11, 2014. On December 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 6, 2016, and 
requested a decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 7, 2016, 
was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated March 8, 2016. Applicant received 
the FORM on March 21, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the 
FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM or submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned 
to me on December 6, 2016. 
 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
his unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background 
investigator from January 28, 2013. Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, and he raised no objections. I 
admitted the document and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted the three SOR factual allegations - delinquent 
accounts totaling over $51,000. Applicant’s SOR admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1989, and attended a community college between 2010 and 2013, where 
he received an associate’s degree. He married in 1997, and has a 19-year-old daughter 
and two stepsons, ages 26 and 23. 
 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1989 and honorably served until he retired 
in 2009. After his retirement, he worked for a private company for about six months. At 
the same time, he worked as a security officer for a federal contractor (A) between 2009 
and 2013. He left that employment for a period to work on a more lucrative contract. He 
resumed working for (A), his current employer, in April 2014. Applicant was granted a 
secret clearance while serving in the Navy starting in 1989, and a top secret clearance 
starting in 2004-2005.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2014 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he had financial problems and revealed one delinquent debt in collection 
for $3,335. He stated that the creditor obtained a judgment against him in 2013, and he 
was paying it through a court-ordered garnishment of wages. Applicant claimed that as 
of June 2014, he owed about $800 and he anticipated paying the debt in full within three 
months. 
 
Applicant stated in his 2014 SCA that his wife was in charge of the family finances 
while he was deployed during his Navy service. He claimed that due to family problems, 
she failed to pay the bills. Applicant averred that he was now in control of the family 
finances and was trying to bring everything up to date. The subsequent investigation 
uncovered additional delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in January 2012 and 
confronted about his then financial problems. Applicant disclosed he filed for Chapter 13 
 
3 
                                         
 
bankruptcy protection in 2002, converted to a Chapter 7 in 2004, and was discharged of 
all dischargeable debts in 2004. He told the investigator that he had to file for bankruptcy 
protection because he and his wife had maxed out their credit cards over a period and 
now were only making minimum payments. 
 
During his 2012 interview, Applicant was confronted with 12 delinquent accounts 
that he had acquired since his 2004 bankruptcy discharge. Applicant told the investigator 
that his wife was suffering from depression and was not paying the bills. He claimed he 
found out about the financial problems in 2009, and was working to resolve them. He 
averred he had contacted the creditors to make settlement agreements, and stated his 
intent to pay the debts one at a time until he paid them all. 
 
In June 2015, Applicant was interviewed again by a government investigator and 
questioned about his financial problems. Concerning the judgment disclosed in his 2014 
SCA, Applicant stated the creditor attempted to collect but he did not have the money to 
pay. The creditor obtained the judgment and garnished his earnings. Applicant also was 
questioned about 14 delinquent or in collection accounts. He claimed that four of the 
accounts were discharged through bankruptcy in 2004, and he did not recognize a $1,000 
judgment filed against him.  
 
Concerning the remaining 10 delinquent accounts, Applicant claimed that he had 
contacted all the creditors and had been actively working with them to settle the accounts. 
Applicant noted that he did not have any written payment agreements with any of the 
creditors. As of June 2015, he had not participated in any financial counseling.  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s mismanaging the family 
finances. He explained he spent a lot of time at sea and claimed he was not aware of his 
financial problems. He claimed that family emergencies caused his wife to fall behind on 
her payment of the debts. Applicant told the investigator during his 2015 interview that he 
did not disclose all of his delinquent accounts in his 2014 SCA because “he had not 
thought that they were required to be included.”  
 
Applicant’s investigation revealed the three delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, his June 2015 summary of 
interview, and the record credit reports establish the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence to show that he has been in contact with his 
creditors, or that he attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. 
He provided no information about his current financial position. He did not provide any 
information about his current income, monthly expenses, and whether his income is 
sufficient to pay his living expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether 
he has participated in financial counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
  
 
4 
                                         
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, SOR 
response, and 2015 summary of interview. The evidence establishes the three delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $51,000. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
 
6 
                                         
 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show that his 
financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. Applicant presented no evidence of efforts taken to 
remain in contact with his creditors, or of efforts he has taken to pay or resolve his 
delinquent debts. His evidence is insufficient to establish that circumstances beyond his 
control contributed to or aggravated his financial problems. Furthermore, Applicant failed 
to establish that he was financially responsible under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant submitted his SCA in 2014 disclosing only one delinquent debt. He 
claimed he did not believe he had to disclose his other delinquent debts at the time he 
completed his SCA. In 2012 and 2015, he participated in government interviews where 
he was asked about his financial problems. At that time, he acknowledged his financial 
problems, claimed he was in contact with his creditors, and promised to address his 
delinquent debts and work toward resolving them. He failed to submit any documentary 
evidence to support his claims. 
 
 Applicant was in the service and submitted SCAs at least since about 1989, when 
he was granted a security clearance. He was made aware of the Government’s financial 
considerations security concerns during his 2012 and 2015 interviews. He was allowed a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and 
mitigation. He failed to provide any documentary evidence to show he has been in contact 
with his creditors, or that he attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve his delinquent 
debts since he acquired them. Applicant also failed to establish that he has sufficient 
income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making progress paying his 
delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service and his years working for federal 
contractors. Notwithstanding, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show his 
financial responsibility. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence of payments to the 
SOR creditors or of efforts to resolve his debts. There is insufficient evidence of progress 
addressing his financial problems. The available information is insufficient to establish 
 
7 
                                         
 
clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial 
problems are being resolved, or are under control. Applicant failed to establish that he 
has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed 
as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary 
for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior consistent 
with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
