 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight exhibits (Items 1 - 8) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-06844
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by her delinquent or
past-due debts. Her request for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 14, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified
information. After reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.1
On August 21, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns about financial considerations (Guideline F).  Applicant2
timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. Department
Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of
Relevant Material (FORM),  dated February 25, 2016, in support of the SOR. Applicant3
 Directive. 6.3.4
2
received the FORM on March 16, 2016. She timely responded to the FORM and
provided additional information. The record closed on April 6, 2016, and the case was
assigned to me on September 13, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged Applicant owes $115,236 for 15
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.o). Applicant denied SOR 1.d, 1.h, 1.i, and
1.k. She admitted with remarks the remaining allegations. All of the debts alleged are
documented in the credit reports produced by the Government. (FORM, Items 1, 3 - 7)
Applicant is 49 years old and was offered a position in December 2011 with a
defense contractor. Her employment is contingent on obtaining eligibility for a security
clearance. Applicant worked as police officer and detective from August 1991 until
retiring in October 2011. (FORM, Item 4)
Applicant has been married twice – from January 1987 to June 1999 and from
July 2001 to December 2007. Both marriages ended in divorce. She has an adult child
from her first marriage. (FORM, Item 4)
Applicant disclosed several debts in her EQIP. Credit reports obtained by the
Government during the enduing background investigation reflect the debts alleged in
the SOR. Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator in March 2012 as
part of her background investigation. Among the topics discussed was her financial
condition at the time. (FORM, Items 4 - 8)
In response to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant cited her divorces as being an
underlying cause of her financial problems. She also referenced a house fire and
injuries from that fire that caused her to be homeless and out of work for a time. She did
not provide any details about those events. Applicant also claimed her home was
burglarized, resulting in the loss of numerous valuables, and that her basement flooded.
Again, Applicant did not provide any details about those events, such as when they
occurred or what financial impact resulted from any or all of those events. Response to
FORM; FORM, Item 3)
Applicant also did not provide any information that shows she has paid or
otherwise acted to resolve her debts over the four years since her interview. In
response to the FORM, she provided an undated and unsigned letter from a credit
repair company. It appears from that letter that Applicant started working to repair her
credit at or near the time she responded to the FORM. Applicant also has not provided
any information about her current finances. (Response to FORM)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
3
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information supports the SOR allegations. The resulting security
concern about the facts established by the Government is expressed at AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
4
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts. 
More specifically, the ongoing presence of multiple, unsatisfied debts requires
application of the following AG ¶ 19 disqualifying conditions:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Under AG ¶ 20, the following mitigating conditions are pertinent to the facts and
circumstances of this case:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s debts are multiple and recent. They have not been paid or otherwise
resolved despite being the subject of her investigative interview four years ago. It was
incumbent upon Applicant to present information that might support these mitigating
conditions. She did not do so and has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by
the Government’s information.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant did not meet her burden of
persuasion in response to the adverse information about her unresolved debts. Doubts
about her suitability for access to classified information remain. Because protection of
the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s security
clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
