 Exhibit 3. 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 12-09634
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for
access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from his involvement in a July
2009 incident of child sexual abuse of his then 14-year-old daughter. Accordingly, this
case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
In May 2010, Applicant’s employer submitted an adverse information report
based on Applicant’s release from jail after posting a $10,000 surety bond after his
arrest for two felony offenses involving sexual abuse of a minor.  His employer1
submitted another adverse information report in June 2011 when the two felony charges
 Exhibit 3. 2
 Exhibit 1 (commonly known as a security clearance application). 3
 Exhibit 2.4
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate5
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,6
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
2
were nolle prossed (dismissed).  Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire2
for National Security Positions (SF 86 Format) on March 28, 2012.  He underwent a3
background investigation in 2012, and he provided additional information in response to
interrogatories in early 2016.  4
Thereafter, on April 7, 2016, after reviewing the application and information
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent5
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the6
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline J for criminal conduct and
Guideline E for personal conduct. The sole allegation under Guideline E is a cross-
allegation to the matters alleged under Guideline J. He answered the SOR with a three-
page memorandum on May 23, 2016, and requested a hearing.          
The case was assigned to me on July 8, 2016. The hearing was held as
scheduled on September 7, 2016. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–7, and they
were admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented four witnesses (three
character witnesses and his daughter), and offered Exhibits A–C, and they were
admitted. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 15, 2016.
Procedural Matters
At hearing, SOR ¶ 1.b was amended, without objections, to note that the charges
of child sexual abuse were dismissed without prejudice.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job
as a senior principal systems engineer with a company doing business in the defense
industry. He has worked for this company since January 1998, and he has held a
 Tr. 34–64; Exhibit C. 7
 T. 108–109. 8
 Exhibits 6 and. 7. 9
 Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and 5.10
 Exhibits A and B. 11
3
security clearance throughout this period. By all accounts, he has a good if not excellent
record of employment as verified by the three character witnesses and performance
evaluations from 2009–2015.  His educational background includes a master’s degree7
in applied mathematics awarded in 1998. His first wife, the mother of the daughter at
issue in this case, passed away in 2013. He married his current spouse in 2015, and he
has three stepchildren, ages 20, 16, and 15, in his household. Outside of work,
Applicant serves his church as a deacon and is involved in various church activities.8
As alleged in the SOR, this case concerns Applicant’s involvement in two
incidents of criminal conduct against minor children. The first incident, which involves
adjudicated criminal conduct, goes back to 1999 when Applicant was convicted of a
single misdemeanor offense of assault by recklessly causing injury to a seven-year-old
child during an October 1998 tour of a hay maze.  Applicant admits he did not behave in9
an exemplary manner when he reacted badly by pushing the child off his leg after being
provoked by the child’s rude or bratty joke. A confrontation between Applicant and the
child’s father resulted in the hay-maze incident being reported to the police. Applicant
pleaded not guilty, but was found guilty by the state court and ordered to pay a $500
fine and serve 12 months of unsupervised probation. His conviction was affirmed on
appeal, and he completed probation in January 2001. 
The second incident, which involves unadjudicated criminal conduct, occurred in
July 2009. Applicant was charged with two felonies involving child sexual abuse of his
then 14-year-old daughter (criminal sexual penetration of a minor and second degree
sexual contact with a minor) in 2010, but he was never tried and the charges against
him were nolle prossed in 2011.  Applicant has steadfastly maintained that his actions10
were not intentional or deliberate because he was asleep at the time. 
As part of the criminal case, Applicant underwent two evaluations by forensic
psychologists in 2010, and both reports were highly favorable for him.  The second and11
far more detailed report summed up the evaluation of Applicant as follows:
This evaluation cannot state with certainly that [Applicant] either did
commit or did not commit the offense alleged by his daughter. There is a
real possibility that he committed it while asleep and that he did not
consciously sexually molest her. Regardless, he is significantly different
from most of the sex offenders that I have evaluated. He does not have a
personality disorder, which is the most common diagnosis that I have
 Exhibit A at 20. 12
 Tr. 97. 13
 Exhibit 2 (addendum report to juvenile court). 14
 Tr. 95–96. 15
4
observed in such cases. He presents with the lowest level of risk that I
have ever observed in cases of persons accused of sexually molesting a
child. His lifestyle is extremely benign and well conformed. He is probably
one of a very few number of individuals for whom it is conscionable for the
courts to entertain some alternative course of action that does not involve
formal criminal proceedings.12
The charges were dismissed or nolle prossed on the condition that Applicant
participate in counseling or treatment.  The sessions with the sex offender treatment13
program, which were part of a juvenile dependency case involving his daughter,
occurred during August–November 2011. The sessions were discontinued due to
Applicant’s lack of participation and unwillingness to work on the issues of the
offenses.  The counselors described Applicant as resistant and sarcastic, and it14
appears they were unsatisfied with Applicant’s unwillingness to accept responsibility for
the misconduct. Applicant attributes the discontinuation of services to a personality
conflict with the counselors.15
What occurred between Applicant and his daughter in July 2009 was described in
his daughter’s written account of the incident. She did so in a letter to her mother in
which she described the incident as follows:
It all happened on July 30, 2009. Dad asked me if I wanted a back
massage to go to sleep. I said yes because it sounded great but how
wrong I was. After about 15 min. Dad started nudging me asking if I was
awake. I heard him but I was to [sic] tired to answer him. Then all of a
sudden his hand moves from my back to my butt and he starts rubbing it.
Instantly I was awake but to [sic] scared to say anything. So instead I roll
over so he can’t reach my butt and he started rubbing my female part and
the he sticks his hand inside my underwear and starts massaging my
female part with his hand. I was so scared that I just froze until he
stopped. When he was finally done and he left I just sat there crying all
night. You didn’t hear me because you and Dad were talking to grandma
because we were at her house. Sorry I didn’t tell you sooner. I meant to I
just knew you would be crushed and I was scared. I am BEGGING you
not to talk to Dad about it because he doesn’t know I know and I’m scared
of what he’ll do to me when he finds out. I would like you to call the cops
because I can’t stand it any more. Every time I’m talking to Dad I feel like
throwing up. I mean you don’t know what it’s like for me right now. My life
will never be the same. That’s why I’ve been acting weird lately, like being
 Exhibit 5. 16
 Tr. 76. 17
 Tr. 76–77. 18
 Exhibit 5. 19
 Tr. 98. 20
 Tr. 87. 21
 Tr. 100. 22
 Tr. 109–110. 23
5
always in a bad mood and wanting to be at friends houses all the time. So
I’m asking you to call the cops because I think it’s a form of child
[molestation]. And I would appreciate if you wrote back instead of talking
to me because it is a touchy subject for me and I don’t know if I can talk
about it. It was hard enough for me to write this note.  16
At the hearing, Applicant’s daughter stated that when she wrote the letter to her mother,
she believed what she wrote was true.  In addition, she has not retracted the17
statements she made in the letter.18
Her mother replied by letter and addressed the following subjects: (1) calling the
police was an option, but a serious one with potential adverse consequences, including
Applicant’s loss of employment and a divorce; (2) she told her daughter that she
believed her and recalled the night in question as she remembered Applicant coming
out of the bedroom looking confused and saying something about falling asleep and not
otherwise acting guilty; and (3) she suggested finding a counselor for her daughter to
talk to and explore the various options.19
Applicant described himself as “horrified” when his then wife informed him about
his daughter’s accusations, and he could not wait to apologize to his daughter and ask
for forgiveness from her.  He maintained at the hearing, as he has in the past, that his20
actions were not intentional or deliberate because he was asleep at the time. He
recounted past sleep-behavior stories, including incidents where he touched his wife in
the marital bed while asleep with no recollection of his actions.  He further asserted21
that his daughter’s account of him asking if she was awake during the incident was
sleep talking.  He describes his current relationship with his daughter as “blessedly22
wonderful,” although any discussion of the July 2009 incident is upsetting to her, the
matter has been settled in the household, and it is not further discussed.     23
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to24
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.25
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 26
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 27
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).28
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.29
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.30
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 32
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).33
6
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As24
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt25
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An26
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  27
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting28
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An29
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate30
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  31
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s32
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.33
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.34
 AG ¶¶ 15 and 30. 35
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).36
7
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it34
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The SOR allegations under Guidelines J for criminal conduct and Guideline E for
personal conduct are factually interrelated and will be discussed together. The focus of
those two guidelines is on a person’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Accordingly, given that the35
allegation under Guideline E is a cross-allegation to the matters under Guideline J, a
separate discussion of the Guideline E matters is unnecessary. 
In analyzing this case, I considered the following disqualifying and mitigating
conditions as most pertinent:  36
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted;
AG 31(e) violation or parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program; 
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [person’s] reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
AG ¶ 32(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.37
8
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment
record, or constructive community involvement.  
Starting first with the 1998 hay-maze incident that led to the 1999 misdemeanor
conviction, I am not particularly concerned about this matter. It took place nearly 20
years ago, it is a relatively minor matter, it happened under unusual circumstances, and
a similar incident has not recurred. But the same cannot be said about the 2010
charges of child sexual abuse, which were ultimately not formally prosecuted in 2011.
Applicant maintained in this proceeding, as he has since the allegations were first
made, that his conduct with his daughter was unintentional and not deliberate because
the incident occurred after falling asleep while giving his daughter a back massage. To
accept his argument would require me to believe that he engaged in extensive fondling
of his daughter (including inside her underwear), and he spoke to her (asking if she was
awake) while he was asleep. After reviewing a substantial record and having an
opportunity to listen to and observe the testimony of Applicant and his daughter, I
cannot accept his description of events as a truthful account. In reaching this
conclusion, I found his daughter’s letter to be a credible and persuasive account of the
2009 incident. In addition, the discontinuation of the sessions with the sex offender
treatment program in 2011 is akin to a failure to complete a court-mandated
rehabilitation program.    
Applicant presented a substantial case in reform and rehabilitation. He has a
highly favorable employment record, he is involved in constructive community
involvement as shown by his church activities, and he appears to have repaired and
restored his relationship with this now 21-year-old daughter. Nevertheless, the criminal
conduct at issue here is serious, he continues to deny guilt or culpability for the 2009
incident, and his explanation is not credible.  
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision.  This is the burden the law imposes upon a person seeking access to37
classified information. I must fairly apply that standard in all cases, regardless of the
importance of Applicant’s contribution to the defense effort, or whether an unfavorable
clearance decision will have an adverse effect on Applicant, his family, or his employer.
After a careful review of the record, I cannot conclude that Applicant has met his
burden. 
For the reasons discussed above, Applicant’s involvement in a July 2009 incident
of child sexual abuse of his then 14-year-old daughter creates doubt about his current
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).38
9
consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that he did not38
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b–1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
