 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-05092 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alec Sauchik, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his business-related foreign 
travel, as well as his attendance and presentations at professional conferences 
overseas. However, he did not mitigate security concerns raised by his relationship to a 
relative who is a citizen and resident of Ukraine. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the foreign influence and involvement in outside activities 
guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his 
eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 8, 2016, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held.2 
Applicant testified, and Exhibits 1 – 7 and A – E were admitted into the administrative 
record without objection. Applicant’s objection to Exhibit 8 was overruled and the exhibit 
was admitted into the record.3 After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted additional 
documents that were collectively marked Exhibit G and admitted into the record without 
objection. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on June 16, 2016. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
The record was left open until July 1, 2016, to allow Department Counsel to file a 
motion to amend the SOR.4 The motion, which was marked App. Exh. IV, was 
submitted after the deadline passed. Department Counsel moves to amend the SOR to 
add allegation “1.e. Your sister-in-law, brother-in-law, and stepson are citizens of and 
reside in the (sic) Ukraine.” The Government failed to establish good cause for the late 
filing and, thus, the untimely motion is denied. ISCR Case No. 14-03641 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2015) (having granted a party 26 days after hearing to file post-hearing 
matters, the party failed to show the judge erred in denying request for more time).  
 
Additionally, Applicant had previously disclosed these foreign familial 
connections to the Government. See Exhibit 7 at 2-3 (during 2005 background 
interview, Applicant disclosed and discussed his stepson, as well as the purchase of 
property in Ukraine for his stepson’s use). The DOD CAF elected not to allege these 
foreign familial connections in the SOR and counsel did not move to amend the SOR 
prior to the hearing. After weighing the interest of the parties, the Government, and 
industry in a fair, just, and expedient decision, I further find that Department Counsel did 
not establish good cause to amend the SOR.5 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.17. 
Nonetheless, recognizing the paramount importance of safeguarding national security, I 
have examined the totality of Applicant’s foreign connections and contacts in resolving 
the security concerns at issue. ISCR Case No. 14-03497 at 3 (App. Bd. March 9, 2015) 
                                                          
2 Correspondence with the parties, the notice of hearing, and the case management order (CMO) are 
attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 Applicant contends that the portion of Exhibit 8 relating to Ukraine is inaccurate. I overruled Applicant’s 
objection after reviewing the cited source documents, but left the record open to allow Applicant the 
opportunity to present matters in support of his position. (Tr. 17-21) I have considered Applicant’s 
argument and post-hearing matters in considering the weight to extend Exhibit 8. 
 
4 Initially, I left the record open to June 24, 2016, for Department Counsel to file his motion. At counsel’s 
request, the deadline was extended to July 1, 2016. (Tr. 145-49) Although some of the matters that 
contributed to counsel’s late filing were beyond his control, he failed to request an extension of time 
before the newly established deadline passed.  
 
5 Judicial economy also weighs against granting the late motion. I coordinated with the parties about 
scheduling the hearing in April 2016. Thus, both sides had nearly two months to prepare for the hearing. 
The hearing was one of eleven that were scheduled over three days, and was the second of three 
hearings to be heard on the same day. The hearing started before the scheduled start time of 1000 and 
did not end until 1309 (or, after the next hearing was scheduled to start). See App. Exh. I and V; Tr. 4, 
160. See also, Judge Ra’anan’s dissenting opinion in ISCR Case No. 14-06592 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 
2016), citing “the current concern for judicial economy” as a basis for not ordering a remand.  
 
3 
 
 
(“permissible for DOHA [judges] to consider non-alleged conduct and circumstances . . . 
on such issues as mitigation, rehabilitation, and a whole-person analysis.”) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
General background6 
 
 Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Ukraine when it was part of the 
former Soviet Union. He and his wife of now nearly 30 years immigrated to the United 
States in approximately 1990. They are naturalized U.S. citizens. He has three adult 
children, all of whom are foreign nationals. One of his children is a U.S. resident. 
 
 Applicant is an accomplished, certified translator and interpreter in Russian and 
Ukrainian. He has built a successful business providing translation services, including 
as a subcontractor on U.S. Government (USG) contracts. He was initially granted a 
security clearance in connection with his employment as a federal contractor over ten 
years ago. He has served as a translator in support of USG agencies and military for 
nearly 20 years, including overseas assignments.  
 
Foreign connections and contacts in Ukraine (SOR 1.a)7  
 
 In 2005, Applicant submitted his initial security clearance application (SCA). He 
has subsequently gone through at least two additional security clearance background 
investigations. During these investigations, Applicant disclosed and discussed his 
foreign connections and contacts, including his mother-in-law who is a citizen and 
resident of Ukraine. Applicant’s mother-in-law lives with his wife’s twin sister, and they 
both receive a pension from the Ukrainian government. Applicant’s wife has frequent 
contact (at least once a week) with her mother, and travels to Ukraine once or twice a 
year to visit her mother and other family members in Ukraine. Applicant and his wife 
have sent money to her family in Ukraine.  
 
 On the initial 2005 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he and his wife purchased an 
apartment in Ukraine for her son’s use. He also disclosed two foreign investment 
accounts with a total approximate value of $200,000. Applicant closed both of these 
foreign accounts and used some of the proceeds to help his child living in the United 
States purchase a home. He testified that he and his wife do not own any foreign 
property or have any foreign assets. (The record is silent as to what happened to 
Applicant and his wife’s ownership interest in the Ukrainian property.) 
 
 Before immigrating to the United States, Applicant worked for over 15 years as a 
senior research associate for a government or quasi-governmental agency that was part 
                                                          
6 The pertinent portions of the record relied upon for the information in this section can be located at: Tr. 
25-43, 61-63; Exhibit (Ex.) 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, C, F.  
  
7 The pertinent portions of the record relied upon for the information in this section can be located at: Tr. 
26, 68-77, 97-110, 120; Ex. 1 at 24-27; Ex. 3 at 3-5; Ex. 6 at 4; Ex. 7, Ex. F at 5. 
 
4 
 
 
of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. In 1994 or 1995, while visiting Ukraine, he had a 
chance meeting with a former professional acquaintance who had worked for the same 
agency. He had not seen this person in over 15 years. He has contact with this person 
maybe once a year. When this acquaintance has traveled to the United States, 
Applicant has not met with her. She has never requested any favors or assistance from 
Applicant, and Applicant has not provided her any assistance, financial or otherwise. He 
disclosed this foreign contact during his background investigations. 
 
Foreign connection and contact in Russia (SOR 1.b)8 
 
 From 1993 to the present, Applicant has been hired to provide translation 
services by a U.S.-based company that is the primary contractor on several federal 
contracts. Applicant became acquainted with one of the project managers who worked 
for this prime federal contractor. This person married a Russian national and moved to 
Russia in 2013. Applicant has had sporadic, infrequent contact with this former 
professional acquaintance since she moved to Russia. She has never requested any 
information or favors from Applicant, and vice versa. He disclosed this foreign contact 
during the course of his security clearance background investigations.  
 
Overseas business travel and attendance and presentation at international conferences 
(SOR 1.c, 1.d, and 2.a)9 
 
 Applicant is a member of several professional associations. He has been invited 
to present at international conferences organized by these associations, including 
several conferences held in Israel and one in China nearly ten years ago.10 Before and 
after traveling to these conferences, Applicant has complied with security reporting 
requirements. He disclosed on his SCA and discussed during the course of his 
background investigations his attendance and presentation at these conferences. While 
attending these conferences, Applicant has made professional contacts and 
subsequently hired presenters who demonstrated a proficiency in other languages that 
he does not speak. He usually hires these other translators through an Israeli-based 
professional association because in his experience he has found that these translators 
possess the high-quality proficiency he is seeking and are usually less expensive than 
other similarly qualified translators. He has hired about a half dozen translators in this 
fashion. He has hired them on a project-by-project basis and strictly as subcontractors, 
not direct employees of his company. He maintains a professional, business 
relationship with some of the persons he has hired, and has met with them in social 
settings while traveling abroad. 
                                                          
8 The pertinent portions of the record relied upon for the information in this section can be located at: Tr. 
Tr. 77-84, 128-132; Ex. 4 at 1. 
  
9 The pertinent portions of the record relied upon for the information in this section can be located at: Tr. 
35-61, 85-95, 113-120, 132-142; Ex. 1 at 28-30; Ex. 2 at 3-8; Ex. 3 at 10-14; Ex. B, D, F. 
  
10 Applicant’s attendance and presentation at the conferences held in Israel and the one in China were 
alleged as a Guideline B and Guideline L security concern. However, no matters for administrative notice 
about any foreign countries were provided, except for Russia and Ukraine.  
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s proficiency as a translator has provided him a substantial amount of 
business income over the years. His estimated annual business earnings range from 
$70,000 to $200,000. Ninety percent of his clients are from the United States, with 30-
40% of his U.S.-based work coming through federal contracts. The remaining ten 
percent of Applicant’s total earnings emanate primarily from contracts with commercial 
interests in the United Kingdom. At times, these contracts, including USG contracts that 
Applicant has been awarded, have required him to travel overseas. His overseas 
business-related travel has included travel to Russia, China, and Israel. 
 
Applicant has complied with all security reporting requirements regarding his 
foreign travel, both business and personal. He submits a trip report to his security officer 
even for non-USG-related overseas trips, and dutifully complies with annual security 
training. He freely provided a list of his clients and updated foreign travel information 
during the course of his security clearance processing.  
 
Applicant does not have any direct contracts with clients in Russia or Ukraine. 
However, he has been hired and performed translation work where the “end users” (or 
the recipient of his services) were companies and quasi-governmental agencies in 
Russia and Ukraine. One of his USG contracts required him to perform translation 
services for a quasi-governmental Ukrainian agency in Ukraine and a commercial 
contract with a large U.S. pharmaceutical company required him to travel to Russia for 
less than three days. Applicant testified that he does not have a business relationship 
with the end user of his services. Instead, the business relationship is with the client 
who hired him to do the work. He submits blind bids without knowing who the end user 
may be until after he is awarded the contract. 
 
Applicant does not have any contracts with foreign governments. He testified that 
he has never performed compensated or volunteer work for a foreign country. He also 
testified that he has never been approached by an agent of a foreign power or asked to 
divulge classified information. The contracts Applicant signs to perform translation work 
generally include a non-disclosure provision. None of these non-disclosure agreements 
are with foreign governments. He does have about six non-disclosure agreements with 
foreign companies for past translation work that he performed, but none of these 
agreements are with companies in Russia, Ukraine, or Israel.  
 
Financial and other ties to the United States11 
 
Applicant described his financial situation as “comfortable.” He recently 
purchased a home in the United States. His net worth is approximately $800,000. All of 
his assets are in the United States. His wife works full-time for a hospital in the United 
States, and has been with her current employer for decades. A U.S. servicemember 
provided a reference letter, noting Applicant’s professionalism and the immense value 
Applicant provided the USG during an overseas military exercise. 
 
                                                          
11 The pertinent portions of the record relied upon for the information in this section can be located at: Tr. 
64-67; Ex. E. 
 
6 
 
 
Administrative Notice (Russia and Ukraine) 
 
Administrative notice may be taken of uncontroverted facts regarding a foreign 
country set forth in reliable and relevant U.S. Government reports. Additionally, the 
official position of relevant federal agencies or the statements of key U.S. Government 
officials may be appropriate for administrative notice. Generally, the party requesting 
administrative notice must provide the source document, either the full document or 
relevant portion, to allow an administrative judge to assess the reliability, accuracy, and 
relevancy of any matter requested for administrative notice.12 After reviewing the 
parties’ respective requests for administrative notice, to include the source documents 
cited therein, the following pertinent facts regarding Russia and Ukraine are noted: 
 
Russia is one of the leading state intelligence threats to the United States. 
Russia has extensive and sophisticated intelligence operations, which they use to target 
U.S. and allied personnel with access to sensitive computer-network information. 
Russia has a poor human rights record. The United States, along with other members of 
the international community, does not recognize the purported annexation of the 
Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine and considers Russia’s action to be illegal. 
 
Ukraine is a republic with a political system composed of three branches of 
government. In February 2014, the parliament voted to remove the former president 
from office after he fled the country. This followed three months of massive anti-
government protests on Kyiv’s central square (the Maidan) over his decision to 
postpone signing political and trade agreements with the European Union, in favor of 
closer ties with Russia, as well as his violent responses to the protests. In February, 
Russian armed forces intervened militarily in Crimea, which Russia occupied and 
purported to “annex” in March. Additional unrest and civilian deaths occurred when pro-
Russian protesters in eastern and southern Ukraine seeking more autonomy from the 
national government, clashed with government forces. In May 2014, a new president 
was elected, signaling a strong democratic mandate for change in Ukraine. 
 
The Russian occupation of Crimea has displaced more than 18,000 Crimeans 
and caused numerous human rights abuses. Russia has been accused of orchestrating 
attacks by Ukrainian separatists. Despite attempts to cease hostilities and establish 
peace through political dialog, the government’s efforts have been largely rejected and 
the situation in Ukraine remains precarious. Violent clashes between Russia-backed 
separatists and Ukrainian forces continue in eastern regions of the country. In addition, 
Russian military forces continue to occupy the Crimean Peninsula, supply weapons and 
material support to the separatists, and are present on the eastern border of Ukraine.  
 
In December 2015, the State Department issued a warning to U.S. citizens to 
defer all travel to Crimea and the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts. 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007). See also, Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.19 (the Federal Rules of Evidence shall serve as a guide 
in DOHA proceedings and technical evidentiary rules may be relaxed to permit the development of a full 
and complete record); F.R.E. 201; F.R.E. 1006. 
 
7 
 
 
Separatist groups have threatened, detained or kidnapped persons, including U.S. 
citizens, and violent clashes have caused over 9,000 deaths. There are reports of 
abuse against local populations that oppose separatist goals.  
 
The United States has stood by Ukraine as Russia has sought to stymie its new 
democratic government. Since the start of the crisis, the United States has committed 
millions of dollars in financial aid and loan guarantees to Ukraine. U.S. advisors serve in 
almost a dozen Ukrainian ministries and localities to help deliver services, eliminate 
fraud and abuse, improve tax collection, and modernize Ukraine’s institutions. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, 
an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations 
and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has 
held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 An individual who is granted access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
 
8 
 
 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because s/he has relatives or other contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
a person’s vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge examines the 
nature of the relationship(s), as well as the foreign country (or countries) involved.13 A 
foreign country’s intelligence-gathering history; human rights record; and other similarly 
pertinent factors are all relevant in assessing the foreign influence security concern.14  
 
Applicant’s connections to and limited contact with his former professional 
acquaintances who now live in Ukraine and Russia do not raise a foreign influence 
security concern. The nature of these relationships is casual. Even after taking into 
account the heightened security risk associated with the countries involved, Applicant’s 
connections to and contact with these persons does not leave him vulnerable to foreign 
coercion. Accordingly, the portion of SOR 1.a and 1.b relating to these passing 
professional acquaintances is found in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Similarly, Applicant’s extensive business-related foreign travel and attendance 
and presentations at international professional conferences do not raise a foreign 
influence security concern.15 Thus, SOR 1.c and 1.d are found in Applicant’s favor.  
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 6; ISCR Case No. 12-05839 at 4 (App. Bd. July 11, 2013) (“in assessing whether there is a 
likelihood of vulnerability to [foreign] government coercion,” the judge properly considered “the nature and 
strength of the family ties, the nature of [the foreign] government, its relationship with the United States 
and its human rights record.”). 
 
14 See generally, ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an 
administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
15 ISCR Case No. 14-05013 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (Guideline B is not implicated by mere attendance 
and presentations at international professional conferences); ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep. 
21, 2005) (foreign travel alone raises no independent security concern).  
 
9 
 
 
On the other hand, Applicant’s relationship to his mother-in-law who is a citizen 
and resident of Ukraine, coupled with the facts administratively noticed, raise the foreign 
influence security concern. Although Applicant has infrequent contact with his mother-
in-law, his wife clearly is close to and has frequent contact with her mother. In the 
security clearance context, this close relationship between Applicant’s wife and her 
mother is imputed to Applicant.16 Accordingly, Applicant’s relationship to his mother-in-
law raises the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 7(d).17  
 
 Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to Applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15). A person with relatives in a foreign country, such as Ukraine, faces a very 
heavy burden of persuasion due to the significant security concerns raised by such 
circumstances.18 The adjudicative guidelines set forth a number of potential conditions 
that may mitigate the foreign influence security concern. I have considered all the 
applicable mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual . . . and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; and 
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015) (“In-laws represent a class of persons who are 
contemplated by the Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common sense and 
human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation 
to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”) 
 
17 Sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship 
creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 14-02563 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015). Although U.S. relations with the current Ukrainian 
government are good, foreign-backed forces with interests inimical to the United States operate freely in 
parts of Ukraine and pose a significant threat not only to Ukraine’s sovereignty, but also to U.S. national 
security interests. In light of these circumstances, the serious security concerns that are raised by an 
individual with family members in a hostile foreign country are also present in the current case. 
Accordingly, Applicant’s mitigation case must be examined through the lens of this heightened scrutiny. 
 
10 
 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of [foreign] contacts. 
 
 Applicant’s contact with his mother-in-law is infrequent, but he did not rebut the 
presumption of a close relationship to her through his wife. Additionally, Applicant 
reported his foreign relatives, foreign travel, and other foreign connections and contacts 
during multiple security clearance investigations and to his security officer. However, in 
light of the matters accepted for administrative notice, AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(c), and 8(e) have 
limited applicability. Cf. ISCR Case No. 13-01341 (App. Bd. Nov. 10, 2014). 
 
 Applicant presented a compelling case for mitigating the foreign influence 
concern under AG ¶ 8(b). After immigrating to the United States nearly 30 years ago, 
Applicant and his wife established significant ties to this country. Applicant built a 
successful business, while his wife has been employed by the same U.S. employer for 
decades. They recently purchased a home in the United States and financially helped 
one of his children also purchase a home in the United States. All their assets, totaling 
nearly a million dollars, are in the United States. Furthermore, Applicant has a long track 
record of properly handling and safeguarding sensitive U.S. information, and 
contributing to the national defense.  
 
 On the other hand, Department Counsel presented evidence that undercuts the 
application of AG ¶ 8(b). Notably, Applicant’s wife regularly travels to Ukraine to visit her 
mother and other extended family members in Ukraine. Although Applicant’s ties to his 
mother-in-law and his wife’s travels to visit her have presumably been a constant issue 
that he has dutifully disclosed during the processing of his current and past security 
clearance applications, the country conditions in Ukraine have fundamentally changed 
since he was first granted a clearance. Of significant note is the State Department’s 
current warning against travel to Ukraine, a country that is essentially in the midst of a 
civil war where separatist forces are backed by a hostile foreign power. This significant 
change puts this close familial connection in a different light, requiring a heightened 
level of scrutiny. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-02210 (App. Bd. Jan. 18, 2008) (judge 
erred in mitigation analysis by failing to consider the risk associated with applicant’s 
parents frequent travels to their country of birth, a hostile foreign nation). 
 
 After weighing all the evidence and considering pertinent Appeal Board 
precedent, I find that Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concern. 
See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015) (favorable 
decision reversed because, in part, applicant “communicates regularly with at least 
some of her Ukrainian relatives.”)  
 
 At the same time, this adverse finding is not a comment on Applicant’s patriotism 
or loyalty but merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways 
when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, such as a family 
member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Guideline L: Outside Activities  
 
 The involvement in outside activities security concern is explained at AG ¶ 36:  
 
Involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of 
security concern if it poses a conflict of interest with an individual's security 
responsibilities and could create an increased risk of unauthorized 
disclosure of classified information. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s extensive business-related foreign travel and 
attendance and presentations at international professional conferences could pose a 
conflict of interest with his security obligations. Applicant engages in these activities to 
further his U.S. business. Obviously, any foreign travel that Applicant was required to 
take as part of a USG awarded contract, such as to Ukraine, do not implicate this 
concern.19 Instead, it is the business-related activity outside these USG contracts that 
allegedly raises a security concern under Guideline L.  
 
 Applicant fully reported these activities during the course of numerous security 
clearance investigations and to his security officer. He has not been employed, either on 
a compensated or volunteer basis, by any foreign government or entity. Thus, none of 
the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 37 apply. However, the Appeal Board has 
held that the disqualifying conditions are “illustrative only, not exhaustive and exclusive.” 
ISCR Case No. 12-01698 at 4 (App. Bd. June 13, 2014). Therefore, Applicant’s non-
federal contract, business-related activities must be closely examined to determine 
whether it poses a potential conflict of interest with his security obligations, including 
whether such activities could create an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure of 
classified information (inadvertent or otherwise).  
 
 In the present case, Applicant’s non-USG business comes from U.S. or U.K. 
commercial interests. None of his direct clients are foreign governments, militaries, 
intelligence agencies, or entities. None of the non-USG contract work relates to foreign 
defense, intelligence, or information systems. Applicant’s work on these commercial 
contracts is directed by and paid for by his U.S. or U.K. clients, not a foreign 
government, representative, or entity.20 He was not cautioned or advised by USG 
security officials that his foreign travel in support of non-federal contracts (or, entering 
into nondisclosure agreements) posed a potential conflict with his security obligations.21  
                                                          
19 The SOR alleged all of Applicant’s business-related foreign travel, whether as a USG contractor or not, 
as a security concern under Guidelines B and L. But see, AG ¶¶ 8(d), 38(a).  
 
20 Contrast with, ISCR Case No. 00-0244 (App. Bd. Jan. 29, 2001) (applicant employed as a contractor by 
the embassy of foreign country, whose representatives had the power to fire him). See also, ISCR Case 
No. 02-22067 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007) (affirming denial under Guideline L, in part, based on judge’s 
finding that applicant “provided training on open source intelligence in foreign countries . . . and that in the 
course of doing so he had frequent contact with foreign representatives, such as military officials.”) 
 
21 Cf. ISCR Case No. 03-11096 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2005) (“acceptance of Department Counsel's argument 
could lead to the following untenable result: Any employee of a U.S. defense contractor would be 
 
12 
 
 
 Moreover, the fact that Applicant is hired by a U.S. or U.K. company to translate 
in a commercial dispute or other commercial matter that may involve a Ukrainian or 
Russian commercial interests is not surprising considering he is a certified expert 
translator in these foreign languages. Also, Applicant entering into nondisclosure 
agreements with U.S. and U.K. companies does not raise a security concern, because 
the contract work does not involve security, defense, or intelligence matters. In short, 
the record is devoid of any suggestion that Applicant’s procurement of or work on these 
non-USG commercial contracts raises a potential conflict of interest with his fiduciary 
responsibilities as a clearance holder.22  
 
 As for Applicant’s attendance and presentation at overseas professional 
conferences and his hiring of a handful of translators that he meets at these 
conferences, no record evidence was offered that these activities outside the country 
pose a conflict with his security obligations. Specifically, there is no record evidence that 
at some of the foreign locations these conferences were held that the attendees could 
be subjected to secret monitoring by representatives of a foreign power. Applicant does 
not maintain close ties to any of the persons he has hired at these conferences.23 
Applicant hired these persons as subcontractors on one-time projects, and there is no 
evidence that any of these persons were employed by a foreign government, military, 
intelligence agency, or entity. Although the “federal government need not wait until an 
applicant actually mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before it can 
deny or revoke access to such information,”24 the evidence in this case is insufficient to 
raise a security concern under Guideline L. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
non-exclusive factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
ineligible to hold a security clearance if that employee worked on a contract or project connected with a 
military sale to a foreign country even if that military sale were approved and sanctioned by the U.S. 
government, and even if there is no evidence that the employee was notified by appropriate federal 
officials (or authorized agents of such federal officials) that the employment in question is in conflict with 
the employee's security.”) (emphasis added). 
 
22 Contrast with, ISCR Case No. 14-03112 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“the Judge’s conclusion that 
Applicant having served in a foreign military and having held a foreign security clearance pose a danger 
of a conflict of interest is supportable under the facts of this case.”) 
 
23 Contrast with, ISCR Case No. 10-07436 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011) (“Evidence of foreign travel and 
of social interaction with foreign persons may be of limited significance, considered in and of itself. 
However, in Applicant’s case, evidence of his meeting foreigners over the internet and engaging in 
foreign travel in order to further his relationships with them, all while holding a security clearance, viewed 
cumulatively, supports Department Counsel’s argument that Applicant’s personal interests may conflict 
with the protection of national security.”) 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 10-09511at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2011). 
 
13 
 
 
highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant was candid and cooperative 
throughout the current and past security clearance processing. He was previously 
granted a security clearance (before recent problems in Ukraine occurred). He has 
handled his security obligations without issue. Notwithstanding this and other favorable 
record evidence, Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion in mitigating the 
security concern raised by his close relationship to his relative who is a citizen and 
resident of Ukraine.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:          Against Applicant25 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline L (Outside Activities):       FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
25 This adverse finding only covers Applicant’s relationship, through his wife, to his mother-in-law. It does 
not extend to the second part of SOR 1.a, alleging a security concern based on Applicant’s connection to 
and contact with a former professional acquaintance who is a citizen and resident of Ukraine.  
