 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05856 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
January 24, 2012. On September 3, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 
C.F.R. ¶ 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 12, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 15, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 14, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 27, 2016. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information. She submitted AE D through L, which were admitted 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on 19 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $37,000. In addition, the SOR alleges Applicant filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2006, which was dismissed in 2008; gambled up to twice per month from 
2006 to 2008, and was treated for a gambling habit in 2013; and improper use of a 
company credit card. Applicant admitted all the allegations. Her admissions in her 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and is employed in the security field for a defense 
contractor since 2004. She married in 1989 and divorced in 1999. She has three 
children, ages 22, 16, and 15. The two younger children are in high school and live with 
her, while her oldest child graduated from college and is employed in another city. She 
has a security clearance, and is seeking to renew it. 
 
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts, some of which date back to 2008. 
Applicant’s actions with respect to the SOR allegations and the current status are noted 
below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Student Loan account 
for $19,653. 
Delinquent since 2012. 
Applicant made $5 
payments per week for one 
year, but fell behind after 
program expired. In 
September 2016, Applicant 
received temporary 
forbearance pending 
approval of income-based 
repayment plan.   
Efforts made to pay under 
past repayment plan, but fell 
into delinquency at the 
conclusion.  Renewed 
efforts to obtain payment 
plan since hearing, but no 
documentary evidence of a 
final plan and payments 
submitted. Not resolved. 
 
3 
 
1.b – h, j, l – m, o, p, and s.  
Includes credit card, 
medical, and telephone 
debts. 
No payments made toward 
delinquent debts. 
Not resolved. 
1.i Check to casino with 
insufficient funds for $107. 
No payments made toward 
delinquent debt. 
Not resolved. 
1.k Judgment for unpaid 
rent from 2009 for $6,165. 
Applicant’s partner left 
rental and stopped 
contributing to payments. 
No payments made toward 
judgement. 
Not resolved. 
1.n Returned check with 
insufficient funds for $109. 
No payment made, Not resolved. 
1.q Collection for unpaid 
rent for $5,444.  
Applicant left home because 
of domestic violence. No 
resolution on collection 
account. 
Not resolved. 
1.r Debt to electric utility for 
$132. 
Applicant paid up to date to 
get utility reinstated. 
Resolved 
 
 The SOR also alleges three financial issues that are not current delinquent debts. 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in 2006, which was dismissed in 2008 for failure 
to complete the repayment plan. (SOR ¶ 1.t) Applicant gambled one to two times per 
month from 2006 – 2008 to escape her abusive spouse, and continued on occasion 
until 2014. She received treatment for depression, which included discussion of her 
gambling. (SOR ¶ 1.u) She currently gambles on occasion at casino slot machines. In 
2011, Applicant improperly used her corporate credit card to charge personal items 
such as fuel and tires for her car. (SOR ¶ 1.v) She acknowledged violating company 
policy but believed she had no other option than to use the card in order to repair her 
car to get to work. She immediately paid $574 to reimburse the creditor. The card was 
confiscated by the company but will be returned to her if required for official travel. 
 
 Applicant suffered periods of abuse and on two occasions, she left her home in 
2002 and 2010 as a result. She called the police on her husband on one occasion, but 
did not follow through and eventually returned to him. She expended significant time 
and financial resources fighting for custody of her children. Her pay has been garnished 
in the past to pay for child support, but she never sought child support while she had 
custody. She was able to see her oldest child successfully complete college, and is 
hoping for the same for her other two children. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant essentially lives from paycheck-to-paycheck. She claims to have about 
$700 per month remaining after paying monthly expenses, but typically uses those 
funds for the care of her children. She is paying back a loan from her 401k account that 
was used to pay debts and expenses, and has about $5 in a savings account. After her 
hearing, she sought the advice of a non-profit financial counselor, and was to have a 
first meeting in October 2016. She submitted her performance appraisals from 2006 to 
2015, and two letters of support from her facility security officer and an associate 
security manager, both of which were nearly identical in language. In their letters of 
support, they described her generally as trustworthy, extremely dedicated, well 
respected, and sincere. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.3 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
 
5 
 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,   
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; and 
                                                     
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
6 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, “chasing loses” (i.e. increasing the bets or 
returning another day in an effort to get event), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
 Applicant incurred longstanding delinquent debts that have largely gone 
unresolved. She intentionally used a corporate credit card to improperly charge 
personal expenses. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(d) as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant’s gambling has not been shown to raise disqualifying condition AG ¶ 
19(i), in that the evidence does not support an addiction or compulsive habit, 
concealment of losses, borrowing money to fund her gambling, or family conflicts as a 
result of her gambling. Therefore, the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.u does not raise a 
disqualifying condition per se, although gambling money while faced with delinquent 
debts, writing checks with insufficient funds, and borrowing from a 401k to pay debts 
may be considered under a financial responsibility and whole-person analysis. SOR ¶ 
1.u is concluded for Applicant. Likewise, Applicant’s use of the bankruptcy court to 
address her debts as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t is not disqualifying. Although her failure to 
complete the Chapter 13 plan may raise issues of financial irresponsibility, and the 
debts may be individually alleged in the SOR, the act of filing an unsuccessful Chapter 
13 alone is not a disqualifying condition. SOR ¶ 1.t is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant allowed her debts to remain unresolved for many years. Despite an 
effort to make reduced payments through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, she was 
unsuccessful and the debts remained in a delinquent status. Although she suffered 
periods of difficult relationships and divorce that may have contributed to her financial 
problems, she has been steadily employed since 2004 and has resolved only one 
delinquent debt, a utility bill. She has not shown evidence of good-faith efforts to resolve 
the remaining debts, nor has she established a financial track record to show similar 
issues are unlikely to recur.  
 
 Her financial issues have been longstanding, remain recent and ongoing. There 
is no evidence of completed financial counseling except for pre-bankruptcy counseling 
presumably required before she could file a bankruptcy petition. There is no evidence 
that Applicant’s financial problems are under control, or that she has the intention or 
ability to address her debts.  
 
 The utility debt in SOR ¶ 1.r is resolved. Applicant’s one-time use of her 
corporate credit card for personal expenses (SOR ¶ 1.v) has been mitigated by her 
immediate reimbursement of the charges and the passage of five years since the event 
without additional infractions. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. Applicant has made a renewed effort 
to begin repayment of her student loans alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but has not shown 
sufficient effort toward resolution of the delinquency. 
 
 Although mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies to her delinquent debts, 
Applicant has not acted appropriately under the circumstances. The remaining 
mitigating conditions are not applicable. Her overall financial responsibility and her 
current financial condition casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Her minimal efforts to resolve her debts so far have been inadequate to 
demonstrate that her financial circumstances are under control or that she is willing and 
able to meet her past and future financial obligations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant has not resolved the majority of her delinquent debts. She attempted 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but was unsuccessful in following the plan and abandoned the 
effort. She suffered periods of abuse and a difficult marriage, but it does not account for 
her significant unresolved debts since her divorce in 1999. In addition, Applicant 
resorted to gambling as an escape from her relationship troubles, but did not have the 
funds to put at risk given her longstanding delinquent debts, and she has not stopped 
gambling even when confronted with her current financial situation. Likewise, her 
decision to improperly charge personal expenses to her corporate credit card shows an 
element of desperation brought on by her poor financial condition, which is indicative of 
someone who is not in control of her finances. 
 
 Overall, the record leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – q; and 1.s:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.r, 1.t, 1.u, and 1.v: For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
