 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 13-00502 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
An unacceptable risk of foreign influence exists because Applicant’s father is a 
citizen of Taiwan, who spent most of his career working for Taiwan’s government in an 
office that promotes the interests of the country abroad. Applicant has not shown that 
she can be counted to act fully in the U.S. interests. Personal conduct security concerns 
are established because she was not fully candid on her April 2013 security clearance 
application about her previous background investigation and clearance denial. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security 
concern under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and 
explaining why it was unable to grant or continue a security clearance to Applicant. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on May 12, 2014, and she requested 
that a decision be made on the written record by an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The Government requested a 
hearing. (Tr. 9.) On March 4, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing 
to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. On April 22, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for 
May 16, 2016. Applicant was on temporary duty for her employer and did not receive 
the notice of the hearing until May 2, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant waived the 15-day advance 
notice of hearing required under ¶ E.3.1.8 of the Directive. Nine Government exhibits 
(GEs 1-9) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected 
in a transcript (Tr.) received on May 27, 2016. Additionally, the Government requested 
that I take administrative notice of several facts pertinent to the Republic of China 
(Taiwan). A letter dated December 30, 2015, forwarding discovery of the proposed 
Government exhibits and the Government’s Administrative Notice request to Applicant, 
was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) but was not admitted as an evidentiary exhibit. 
 
I held the record open for one month after the hearing for Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence and respond to the Government’s Administrative Notice request. 
On June 17, 2016, Applicant submitted seven documents, which were marked as 
Applicant Exhibits (AEs A-G). Department Counsel indicated on June 27, 2016, that the 
Government had no objection, so AEs A-G were accepted into the record, and the 
record closed on that date. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Taiwan, as set forth in an Administrative Notice request dated December 
30, 2015. The Government’s request was based on several U.S. government 
publications referenced in the document.1 By letter dated December 30, 2015, Applicant 
was provided extracts of the source documents and the Internet addresses where she 
could access the publications. 
 
Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most current 
political conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-11292 
(App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007)), I informed the parties of my intent to take administrative 
notice, subject to the reliability of the source documentation and the relevance and 
materiality of the facts proposed. Applicant filed no objections to the facts set forth in the 
Government’s Administrative Notice request. I held the record open after the hearing to 
                                                 
1 
The Government’s request for administrative notice was based on a Congressional Research Service 
publication dated December 11, 2014; three joint communiques between the United States and the 
People’s Republic of China from February 1972, January 1979, and August 1982; annual reports to 
Congress for 2000 and 2005 by the Office of the National Counterintelligence Center; four press releases 
and an October 2014 summary of export enforcement criminal cases from the U.S. Department of 
Justice; and a November 2014 report from the Defense Personnel and Security Research Center. 
  
 
 3 
give Applicant the opportunity to propose facts for administrative notice. Applicant 
included in her post-hearing submissions election guides for presidential and legislative 
elections in Taiwan, which were entered as exhibits C and D without objection. She did 
ask that I take administrative notice of any specific facts. 
 
 Concerning the U.S. Department of Justice press releases and its summary of 
major U.S. export enforcement and economic espionage criminal cases, they were 
presented by the Government apparently to substantiate that Taiwan actively pursues 
collection of U.S. economic and proprietary information. Neither Applicant nor any of her 
family members were implicated in that criminal activity. With that caveat, the facts 
administratively noticed are set forth below. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s father (SOR ¶ 1.a) and 
brother (SOR ¶ 1.b) are resident citizens of Taiwan with U.S. permanent residency 
status, and that Applicant’s father works in city government in Taiwan (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified material facts on her April 2013 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) by denying that she had 
ever had her background investigated for security clearance eligibility (SOR ¶ 2.a) and 
by denying that she had ever been denied security clearance eligibility (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
Also under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified material facts during an 
August 2007 hearing before a DOHA administrative judge by testifying that her 
Taiwanese passport expired in November 2002 and that she did not intend to renew it 
when in fact she renewed her Taiwanese passport in 2002 and used it to travel to 
Taiwan in March 2012 (SOR ¶ 2.c). 
 
 When Applicant answered the SOR, she admitted the allegations about her 
father. She denied that her brother was a resident citizen of Taiwan and explained that 
he had not been in Taiwan since 2000. Applicant denied the Guideline E allegations. 
According to her records, she had admitted on her e-QIP that she had been 
investigated and that she had been denied a clearance. Applicant also denied that she 
had testified falsely at her August 2007 hearing. The passport in her possession was 
expired, she was unaware that the Taiwanese government had issued her a new 
passport, and she was not the person who renewed it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old college graduate with two bachelor’s degrees awarded 
in June 2004 and in January 2005. She has been employed by a defense contractor as 
a system engineer since October 2005. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 
 4 
Applicant and her sister were born in the United States to Taiwanese citizens. 
Their father worked in public relations for Taiwan’s government in a division that acted 
as a diplomatic agent or ambassador of Taiwan’s interests abroad. (Tr. 66.) He traveled 
extensively because of his job and was working in the United States when Applicant 
and her sister were born. He was stationed in England when their brother was born. 
Since the United Kingdom did not confer citizenship based on birth, their brother has 
citizenship only with Taiwan. (Tr. 41.)  
 
Applicant initially applied for a DOD security clearance in February 2006, 
submitting a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) incorporated within 
an e-QIP dated February 13, 2006. Applicant disclosed that she held dual citizenship 
with the United States and of Taiwan through her parents, both citizens of Taiwan. She 
admitted that she held a Taiwanese passport “by default” from birth to present. 
Applicant also reported that her father was a resident of Taiwan. (GE 3.) 
 
On January 30, 2007, DOHA issued an SOR to Applicant alleging foreign 
influence security concerns because of her father’s Taiwan citizenship, Taiwan 
residency, and his employment for Taiwan’s government. DOHA also alleged foreign 
influence security concerns because of Applicant’s exercise of dual citizenship and 
possession of a Taiwanese passport. On August 22, 2007, I convened a hearing at 
which Applicant presented evidence showing that her Taiwanese passport expired in 
November 2002. She expressed a willingness to renounce her dual citizenship. 
Applicant also denied any effort or intent to renew her Taiwanese passport because she 
did not need it.2 (Tr. 89.) On September 27, 2007, I denied security clearance eligibility 
for Applicant because of unmitigated foreign influence security concerns raised by her 
father’s employment with the Taiwanese government and his Taiwanese citizenship and 
residency. I found the foreign preference concerns were mitigated by the expiration and 
cancellation of her Taiwanese passport with no intent to renew it and by her clear 
preference for the United States. (GE 8.) The DOHA Appeal Board upheld that decision 
on February 8, 2008. (GE 7.) 
 
 Applicant worked on unclassified projects, but the lack of security clearance 
eligibility precluded her from contributing on some military contracts. (Tr. 74-75.) Her 
manager asked her to reapply for security clearance eligibility in 2012 because of the 
passage of time and a change in her father’s employment status. (Tr. 75.) On July 6, 
2012, Applicant certified to the accuracy of an SF 86 incorporated within an e-QIP. 
Applicant disclosed that she held dual citizenship with Taiwan based on her parents 
being citizens of Taiwan, but she indicated that she had taken action to renounce her 
dual citizenship. She explained that she declared a willingness to renounce her 
citizenship with Taiwan in 2006, and she did not renew her Taiwanese identification 
                                                 
2 
The transcript of Applicant’s August 2007 hearing is not part of the present record. The Government 
submitted as GE 8 the decision that I issued on September 27, 2007, denying Applicant security 
clearance eligibility because of unmitigated foreign influence security concerns. Some of the factual 
findings relevant to SOR ¶ 2.c come from that decision. Applicant admitted at her May 2016 hearing that 
she had testified at her August 2007 that her foreign passport had expired and that she did not intend to 
renew it. (Tr. 89-90.) 
 
 5 
card when it expired. She disclosed that she held a Taiwanese passport from December 
2002 to December 2012, which she used to travel to Taiwan in March 2012. (GE 2.) 
 
On April 20, 2013, Applicant certified to the accuracy of another SF 86. Applicant 
explained that she held derivative citizenship with Taiwan from February 1983 to 
December 2012, but that she was no longer a citizen of Taiwan because she had no 
assets, no identification or work permits, and no residency in Taiwan. She explained 
that she had declared a willingness to renounce her foreign citizenship in 2006, and that 
she did not renew her Taiwanese identification card or Taiwanese passport when they 
expired. Applicant again indicated that she held a valid Taiwanese passport from 
December 2002 to December 2012. (GE 1.) 
 
On June 4, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Regarding steps taken to renounce her 
Taiwan citizenship, Applicant indicated that a security officer at work asked her in 2006 
whether she would be willing to renounce her foreign citizenship and that she signed a 
document renouncing her foreign citizenship. Applicant expressed her belief that her 
foreign citizenship was completely renounced when her Taiwanese passport expired in 
December 2012. About her foreign passport, Applicant explained that her mother told 
her that she would shred it when it expired. Applicant indicated that she obtained a 
Taiwanese passport because her mother thought it would ease travel within Asia. 
Applicant admitted that she had used her Taiwanese passport in March 2012 in lieu of 
her U.S. passport for convenience (shorter line at Taiwan’s airport). She expressed her 
belief that security authorities had approved her foreign passport, and she denied an 
intention to renew it. (GE 4.) 
 
In response to foreign preference inquiries from DOHA, Applicant indicated on 
December 16, 2013, that her expired Taiwanese passports were destroyed, so she 
could not provide proof of surrender. She indicated that one passport was destroyed 
before her defense contractor employment. The other passport was destroyed before 
she applied for a clearance, and she knew she had to destroy it in front of a facility 
security officer. Applicant admitted that she used a Taiwanese passport in July 2000 
and March 2012 for “ease of travel into Taiwan.” Applicant denied any duty, obligation, 
or responsibility to Taiwan, explaining that she no longer held Taiwanese citizenship. 
(GE 6.) 
 
At her security clearance hearing in May 2016, Applicant initially testified that she 
did not have a valid Taiwanese passport in 2007. (Tr. 44-45.) Applicant later elaborated 
that when she completed her first security clearance application, she asked her mother 
about the dates on her Taiwanese passport and was told that it had expired. (Tr. 103.) 
Applicant did not have possession of her Taiwanese passport issued in 2002 because 
her mother had put the passport in a safe deposit box in a bank; her mother had 
renewed it;3 and neither she nor her mother realized that the passport was valid until 
                                                 
3 
At her May 2016 hearing, Applicant did not recall having had a passport picture taken to renew her 
Taiwanese passport. However, she recalled having had a passport photo taken when she was in high 
school to renew her U.S. passport. (Tr. 109.) Applicant’s current U.S. passport (GE 9) was issued in 
 
 6 
2011, when they were planning their March 2012 trip to Taiwan to visit relatives, and 
they thought it would be convenient for her to have a Taiwanese passport for that trip. 
(Tr. 44-45, 81-82.) By then, she had already been denied a clearance, and she thought 
it was “probably not an issue” if she used her Taiwanese passport. She did not consider 
the implications to her future security clearance eligibility because she was thinking of 
leaving her job at that time. (Tr. 90-96.)  
 
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions include a sample Taiwanese passport 
renewal form which shows that the signature of a parent or guardian is required for 
minors under age 20. The sample also shows that the passport applicant is required to 
sign the form unless he or she is unable to do so. (AE B.) Applicant asserts that her 
mother was able to renew her passport for her in 2002 using passport pictures taken 
when she was in high school because she was under age 20. (AE A.)  
 
About her family members with foreign citizenship, Applicant gave the same U.S. 
address for her parents and brother, then all citizens of Taiwan, when she completed 
her SF 86 in July 2012. She indicated that her brother had his U.S. “green card.” 
Applicant responded affirmatively to an inquiry into whether she had sponsored any 
foreign national to come to the United States as a student, for work, or U.S. permanent 
residence. She listed her father, gave her mother’s U.S. address for him, and indicated 
that he had been in the United States from “01/2011 To Present.” In response to an 
inquiry concerning her clearance investigations, Applicant reported that the DOD had 
denied her security clearance eligibility in 2007 because her father worked at the time 
for an organization affiliated with Taiwan’s government. However, she also stated that 
the office had been disbanded and her father no longer worked there. (GE 2.) Applicant 
now admits that despite the reorganization of her father’s division around January 2012, 
her father was kept on the payroll in Taiwan, and he was in the United States for only 
short family visits of one week or two, once in the summer of 2012 and then again at the 
holidays in late 2012. (Tr. 57-60, 64.) Applicant saw no contradiction in reporting a U.S. 
address for her father despite the fact that he spent most of his time in Taiwan in 2012. 
Her father’s permanent residence was with her mother in the United States, he rented 
living quarters in Taiwan, and her mother could not afford her U.S. mortgage payment 
without his income. Additionally, her father had been in the United States for four [sic] 
years before January 2012 and had his belongings shipped to her mother’s home when 
he returned to Taiwan in early 2012 awaiting reassignment. (Tr. 60-64.) 
 
Applicant indicated on her April 2013 SF 86 that her parents and brother were 
living in the United States. In response to an SF 86 inquiry into whether she or any 
member of her immediate family had contact with a foreign government in the last 
seven years, she indicated that her father had contact between January 2012 and April 
2012 with the government-affiliated information office in Taiwan for purposes that she 
described as “job transition.” (GE 1.)  
                                                                                                                                                             
November 2009 when she was 26, so she may have had her photo taken when she was in high school 
for her previous passport, which was issued in March 1999. (GE 7.) She would have been 19 in 
December 2002, when her Taiwanese passport was apparently renewed. 
 
 7 
During her June 2013 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant provided an 
address in Taiwan for her father and indicated that he had recently returned to Taiwan 
for employment.4 She admitted that she had in-person contact with her father once a 
year, when he was in the United States, and contact by email monthly. Applicant 
indicated that her father was working in public relations in Taiwan, but that he had left 
his previous position in January 2012 when his division was dissolved.5 In response to a 
request from DOHA to verify the OPM investigator’s report of her June 2013 interview, 
Applicant indicated on December 16, 2013, that her mother had become a U.S. citizen 
and that the office that provided public affairs for Taiwan’s government still existed, but 
that her father left that employment when his division was dissolved. (GE 4.) In 
response to foreign influence inquiries, Applicant explained that her father had been 
employed as a press secretary from July 1980 to January 2012 in an office affiliated 
with Taiwan’s government. Applicant added that her father received his U.S. permanent 
residency in 2011, and he resided in the United States from 1980-1984, 1994-1997, and 
2009-2012 for his work.6 Her father went to Taiwan in January 2012 to seek another 
position, where he rented a room “while looking for work in the public relations/press 
domain.” However, she continued to maintain that her father’s permanent address was 
in the United States with her mother. (GE 5.) 
 
In May 2016, Applicant testified that her father had accepted a position in a 
Taiwanese cultural office tasked with promoting Taiwan’s arts and culture abroad, 
cultural and student exchanges, and inviting foreign performers to Taiwan. (Tr. 68-69.) 
That entity is separate from the office where he worked from about 1980 to 2012, which 
has diplomatic responsibilities in representing Taiwan’s government abroad. (Tr. 70.)  
Her father retired from his employment in Taiwan in July 2015 and moved to the United 
States in August 2015. (Tr. 40, 111.) He is not yet eligible for U.S. citizenship because 
of his considerable time spent outside the country. (Tr. 52.) Applicant’s brother has lived 
in the United States since he was three years old. He was in the United States as a 
dependent on their father’s work visa and then on a student visa until 2011, when he 
acquired his “green card.” (Tr. 52-53.) Her brother has not been to Taiwan since 2000, 
when he, Applicant, and their mother traveled to visit maternal relatives. (Tr. 40, 77.) 
Applicant’s sister sponsored their mother for U.S. naturalization. (Tr. 54.) Applicant has 
weekly contact with her mother and brother by telephone and monthly contact in 
person. Applicant’s brother lives with their mother. (Tr. 72.) Applicant joins her mother 
for a show or dinner and her brother for a sporting event, dinner, or movies. (GE 4.) 
Applicant did not elaborate about the extent of her contacts with her father since his 
retirement and move to the United States. It may reasonably be inferred that he is 
                                                 
4 
Applicant testified that her father came to the United States either or the summer or over the winter, 
usually just one week per year, for a family visit. (Tr. 58.) 
 
5 
Applicant testified at her hearing in May 2016 that after the reorganization, her father continued to be 
paid even though he was not working, and that it was not until late 2013 or early 2014 that he was offered 
a position in the new division. (Tr. 67.) 
 
6 
Applicant testified at her May 2016 security clearance hearing that she and her father got together when 
she was on assignment for her employer to a U.S. city where her father was posted from 2009 until 2012. 
(Tr. 71.) 
 
 8 
currently cohabiting with Applicant’s mother and brother, given Applicant has not 
provided another address for her father in the United States. Applicant co-owns with her 
mother the townhouse in which her parents live. (GE 8; Tr. 111-112.) Applicant denies 
vulnerability to undue foreign influence because of her father in part because the party 
in power when her father worked for Taiwan’s government was voted out of office in 
presidential and legislative elections held in January 2016. (AEs C, D.) The current 
government won 68 seats in the legislature while the party that had been in power won 
35 seats. (AE D.) 
 
Applicant provided discrepant responses on her SF 86 forms about her 
investigations record. Applicant disclosed on her July 2012 SF 86 that the DOD had 
denied her security clearance eligibility in January 2007 [sic] because of her father’s 
employment for Taiwan’s government. (GE 2.) However, on her April 2013 SF 86, she 
responded negatively to the following inquiries under section 25: “Has the U.S. 
Government (or a foreign government) EVER investigated your background and/or 
granted you a security clearance eligibility/access?” (SOR ¶ 2.a) and “Have you EVER 
had a security clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended, or 
revoked?” (SOR ¶ 2.b). (GE 1.) When the OPM investigator asked Applicant about her 
investigations record in June 2013, she indicated that she had been previously denied a 
security clearance by the DOD. About her negative responses to the clearance inquiries 
on her April 2013 SF 86, Applicant told the investigator that she did not understand the 
questions clearly. (GE 4.) 
 
At her security clearance hearing in May 2016, Applicant explained that she was 
conducting field testing and had only 15 days to complete her SF 86 in April 2013. She 
did not expect to have to complete another SF 86 so soon, and surmised that she 
“probably just read it quickly and read it wrong.” About what she termed as a 
“miscommunication,” Applicant stated that she would have had no reason to conceal the 
denial of clearance eligibility, given it was a matter of record at the DOD. She did not 
receive a security clearance and so did not have a clearance revoked. (Tr. 42-43, 86.) 
 
In September 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) granted Applicant a DOD secret clearance.7 (AE G.) Applicant’s 
immediate family members know that she has a DOD security clearance. (Tr. 84.) 
Applicant’s primary assignment in 2014 was to support an offsite verification team. She 
traveled extensively throughout the year and worked nights and weekends in support of 
the program goals. In her annual performance review, Applicant was described as “a 
critical asset” to the verification team. Applicant demonstrated an ability to adapt well 
and react quickly to changing priorities in a challenging environment. She also 
supported two other programs with overlapping deadlines at the request of chief 
engineers, who sought out her involvement because of her expertise on certain types of 
surveillance programs and her work ethic. Applicant was given a performance rating of 
“Exceeds Requirements” for 2014. (AE E.) 
 
                                                 
7 
The grant of security clearance to Applicant was seemingly not known to Department Counsel before the 
hearing. (Tr. 45-46, 49.) 
 
 9 
Applicant demonstrated flexibility, diligence, and an ability to work independently 
in three successive assignments in 2015. After a funding cut, she was re-assigned in 
March 2015 to a remote task where there was a mismatch in expectations and 
execution of Applicant’s role, likely due to her not being fully integrated into the team. 
Her rating official concluded that she did a good job in a difficult environment. In June 
2015, she joined a system engineering team tasked with writing initial system, software, 
and interface requirements. She proved to be a key contributor, able to complete her 
tasks on a tight schedule. She exceeded requirements of her position in 2015. (AE F.) 
 
I take administrative notice that the United States no longer diplomatically 
recognizes Taiwan as a sovereign nation. In joint communiques with the PRC, the 
United States recognized the government of the PRC as the sole legal government of 
China; acknowledged the PRC’s claim that there is but one China while not recognizing 
the PRC’s claim over Taiwan; and refrained from taking its own stance on Taiwan’s 
status. Taiwan continues to be of significant security, economic, and political interest to 
the United States. Taiwan has been described by the United States as a “beacon of 
democracy.” The country is a major recipient of U.S. arms sales and is a significant 
trading partner of the United States. U.S. policy seeks to support security, political, and 
economic interests that foster peace and security in the region and human rights in 
Taiwan as cross-strait relations between the PRC and Taiwan continue to improve. In 
May 2008, Taiwan resumed dialogue with the PRC, which has resulted in closer 
economic engagement between the two countries. The United States and Taiwan have 
put more effort into their respective relations with the PRC, while pursuing a parallel, 
positive U.S.-Taiwan relationship. 
 
 Taiwan has an extensive, pervasive history of engaging in economic and 
technological espionage against the United States. In September 2004, a U.S. State 
Department former Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State was arrested for trying 
to conceal a 2003 meeting with two Taiwanese intelligence agents in Taiwan. In 
December 2005, this former State Department official pleaded guilty to keeping 
numerous classified documents in his home and concealing an affair with one of the 
Taiwanese intelligence agents, with whom he had shared sensitive information. U.S. 
Justice Department releases show that U.S. and Taiwanese citizens and corporations 
have been involved in the illegal export or attempted export of U.S. restricted dual-use 
technology to Taiwan. In 2008, two persons were convicted for arms export control 
violations involving the attempted illegal export to Taiwan of infrared laser aiming 
devices, thermal weapons sights, and a fighter pilot cueing system. In August 2010, a 
Taiwan passport holder was sentenced to 3.5 years in prison for conspiring with a 
Taiwan corporation to illegally export dual-use commodities (missile components) to 
Iran. In April 2012, two Taiwanese nationals were charged with seeking to export 
sensitive U.S. military technology to China. In December 2012, a U.S. resident citizen 
was arrested for allegedly shipping military-grade protective-coating materials to 
customers in Taiwan and attempting to ship microwave amplifiers to China without the 
requisite export licenses. In January 2013, an employee of a U.S. manufacturer of 
microwave amplifiers was sentenced to 42 months in prison and fined $1,000 for 
altering shipping invoices and shipping documents to conceal the correct classification 
 
 10 
of national security sensitive amplifiers so they could be shipped without the required 
licenses to several destinations, including Taiwan and China, between June 2006 and 
June 2011. In March 2013, a Taiwanese citizen was sentenced in the United States to 
nine months in prison for attempting to export weapons-grade carbon fiber to Taiwan on 
the behalf of a Taiwanese company. In October 2014, a former resident of Taiwan 
pleaded guilty to defrauding the United States in its enforcement of regulations targeting 
proliferators of weapons of mass destruction. The defendant, his son, and an associate 
in Taiwan with ties to three companies based in Taiwan purchased and exported 
machinery used to fabricate metals. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
 11 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
As of the issuance of the SOR in April 2014, Applicant’s father was a resident 
citizen of Taiwan, where he was employed as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. For most of his 
career, Applicant’s father worked for Taiwan’s government in an organization that had 
diplomatic responsibilities in fostering the interests of Taiwan abroad. His work took him 
overseas, including to the United States from 1980-1984, 1994-1997, and 2009-2012. 
Applicant reported that the information office where her father had spent his career was 
eliminated by reorganization in 2012. Her father returned to Taiwan for most of 2012 
while awaiting reassignment, and he was kept on the government payroll even when he 
was not working. In late 2013 or early 2014, he accepted a public affairs position with a 
city’s cultural division tasked with promoting Taiwanese culture and exchange programs 
abroad. Applicant indicated that her father retired in 2015 from the “civil cultural office” 
(AE A), but there is no proof that it was a private entity.  
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) is implicated if contacts create a heightened risk of foreign influence: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
 12 
The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of 
the family ties or other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are 
relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government 
coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated with, or 
dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. In considering the nature of the foreign 
government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
Despite the peaceful, democratic transition of power in recent years and positive 
relations with the United States, Taiwan has an extensive, pervasive history of engaging 
in economic and technological espionage against the United States. The fact that 
Applicant’s father spent most of his career in the service of Taiwan’s government also 
heightens the risk. AG ¶ 7(a) applies. 
 
Furthermore, there is a rebuttable presumption that Applicant has bonds of 
affection or obligation to her father that create a potential conflict of interest under AG ¶ 
7(b), which states: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
As an information officer for Taiwan’s government for over 30 years, Applicant’s 
father derived the income to support himself and his family directly from the 
government. Moreover, given her father’s postings in several foreign countries over the 
years, including the United States when Applicant and her sister were born, he 
represented Taiwan abroad and promoted its interests. There is no information in the 
record about whether Applicant’s father currently receives a pension from Taiwan. 
Nevertheless, his retirement is too recent to rule out the potential for a conflict of 
interest, especially when there is no evidence that he has completely terminated such 
an important tie as citizenship with Taiwan. AG ¶ 7(b) applies. 
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen of Taiwan from birth, who has U.S. permanent 
residency status since 2011. The evidence does not substantiate that he ever resided in 
Taiwan. He traveled to Taiwan with Applicant in 2000, but has not otherwise been to 
Taiwan. It is difficult to see where Applicant’s relationship to her brother raises a 
security concern under AG ¶ 7(a) or ¶ 7(b) apart from the risk that exists through their 
bonds to their father. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) cannot reasonably apply in mitigation of the foreign influence 
concerns. Applicant is presumed to have a close relationship to her father, despite their 
distance over the years because of his employment with Taiwan’s government and then 
 
 13 
the cultural organization. Although her father’s duties involved the open dissemination of 
information rather than intelligence or security, he was required to promote the interests 
of Taiwan’s government. Applicant has repeatedly described her contacts with her 
father as monthly, primarily by email, but when her father was assigned to a post in the 
United States from 2009 through 2011 and she was on temporary duty for her employer 
in her father’s locale, they would meet. (Tr. 71.) Furthermore, her father has been living 
in the United States since August 2015, Applicant reported monthly in-person contact 
with her mother and brother. Applicant joins her mother for a show or dinner and her 
brother for a sporting event, dinner, or movies. It is reasonable to assume that she has 
contact with her father on some if not all of the occasions where Applicant has seen her 
mother or brother in their home since August 2015. Even with her father’s U.S. legal 
residency, it is difficult to apply mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(a) in light of Taiwan’s 
targeting of economic and technological information developed in the United States. AG 
¶ 8(a) provides:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
 
Applicant professes no allegiance or sense of loyalty to Taiwan. She has no 
assets in Taiwan. Applicant’s Taiwanese passport was renewed in late 2002 by 
Applicant’s mother, using a passport photo that Applicant had taken for her U.S. 
passport when she was in high school. A sample passport renewal form for Taiwan 
shows that parents or guardians are required to sign passport applications for their 
children under age 20. Applicant was 19 when her foreign passport was issued on 
renewal. Applicant was required to sign the application for renewal, unless she was 
unavailable. Assuming the dates Applicant provided for her foreign passport were 
reasonably accurate, she was in college when the passport was renewed. Under those 
circumstances, the renewal of Applicant’s foreign passport does not undermine her 
case for establishing longstanding ties to the United States under AG ¶ 8(b), which 
provides: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
However, Applicant’s use of a Taiwanese passport in March 2012, when she 
held a valid U.S. passport, weighs against her when considering whether she can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Applicant did not 
have a security clearance, and she may well have been considering leaving her 
defense-contractor job when she used her Taiwanese passport in 2012. Yet, Applicant 
should have realized that her use of a Taiwanese passport was inconsistent with her 
 
 14 
U.S. citizenship. Her possession and use of a foreign passport had been identified as 
security concerns in 2007. Concerns of foreign preference were mitigated in 2007 
because her Taiwanese passport had expired in November 2002, and she had no 
intention to renew it. There is no evidence to substantiate her assertion to the OPM 
investigator in June 2013 that her use of her foreign passport in 2012 had been 
approved by security authorities. Concerns arise about what Applicant would do if 
placed in the untenable position of having to choose between a family member and her 
security responsibilities, given she has shown a willingness to represent herself as a 
Taiwanese citizen for mere convenience. The DOHA Appeal Board has long 
acknowledged that “people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that 
could be important to a loved-one, such as a family member.” See ISCR Case No. 08-
10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009.) Applicant denies that she could be coerced to act 
contrary to U.S. interests because of the change in government in Taiwan in 2016 and 
her father’s retirement to the United States. While I have considered her father’s move 
to the United States, he is still a citizen of Taiwan who spent most if not all of his 
professional career in public service for Taiwan’s government. Not enough is known 
about his present activities, income, or acquaintances to rule out the risk of undue 
foreign influence. 
 
Guideline E—Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have deliberately falsified her April 
2013 SF 86 by responding negatively to the following inquiries under section 25:  “Has 
the U.S. Government (or a foreign government) EVER investigated your background 
and/or granted you a security clearance eligibility/access?” (SOR ¶ 2.a) and “Have you 
EVER had a security clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended, or 
revoked?” (SOR ¶ 2.b). The evidence establishes that Applicant applied for a security 
clearance on February 13, 2006. Following an OPM investigation into Applicant’s 
background that revealed issues of foreign influence and foreign preference, I 
conducted a hearing on August 22, 2007. After considering the evidence presented, I 
issued a decision on September 27, 2007, denying Applicant security clearance 
eligibility because of unmitigated foreign influence security concerns. That decision was 
upheld by the DOHA Appeal Board on February 8, 2008. The evidence also shows that 
when Applicant reapplied for a security clearance on July 6, 2012, she disclosed her 
previous background investigation and the denial of security clearance eligibility for her 
in 2007. However, she discrepantly provided negative responses to the relevant 
clearance inquiries on her April 2013 SF 86. 
 
 15 
Applicant denies any intent to falsify the SF 86 background investigation and 
clearance denial inquiries, citing her disclosure of her previous investigation and 
clearance denial during her OPM interview. She also explained that when she 
completed her SF 86, she was working in the field, filled it out in a hurry, and did not 
have her records. She acknowledged in hindsight that she should have checked her 
records, but she also stated “in my mind, I would have never claimed to have gotten a 
clearance when I never received one.” (Tr. 88.) Applicant’s disclosure of her clearance 
denial to the OPM investigator in June 2013 is evidence in reform, but it does not 
explain her negative responses on the SF 86 five weeks earlier. Applicant’s claim of 
being hurried is controverted by her admission that she had 15 days to complete the 
form. (Tr. 42-43.) She took the time to list the dates and countries of her foreign travel in 
the preceding seven years. She needed no records to know that she had a clearance 
denied in 2007. Her claim that she read the SF 86 clearance record inquiries as 
pertaining only to revocation of a security clearance cannot be reconciled with her July 
2012 SF 86 affirmative responses to the same questions and her disclosure that her 
clearance had been denied in 2007 because of her father’s employment with Taiwan’s 
government. She offered no explanation for her discrepant responses to the same 
questions on two SF 86 forms completed less than a year apart. Her disclosure of her 
previous background investigation and clearance denial on the July 2012 SF 86 did not 
relieve her of the obligation to report the information again in April 2013. Similarly, the 
fact that the DOD has record of the clearance denial did not relieve her of her obligation 
to report it on her SF 86. Even if she had read the clearance denial question as 
pertaining only to clearance revocation, it would not explain her negative response to 
whether her background had ever been investigated for security clearance or access 
eligibility. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal  history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant testified falsely during her August 2007 
hearing when she indicated that she had not renewed her Taiwanese passport that 
expired in November 2002 and had no intention to renew it (SOR ¶ 2.c). The evidence 
shows that when Applicant first applied for security clearance eligibility in February 
2006, she indicated that she had a Taiwanese passport “by default” from her birth to 
present. She explained at her August 2007 hearing that she did not have the passport in 
her possession when she completed her SF 86 and decided to indicate that she held 
the passport for her entire life since she did not know when it expired. (GE 8.) Applicant 
presented in evidence at her August 2007 hearing a Taiwanese passport that was valid 
from November 26, 1996, to November 26, 2002, which had been renewed by her 
parents. She denied any intention to renew it. However, Applicant indicated on her July 
2012 and April 2013 SF 86 forms that she had held a Taiwanese passport from the 
estimated dates of December 1, 2002, through December 1, 2012. That foreign 
passport was not submitted in evidence at her May 2016 hearing, so the date of its 
 
 16 
issuance cannot be confirmed. Applicant testified that she does not have a habit of 
keeping expired passports, although she was able in August 2007 to produce her 
Taiwanese passport that expired in 2002. She indicated in response to DOHA 
interrogatories in December 2013 that her foreign passports were destroyed. 
 
Assuming that the December 2002 date for renewal is reasonably accurate, 
prompt steps were taken in 2002 to ensure that Applicant maintained a valid Taiwanese 
passport. However, Applicant testified that she did not renew the passport herself, and 
that in August 2007 she believed her Taiwanese passport had expired. She did not 
know until 2011, when she and her mother were planning their March 2012 trip to the 
PRC and Taiwan, that she held a valid Taiwanese passport. Among her post-hearing 
submissions, Applicant presented a sample passport renewal form for Taiwan that 
shows that the signature of the applicant is required for renewal unless unable to sign, 
but also that a parent’s signature is required for minors under age 20. Applicant was 19 
at the time and in college, so it is certainly possible that her mother applied to renew her 
Taiwanese passport for her. There is no evidence that Applicant has taken any steps to 
renew her Taiwanese passport after her latest one expired in 2012. Based on the 
evidence provided, the Government’s case falls short with respect to establishing that 
Applicant testified falsely in August 2007 about the renewal of her foreign passport and 
her intentions in that regard. 
 
 Applicant’s affirmative responses to the clearance investigation and access 
denial questions when she was interviewed in June 2013 is evidence of reform 
implicating AG ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Yet, 
Applicant undermines her case for mitigation to the extent that she justifies her false 
responses, such as claiming that the OPM investigator “kind of understood how [she] 
could have a different interpretation of some of these [SF 86] questions.” (Tr. 42.) In 
assessing her reform generally, I also note that Applicant has not been fully forthright at 
times about her father’s residency and his time spent in Taiwan in recent years. For 
example, Applicant responded “No” on her July 2012 SF 86 to whether she or any 
member of her immediate family in the last seven years had any contact with a foreign 
government, its establishment, or its representatives. On her April 2013 SF 86, she 
responded “Yes” to that same question, but indicated only that her father had contact 
with his former employer between January 2012 and April 2012 for “job transition.” The 
evidence shows that her father worked for Taiwan’s government for over 30 years as a 
press secretary and that on the reorganization of his division, he resided in Taiwan for 
most of 2012 while awaiting reassignment. He visited his family in the United States for 
one or two weeks twice in 2012: in the summer and again over the holidays at the end 
of the year.8 Applicant listed her father as having the same U.S. address as her mother 
                                                 
8
 The DOHA Appeal Board has long held that the administrative judge may consider non-alleged conduct 
to assess an applicant’s credibility; to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to 
decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or to provide evidence 
for a whole-person analysis under Section 6.3 of the Directive. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 09-07219 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012). Applicant was less than fully 
forthcoming about her father’s foreign government ties and his residency in Taiwan, but conduct not 
 
 17 
on both her June 2012 and April 2013 security clearance applications, giving no 
indication that her father was renting living quarters and spending most of his time in 
Taiwan. Whether Applicant acted to conceal her father’s activities or she failed to 
understand the importance of providing accurate and complete information, it makes it 
difficult to apply AG ¶ 17(d), which provides: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Under AG ¶ 15, “any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process” is of special interest and can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
Applicant has not yet demonstrated that her representations can be fully relied on. The 
personal conduct security concerns are not fully mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).9 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence 
case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still 
pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that 
an applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to 
classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk because 
                                                                                                                                                             
alleged in the SOR cannot provide a basis for disqualification. It is considered for the purpose of 
assessing Applicant’s evidence in mitigation on the issue of whether she possesses the judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness required of persons with security clearance. 
 
9
 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
 18 
of facts and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 
01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
Applicant had no say in her father’s choice to pursue a career as an information 
officer for Taiwan’s government. Her performance reviews for 2014 and 2015 show that 
she is a hard worker who regularly exceeds her employer’s expectations. Her work 
accomplishments weigh in her favor, but they are not enough to overcome the foreign 
influence and personal conduct concerns. It is well settled that once a concern arises 
regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption 
against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 
1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). For the reasons discussed, I am unable to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for Applicant at this time 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
