 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06238 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for a security 
clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on August 1, 2015, under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior), J (Criminal Conduct), and E 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated February 26, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 19, 2015. In a sworn statement, dated 
October 9, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing.2 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on February 23, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on March 23, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on May 2, 2016, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on May 20, 2016.  
 
During the hearing, seven Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 7), one 
Applicant exhibit (AE A), and one administrative exhibit, were admitted into evidence 
without objection, with the exception that one section of AE A was deleted upon 
Department Counsel’s motion.3 Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on June 1, 2016. The record closed on May 20, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR pertaining to sexual behavior (¶ 1.a.), criminal conduct (¶ 2.a.), and personal 
conduct (¶¶ 3.a. through 3.d.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain the top secret (TS) security clearance which was suspended in September 2015. 
He also sought Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) access with another 
government agency, but that access was denied.4  He was initially granted a secret 
security clearance in 1999, and TS clearances in 2003 and 2009. He has been employed 
full-time by the same defense contractor since November 2014, and currently serves as 
a security manager and account manager.5 He was previously with other employers 
serving as facility security officer (FSO) and security manager (1998 – 2010); security 
director (2010 – 2012); and cognizant security specialist officer (CSSO) (2010 – 2014).6  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1987.7 When completing an application 
for a public trust position, Applicant indicated that he had received an associate of arts 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated October 9, 2015. 
 
3 Tr. at 24-26; AE A (Psychological Evaluation, dated May 20, 2014). 
 
4 GE 5 (Letter, dated October 30, 2013); GE 7 (First Appeal Review Memorandum, dated February 24, 2014); 
GE 6 (Final Outcome of Appeal Case Memorandum, dated August 29, 2014). 
 
5 Tr. at 50. 
 
6 Tr. at 31-37. 
 
7 Tr. at 51-52. 
 
3 
                                      
 
(AA) degree, but when he was subsequently confronted, he acknowledged that he had 
not received such a degree.8 During the hearing, he again acknowledged that he had not 
received an AA degree, and he explained that he had taken a few courses at a local 
community college and interpreted the question to mean the degree which he intended 
to obtain.9 Applicant was married in January 1992.10 He and his wife have one daughter, 
born in 1993.11 
 
Sexual Behavior, Criminal Conduct, and Personal Conduct  
 
When Applicant was 16 years old and a high school junior, he frequently cut 
classes, had unspecified academic issues, and was involved in fights. As a result, he was 
placed in a special school with other students with disciplinary issues.12 Between 1988 
and 1990, when he was an employee of a pizza restaurant, he periodically stole $10 to 
$20. He estimated the total amount stolen was between $90 and $100. In his next job, 
between 1991 and 1994 or 1995, he stole between $1,500 and $2,000 worth of wine, 
lottery tickets, and cash.13 There is no evidence of any police or court involvement in 
either of the two theft issues. 
 
In 1994 or 1995, Applicant and his wife moved in with his mother-in-law for 
approximately three months. The sleeping arrangements were as follows: Applicant and 
his wife slept on a floor mattress in her brother’s room with the brother occupying his own 
bed. It was not uncommon for her two minor sisters to watch television from Applicant’s 
floor mattress or the bed, or to sometimes sleep in the bed. On one particular occasion, 
while they were all watching television on the bed, they all fell asleep. Applicant’s wife, 
brother, and one sister got out of the bed and slept on the floor mattress, while Applicant 
and one sister-in-law remained asleep in the bed. Applicant awoke during the night and 
placed his hand, initially on top of her underwear, and starting rubbing her vagina with his 
fingers. He moved his hand under her underwear and continued rubbing her vagina. 
Although he could not remember if he penetrated her vagina, he conceded that he may 
have done so. There was no resistance or reaction from his sister-in-law during the 
incident. At the time, Applicant was 24 or 25 years old and his sister-in-law was 11 or 12 
years old. Two other incidents of an identical nature occurred within a matter of days. 
Once again, there was no resistance or reaction from his sister-in-law during those 
incidents. Applicant was not under the influence of alcohol or drugs when the molestations 
took place. He denied, and there is no evidence of, sexual intercourse, oral sexual 
contact, or any other form of sexual contact with his sister-in-law.14 
                                                          
 
8 GE 2 (Report, dated January 23, 2013), at 4. 
 
9 Tr. at 53-55. 
 
10 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16-17. 
 
11 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20. 
 
12 GE 2, supra note 8, at 2. 
 
13 GE 2, supra note 8, at 5. 
 
14 GE 3 (Report, dated July 3, 2013), at 2-3. 
 
4 
                                      
 
There was no police involvement regarding any of the incidents, and noone other 
than Applicant and his sister-in-law was aware of the incidents at the time they occurred. 
However, in approximately 2008 or 2009, his now-married sister-in-law claimed to her 
family that Applicant had sexually molested her when she was younger. Applicant denied 
the allegations to them.15  
 
In January 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator of another 
government agency. During that security processing polygraph pre-test interview, 
Applicant said he had sent the family an e-mail in which he denied the allegations, but 
indicated that, while he was asleep, he may have “potentially” touched his sister-in-law 
on one occasion, thinking it was his wife, for it was not uncommon for him to touch or 
have sex with his wife while he was fully asleep.16 Applicant eventually admitted he was 
not prepared to discuss the incidents because he was too nervous and embarrassed to 
do so to a female polygrapher, and he was afraid of the eventual repercussions if he did 
admit the incidents.17 
 
In July 2013, during another security processing polygraph pre-test interview, 
Applicant finally admitted the three incidents. He was unable to explain his motivation for 
the sexual contact with his sister-in-law, but he did acknowledge that his behavior was 
wrong and against the law. He expressed remorse for his actions and said that if he could 
go back in time, he would not have done what he did. Applicant claimed he had been in 
denial about molesting his sister-in-law, and that was his explanation for failing to 
previously admit his actions.18 
 
As of August 1, 2015, the date the SOR was issued, Applicant had not fully told 
his wife and family members that he had molested her sister on at least three occasions 
in 1994 or 1995. If placed in a position of blackmail, he stated he would fully confess his 
actions to them.19 During the hearing, Applicant again acknowledged that he has not told 
his wife, daughter, or best friend about the molestations, largely because his acts were of 
a heinous nature and he did not want them to bear the results of the information.20 
Although he advised his employer that there was a sexual incident in the past, no specific 
details were shared with him.21 
 
Commencing in January 2005, Applicant has been treated for conditions 
diagnosed as anxiety and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD). He was initially 
                                                          
 
15 GE 2, supra note 8, at 7. 
 
16 GE 2, supra note 8, at 7; GE 4 (Clearance Decision Statement, dated October 23, 2013), at 1-2; Tr. at 42. 
 
17 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2, at 1; Tr. at 38-39. 
 
18 GE 4, supra note 16, at 2-3. 
 
19 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
20 Tr. at 46-48. 
 
21 Tr. at 48. 
 
5 
                                      
 
administered Effexor, and subsequently transitioned to Paxil.22 In April and May 2014, 
Applicant underwent a complete psychological evaluation by two licensed psychologists. 
A number of tests were administered, including the Derogatis Sexual Functioning 
Inventory and the Garos Sexual Behavior Inventory. According to the psychologists, 
Applicant’s test results generally were within normal limits, and the molestation incidents 
of over two decades ago do not reflect a long-standing pattern of deviant sexual ideation 
or perverted interest.23 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”24 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”25   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”26 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
                                                          
22 GE 1, supra note 1, at 25; GE 2, supra note 8, at 4-5; Tr. at 55-56. 
 
23 AE A, supra note 3, at 7-9. 
 
24 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
25 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
26 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
6 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case.  The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.27  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”28 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”29 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
  
The security concern for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual.  
                                                          
 
27 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
28 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
29 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 13(a), “sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether the individual has been 
prosecuted” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 13(c), “sexual behavior that 
causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress” may raise 
security concerns. In addition, “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack 
of discretion or judgment” is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 13(d). In 1994 or 1995, 
on three occasions, Applicant inappropriately touched, thereby sexually molesting, his 11 
or 12-year old sister-in-law when he was 24 or 25 years old. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 
13(d), have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from sexual behavior. Under AG ¶ 14(b), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” If “the behavior no 
longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress,” it is potentially mitigating 
under AG ¶ 14(c). Similarly, if “the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and 
discreet,” AG ¶ 14(d) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 14(b) applies. AG ¶¶ 14(c) and 14(d) do not apply. Applicant’s three incidents 
of inappropriate sexual behavior with his minor sister-in-law occurred during a very brief 
period over two decades ago and have, since that time, not recurred.  Based on his 2014 
psychological evaluation, Applicant’s test results were found to be within normal limits, 
and those incidents do not reflect a long-standing pattern of deviant sexual ideation or 
perverted interest. Considering Applicant’s subsequent evolvement and maturity, the 
sexual behavior is unlikely to recur and no longer casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. However, while the Government is aware of his sexual 
behavior from his past, his wife is still unaware of the incidents involving her husband and 
sister, and that sexual behavior continues to serve as a basis for coercion, exploitation, 
or duress. While those three incidents were strictly private and discreet, they occurred 
with a minor who is legally incapable of entering into consensual sexual activity. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an “allegation of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” security 
concerns may be raised. Applicant’s SOR-alleged history of criminal conduct consists 
solely of three incidents of sexual molestation of a minor. The incidents involving thefts 
 
8 
                                      
 
were not alleged in the SOR. As to the sexual molestations, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have 
been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 
32(d) may apply when “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. As noted above, the three incidents of inappropriate 
sexual behavior with Applicant’s minor sister-in-law occurred during a very brief period 
over two decades ago and have, since that time, not recurred. His 2014 psychological 
evaluation determined that those incidents do not reflect a long standing pattern of deviant 
sexual ideation or perverted interest. With two decades of maturity, the absence of 
alleged repeated criminal conduct, the presence of successful rehabilitation, expressed 
remorse, and a good employment record, his criminal conduct is unlikely to recur and no 
longer casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(b), it is potentially disqualifying by “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” In addition, 
under AG ¶ 16(c), security concerns may be raised where there is: 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Also, under AG ¶ 16(e), security concerns may be raised where there is  
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
Applicant sexually molested his minor sister-in-law on three occasions in 1994 or 
1995. When confronted by her, in the presence of her family, in 2008 or 2009, he again 
denied the allegations. In January 2013, during his security processing polygraph pre-test 
interview, Applicant denied the allegations, but acknowledged that he may have 
“potentially” touched his sister-in-law on one occasion, thinking she was his wife. It was 
not until his July 2013 processing polygraph pre-test interview, that he finally admitted the 
incidents.  Applicant has acknowledged that he has not told his wife, daughter, or best 
friend about the molestations. AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(c), and 16(e) have been established.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of them apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines D, J, and E in my analysis below.      
 
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has a history 
of serving in responsible positions as a security manager, FSO, security director, or 
CSSO. Although he sexually molested his minor sister-in-law two decades ago when he 
was 24 or 25 years old, there has been no recurrence of such behavior over the ensuing 
decades. His 2014 psychological evaluation test results were found to be within normal 
limits, and those incidents do not reflect a long-standing pattern of deviant sexual ideation 
or perverted interest. 
 
10 
                                      
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
In this instance, the relatively recent cover-ups are more important than the three sexual 
molestation incidents of two decades ago, that resulted in the cover-up. As an FSO, 
CSSO, security director, or security manager, Applicant is cognizant of his responsibilities 
as well as those who have a security clearance. Lying to his family about the incidents in 
2008 or 2009 is one thing, but lying to the investigator during the January 2013 security 
processing polygraph pre-test interview, is far more significant. In addition, by keeping 
the truth about his actions with his sister-in-law from his wife, he is continuing his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record 
evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.30 Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 
2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and supporting 
evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative process, and my 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or 
overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
  
                                                          
30 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
