 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04567 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He had 11 collection accounts 
that totaled more than $28,000. Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
  
History of the Case 
 
 On October 31, 2014, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial 
considerations security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it was clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
On February 23, 2015, DOHA received Applicant’s SOR answer and his request for a 
hearing. On September 30, 2015, I was assigned the case. On October 30, 2015, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a 
hearing to be convened on November 19, 2015. 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified, as did two other witnesses on his behalf, and provided 12 
documents, Ex. A through J, which were admitted without objection. The record was 
kept open to allow Applicant to present additional documents. In November 2015, two 
additional documents were received and admitted without objection as Ex. K and L. On 
December 3, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer (Answer) to the SOR, he admitted owing three student loan 
obligations totaling approximately $37,700. He asserted he had made arrangements 
with two of the creditors and was making monthly payments on another delinquent 
obligation. He denied owing the remaining obligations and stated they had been 
removed from his credit report. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old network data communication analyst who has worked 
for a defense contractor since January 2012, and he seeks to retain his security 
clearance. (Ex. 1, Tr. 17, Tr. 24) His annual salary is approximately $50,000. (Tr. 24) He 
is not married and has no children. (Ex. 1, Tr. 15)  
 
 On Applicant’s March 18, 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) he listed 13 delinquent accounts. These accounts include ten of the 
SOR delinquent debts. (Ex. 1) The only SOR debt not listed in the e-QIP was a $205 
telephone bill (SOR 1.k).  When he completed his April 2014 Personal Subject Interview 
(PSI), Applicant indicated he was making $375 monthly payments on the debt listed in 
SOR 1.b ($4,063, which, at the time, was $7,639). (Ex. 1, 4) 
 
 Applicant asserts his financial problems began when he was attending college. 
(Ex. 4) From September 2002 through November 2004, he attended a technical school 
and received an associate’s degree. (Ex. 1, Tr. 26) From January 2005 through June 
2008 (estimated) and from August 2007 (estimated) to May 2009, he also attended a 
college and a university. (Ex. 1) While attending school, he was working full time and, at 
times, he worked part time. He was also supporting his parents. (Ex. 4) In 2007, his 
employer’s practice, a medical clinic, started having financial problems2, which resulted 
in Applicant being paid less. (Tr. 36) His income decreased, but not his expenses. 
 
 Applicant paid the cable television collection account (SOR 1.c, $263), but does 
not know why it still appeared on an earlier credit report. (Ex. A, Tr. 31) The debt does 
not appear on his most recent credit reports. (Ex. K, Ex. L, Tr. 31) He disputed the 
telephone service debt listed in SOR 1.k ($205) and the balance owed is shown as 
zero. (Ex. B) He owes zero on the debt listed in SOR 1.d ($656). (Ex. D) He satisfied 
the debt listed in SOR 1.f ($7,639). (Ex. D, Tr. 32) The collection firm collecting on the 
debts listed in SOR 1.g ($4,173), SOR 1.h ($5,037), SOR 1.i ($1,829) and SOR 1.j 
                                                          
2 The doctor was later jailed for Medicare fraud. (Tr. 36)  
 
3 
 
($1,682) has closed the accounts and is no longer seeking collection on the four 
accounts. (Ex. E, F, G, H, Tr. 33, 34) The collection agency instructed the three major 
credit reporting agencies to delete these accounts from Applicant’s credit file. (Ex. E, F, 
G, H) Applicant paid the settlement agreement offered by the collection agency. (Tr. 42)  
 
 Applicant’s April 2014 credit report lists two separate accounts with the creditor 
listed for the SOR 1.a ($1,339) debt. (Ex. 2) However, he had only one account with this 
credit card service. (Tr. 39) One is listed as “paid as agreed” and the other as a 
collection account. His July 2014 credit report lists one account with the creditor and 
indicates $1,339 is past due. (Ex. 3) One of Applicant’s November 2015 credit reports 
indicates an account with the same debt as paid, closed, never late. (Ex. L) His other 
November 2015 credit report lists the account as “paid as agreed.” (Ex. K) Neither of his 
most recent credit reports lists a delinquent debt with this creditor. Applicant credibly 
asserts any debt owed this creditor has been paid. (Tr. 30) 
 
 Applicant’s April 2015 credit report lists a charged-off credit card debt not listed 
as a debt of concern in the SOR. The account was his parent’s credit card account, but 
he was an authorized user on the card. (Tr. 41) He contacted the credit card company, 
but the company had sold the account. Applicant has been unable to track down the 
current holder of the debt. (Tr. 41)  
 
 Applicant is making monthly payments on the debt listed in SOR 1.b ($4,063). As 
of November 30, 2015, he had made six monthly payments of $406 each. (Ex. K, L, Tr. 
30) He is also making monthly payments on the debt listed in SOR 1.e ($1,216). As of 
November 30, 2015, he had made four monthly payments of $157 each. (Ex. L)  
 
 Applicant lives with his parents. His 2005 car is paid for and he is current on his 
credit cards, which he is using to re-establish his credit. (Tr. 28, 29, 44) He has 
approximately $13,000 in his 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 44) His net monthly remainder 
(monthly income less expenses and debt payment) is $800 to $1000. (Tr. 47) He has 
received counseling to help him understand financial matters. (Tr. 52) He has 
maintained contact with his creditors. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
 
5 
 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had 11 collection accounts and a charged-off account, which totaled 
approximately $28,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant began to experience financial problems when he was attending college 
and taking care of his parents. He is currently making monthly payments on two debts 
(SOR 1.b, $4,063 and SOR 1.e, $1,216). He reached a settlement agreement and paid 
off the debts listed in SOR 1.g ($4,173), SOR 1.h ($5,037), SOR 1.i ($1,829), and SOR 
1.j ($1.682). He also paid the debts in SOR 1.b ($4,063), SOR 1.c ($263), SOR 1.d 
($656), and SOR 1.f ($7,639). He disputes two debts: a telephone service debt (SOR 
1.k, $205), which shows a zero balance on his credit report and the credit card debt 
 
6 
 
(SOR 1.a, $1,339) is not listed on his most recent credit report. An account with the 
same creditor lists a zero balance. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the debt in SOR 1.a occurred under unusual conditions 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant was attending school and taking care of 
his parents. His job at the medical clinic ended, through no fault of his own. His loss of 
employment is a condition beyond his control that resulted in his financial problems. 
Since obtaining his current job, he has kept in touch with his creditor and is making 
monthly payments on his debts. This shows reasonable action on his part. AG ¶ 20(a) 
and AG & 20(b) apply. 
 
Applicant was an authorized user of the card on a charged-off, non-SOR debt. 
He contacted the original creditor, but has been unable to locate the current holder of 
the obligation. Based on Applicant’s past conduct in addressing his delinquent debts, 
once the holder of the obligation is located it is likely he will enter into a repayment 
agreement to address the debt. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), as previously stated, Applicant has reached a 
settlement agreement with the holder of four delinquent collection obligations and paid 
the settlement amount. He paid additional delinquent obligations and two other SOR 
debts have a zero balance. Having honored the repayment agreements on other debts, 
he is likely to continue making his monthly payments on his current repayment 
agreement. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) apply. Applicant has established a track record of 
debt payment, and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has experienced financial 
problems while in school and taking care of his parents. His current job provides him 
sufficient funds to address his obligations. Since obtaining his current job, he has 
contacted his creditors, arranged repayment agreements, and complied with the terms 
of those agreements. He is not living beyond his means. He has a 2005 vehicle and is 
current on his obligations. His payment history indicates he will continue making timely, 
monthly payments on his debts until the obligations are paid.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. See AG & 
2(a)(1). Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k: For Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
