 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06879 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 3, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 16, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on May 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 15, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
hearing was continued at Applicant’s request. The case was reassigned to me on 
September 28, 2016. The hearing was reconvened on November 16, 2016. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
Z, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcripts (Tr.) 
on June 23, 2016, and November 30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1987 
until he retired with an honorable discharge in 2007. He seeks to retain a security 
clearance, which he has held since he was in the military. He attended college for a 
period without earning a degree. He is married without children.1 
 
 Applicant regularly filed his income tax returns and received refunds for every tax 
year from 2000 through 2011. His refunds during that period totaled more than $68,000. 
His accountant told him that he had to file his tax returns within three years in order to 
receive a refund. The accountant told Applicant, or Applicant misinterpreted the 
accountant’s statements to mean, that he was not legally required to file his federal tax 
returns for three years if he was due a refund.2  
 
 Applicant mistakenly thought he would receive a refund for tax year 2012. He did 
not think he was violating any laws or regulations when he failed to file his 2012 federal 
income tax return when it was due. He also thought he was truthfully answering the 
financial questions on his September 2013 Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86)3 when he did not report any tax issues.4 
 
 Applicant filed his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns in October 2014. 
The tax due for 2012 was $7,528, and the tax due for 2013 was $14,460. Applicant paid 
all his taxes. He filed his tax returns for 2014 and 2015 on time. He accepted 
responsibility for his actions. He credibly testified that he has learned a valuable lesson 
and that he will never again fail to file his tax returns on time. He does not owe any 
taxes, and his finances are sound. He submitted evidence of his excellent job 
performance and that he has all the positive character traits consistent with a 
responsible security-clearance holder.5 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-29; GE 1; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-16, 19; AE D-O. 
 
3 The SF 86 was certified in September 2013, but not signed until December 2013.  
 
4 Tr. at 14-16, 28 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 19-24, 27, 31-35; AE B, C, P-Y. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns when they 
were due. The above disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant misinterpreted his accountant’s statement or he received bad advice. In 
either event, he was unaware that he was doing anything wrong until it was brought to 
his attention. He filed his 2012 and 2013 federal income tax returns in October 2014, 
more than a year before the SOR was issued. All taxes are paid. He accepted 
responsibility for his actions. He credibly testified that he has learned a valuable lesson 
and that he will never again fail to file his tax returns on time. Applicant overcame the 
heavy burden upon an applicant who shirks his tax responsibilities. See ISCR Case No. 
15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016). The above mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
 
 
  
 
5 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
6 
 
I considered Applicant’s 20 years of honorable military service, his steady 
employment with a defense contractor, and his favorable character evidence. He failed 
in his obligation to file his tax returns on time. However, he resolved those matters more 
than a year before the SOR was issued. I am convinced the conduct will not be 
repeated. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns and mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
