                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05564
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 16, 2016
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on April 12, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) On February 6, 2015, the Department
of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal
Conduct) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO)
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006.  1
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 5, 2015 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
Applicant was the subject of an earlier ISCR case, 06-02933. There is no indication that an SOR was issued1
in that case, and neither myself or Department Counsel have any knowledge of Applicant or any prior
adjudication.  (Government Exhibit 1, Section 25; Judge Exhibit I; Tr. 91-94.)
1
to proceed on May 7, 2015. This case was assigned to me on March 28, 2016. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March
30, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 21, 2016. The Government
offered Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibits A through AA, which were admitted without
objection, and testified on his own behalf. Applicant asked that the record remain open
until May 6, 2016, for the receipt of additional documents. He submitted Applicant
Exhibit BB on May 5, 2016, and it was admitted without objection. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 2, 2016. The record closed on May 6, 2016. Based
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 38, married, and has two children. He has a master’s degree in
business administration. Applicant is employed by a defense contractor as a manager
and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. Applicant
admitted all allegations of the SOR with explanations. Applicant’s admissions are
incorporated into the following findings of fact.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he used illegal drugs. Applicant used various drugs from 1992 until
approximately March 2011.
Applicant first began using marijuana in 1992, when he was in high school. He
last used it at his bachelor party in March 2011. Applicant used cocaine from about
January 2006 until his last use, also at his bachelor party in March 2011. Applicant used
Ecstasy in approximately 2006 through 2007. (Tr. 35-36, 64-71.)
Applicant received a security clearance in approximately March 2006. During the
time he held it Applicant used various illegal drugs, as described above, until March
2011. Applicant realized at the time he was using drugs that it violated his company’s
policies, government policies, and the law. During the time he was using drugs he never
told anyone at his company about it. (Government Exhibit 1, Section 25; Tr. 72-77.)2
As stated above, Applicant filled out his latest e-QIP in April 2013. In that
document Applicant gives a complete history of his drug usage. (Government Exhibit 1
at Section 23.)
Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent. In that statement he agrees that
any security clearance he may be granted can be automatically revoked for any future
drug use. (Applicant Exhibit A; Tr. 35-36.)
Another Government agency denied Applicant SCI access on October 24, 2012. (Government Exhibit 2.)2
2
With regard to his drug use in general Applicant states, “I can’t justify it. It’s - - It’s
something that I did in the past. There’s no justification. All I can do is take responsibility
for my actions, show good faith over a period of time that I have not done that and I’ve
changed.” (Tr. 71.) Applicant’s family is the most important thing in his life, and that is
an important reason in his decision to stop using drugs. His life consists of his family
and work. (Applicant Exhibit Z; Tr. 39, 54.)
Paragraph 2 - (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable,
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant bought a house with a friend in 2005. In 2007 they refinanced the
house and obtained both a first mortgage for $506,000 and a home equity line of credit
for $135,200. When the housing market collapsed beginning in 2008 Applicant quickly
found himself under water on the house. His partner lost his job, and transferred his part
of the house to Applicant in 2010. (Applicant Exhibits B, C, and D; Tr. 39-40.)
In 2010 Applicant started to have problems making his payments. He did not
want to walk away from the property or have it foreclosed on by the mortgage holders.
At that time the property was worth less than the total amount of the loans. Applicant
hired a representative to work for him with his mortgage holders. In 2013 the holders of
Applicant’s first mortgage agreed to modify their loan, and it has been modified.
(Applicant Exhibits E, F, and G; Tr. 40-43.)
The situation regarding the home equity line of credit is unclear. Applicant states 
that his representative worked out a deal where the line of credit was forgiven by the
lender. Applicant had no documentation supporting any such deal. Applicant was unable
to confirm that he had received an IRS Form 1099 concerning the forgiveness of the
debt. The two most recent credit reports, one provided by the Government and the other
by Applicant, show this debt as a charge-off in the amount of $127,000. (Government
Exhibit 6; Applicant Exhibits I and BB; Tr. 48-49, 54-55.) 
Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. He is able to pay all of his current
indebtedness without a problem. (Government Exhibit 6; Applicant Exhibits I and J; Tr.
47.)
 
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that shows poor judgment,
untrustworthiness, or unreliability. 
Applicant did not have a security clearance in 2013. However, he often handled
company sensitive information. In February and July 2013 Applicant failed to properly
secure such sensitive information. He received a written warning after the second
3
incident. Applicant has taken refresher training and received personal briefings from
security personnel concerning how to protect and safeguard sensitive information.
Applicant has taken additional steps to avoid such incidents in the future, beyond what
the rules require. (Government Exhibit 2; Applicant Exhibits K, L, and M; Tr. 50-52.)
Applicant’s conduct described under Paragraph 1, above, will also be considered
under this paragraph.
Mitigation
Applicant is a highly respected and successful professional. He submitted letters
of recommendation from co-workers and superiors. He is described as a person who is
trustworthy and capable of holding a security clearance. In addition, the writers say that
Applicant had briefed them on the nature and content of this proceeding. (Applicant
Exhibits W, X, and Y.)
Applicant also submitted his performance appraisals from 2010 to 2015. They
show him to be taking on jobs of increasing responsibility, and that he exceeded
expectations every year. They show that his supervisors view Applicant as an able and
talented person.(Applicant Exhibits P, Q, R, S, T, U, and V.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
4
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
5
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
 Applicant admits using marijuana and other drugs both before and after he began
working for his employer. What is of concern is that he used marijuana, cocaine and
Ecstasy from 2006 to 2011, during the time he held a security clearance.
I have studied all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.
Applicant offered sufficient evidence that would support mitigation under AG ¶¶
26 (a), and (b). Obviously, and as admitted by Applicant, he showed extremely poor
judgment in using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. It has been five years
since he engaged in such conduct, and it is also obvious that his marriage and
becoming a father has had a maturing affect on him. He submitted a signed statement
of intent, with knowledge of the impact future drug use could have on his career.
Applicant has mitigated the impact of his past drug use and Paragraph 1 is found for
him.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
6
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be
negligent, unconcerned, or irresponsible in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.3
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant, based on documentary and testimonial evidence, had a
home equity line of credit that he could not resolve, due primarily to the housing crisis
that began in 2008. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ In addition, AG
¶ 20(b) states that disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  
The evidence shows that both of the above mitigating conditions apply to
Applicant. Applicant was caught up in the financial crisis of 2008. The friend, who
Applicant bought his house with, lost his job in 2010. This left all the financial burden on
Applicant. It took him three years to modify the first mortgage on his house, which he
was successful in doing. According to Applicant, the person he hired to resolve his first
mortgage also got the holder of the line of credit to forgive that debt. While it would have
been better if he could have shown a 1099, showing forgiveness of the debt, under the
particular circumstances of this case I find that he has behaved in a reasonable fashion
concerning his mortgage debts.
It is Applicant’s responsibility to set forth his financial situation in a sufficient way
so that I can make a finding that he has “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” as required by AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant has done so.
Given the state of the record, I also find that his current financial situation is stable, and
that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,”
as required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 2 is found for Applicant.
 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).3
7
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.
I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially
considered the following:  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17 applies to the facts of this case:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
In 2013 Applicant had two incidents where he did not handle company sensitive
information properly. He was counseled about the situation, took the counseling to
heart, and has had no further incidents. Applicant’s drug use is a thing of the past, and
he shows himself to be a mature, successful, and intelligent employee. Paragraph 3 is
found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
8
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s
conduct is not recent. Based on the state of the record, I find that there have been
permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I
also find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress
(AG ¶ 2(a)(8)), and that there is also little to no likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use,
financial situation, and personal conduct. 
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
10
