KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A Judge should consider the circumstances underlying an applicant’s delinquent debts. 
A Judge is not required to discuss every piece of evidence.  A whole-person analysis requires
evaluating an applicant’s case in light of the entirety of the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASE NO: 15-02760.a1
DATE: 12/29/2016
DATE: December 29, 2016
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-02760
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq. , Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 2, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On October 20, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for his present employer for more than 25 years and has held a
clearance since the early 1990s.  Applicant has financial problems, the SOR alleging over $700,000
in delinquent debts.  Applicant attributed his problems to real estate losses during the 2008
recession.  He owned several pieces of property that he could not sell.  He also acquired credit card
debt as a result of remodeling his house and financing his children’s college education.  
Applicant hired a debt management firm but became unhappy with them when they changed
ownership.  Applicant closed his account and filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  He listed assets of
over $1.4 million and liabilities of over $1.5 million.  This filing was converted to Chapter 11
because the value of his assets exceeded the limit for Chapter 13.  At Applicant’s request, the case
was dismissed and he sold a house to pay off some of his debts.
Applicant’s SOR debts include two time share accounts, a home equity loan, credit card
debts, etc.  Some of the debts, such as the time shares, were resolved through debt forgiveness. 
Some were paid or settled for lesser amounts.  Applicant failed to show that he had resolved two of
the credit card debts.  
Applicant took an early distribution from a 401(k) plan in order to pay off some of his debts. 
As a result he incurred a tax obligation to his state in the amount of over $31,000.  Applicant’s
wages are being garnished to satisfy this debt.  A Federal tax lien that resulted from this distribution
has been resolved.  Applicant took a significant amount of personal travel between 2007 and 2009
and recently returned from a trip to Hawaii.  He has received a performance award at his job and
enjoys a good reputation for his judgment and professional competence.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved some of the debts in Applicant’s favor, including the largest, a mortgage
that had been delinquent for more than $520,000.  Concerning those allegations that she resolved
against Applicant, the Judge cited to evidence that some had been forgiven but found that this was
not the same as Applicant having paid the debts.  Though noting circumstances outside Applicant’s
control that affected his financial stability, the Judge also stated that at least some of his problems
were due to his own decisions and conduct.  She concluded that Applicant had failed to demonstrate
responsible action.  She found that Applicant had not had effective financial counseling and that
there are no clear indications that his problems are under control.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s years of professional experience
and his character evidence.  She also stated that his problems were partially attributable to
circumstances outside his control.  However, she found that Applicant had voluntarily incurred debts
2
that he had been unable or unwilling to pay.  She also cited to his ongoing state tax liability.  The
Judge stated that the evidence left her with unresolved doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for a
clearance.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s mitigation analysis.  He notes that the Judge made a
adverse formal findings regarding debts that been resolved, which he contends is inconsistent.  He
argues that the Judge did not take into account favorable evidence, such as his having paid tax
liabilities resulting from debt forgiveness.  He also argues that he should not be expected to pay
creditors for debts that have been charged-off. 
It is not anomalous, however, for a Judge to find against Applicant even regarding debts that
have been resolved.  A Judge evaluates an applicant’s history of financial problems for what they
may reveal about the applicant’s ability to protect classified information.  See Directive, Enclosure
2 ¶ 18 for the proposition that financial problems may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.  Accordingly, a Judge can be expected to
consider not only the extent to which an applicant’s debt have been paid, settled, or forgiven but also
the underlying circumstances, which may, in a given case, shed light upon the applicant’s judgment
and reliability.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015). 
Applicant cites to evidence that some of his debts have been charged-off.  He argues that it
is not  reasonable to pay a creditor for a debt that has resulted in a tax write-off for the creditor. 
However, a creditor’s choice to charge-off a debt for accounting purposes does not affect the
debtor’s obligation to the creditor.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-01175 at 2, n.1 (App. Bd. May 11,
2010).  As with other debts, a Judge must evaluate a charged-off account in light of the requirements
of the Directive.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02854 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2016).  Neither
has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).
Applicant contends that the Judge’s whole-person analysis is “one sided.”  Appeal Brief at
3.  He cites to his having held a clearance for many years, his good credit prior to the events that
gave rise to the SOR allegations, his extensive assets that could be sold for payment of any debts
incurred in the future, etc.  However, a Judge cannot be expected to discuss every piece of evidence
in a record, which would be a practical impossibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01500 at 3 (App.
Bd. Aug. 25, 2015).  In this case, the Judge’s findings captured the essential facts that a reasonable
person would expect to be addressed based on this record, and her conclusions are consistent with
those findings.  The whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of Directive ¶ 6.3, in that
the Judge considered the totality of the evidence in reaching her decision. See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-06653 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2016).   
 The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
3
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
