                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of                                             )
                                                                     )
                                                                     )  
    ------------------------------------------                 )           ADP Case No. 15-04233   
                            )                                                           
                                                         )
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
Appearances
For Government: Andrea Corrales,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated trustworthiness concerns regarding her personal conduct, but did not mitigate
trustworthiness concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility for Applicant’s holding a
public trust position is denied.
 
History of the Case
On March 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of whether to grant
eligibility for a public trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative judge
to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (E.O.
10865), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
1.  A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security,
titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the
Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed  DOHA to continue to utilize DOD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations (to include those involving ADP
I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) Parenthetically, the Directive was designed to implement E.O. 10865.
2
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR in May 2016, and requested a hearing. This
case was assigned to me on June 17, 2016. The case was scheduled for hearing on
August 4, 2016. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s application for eligibility to hold a public trust
position. At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3);
Applicant relied on the one witness (herself) and no exhibits. The transcript was received
on August 16, 2016. 
Procedural Issues
Before the closing of the hearing, Applicant requested the record by kept open to
permit her the opportunity to supplement the record with a forbearance on her student
loans and debt consolidation of her listed debts. For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded two
days to respond. Applicant did not furnish any post-hearing submissions. 
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated three delinquent student
loan debts with the Department of Education (DOE) exceeding $17,000 and (b) accrued
seven consumer debts exceeding $800. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified material facts in the Electronic
Questionnaires for Investigation Processing (e-QIP) she completed in July 2014 by
omitting her delinquent debts detailed under Guideline F.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of her alleged delinquent
debts, but denied any intentional omission of her delinquent debts. She provided no
explanations for her denials.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 39-year-old customer service professional for a health
management group who seeks eligibility to hold a public trust position. The allegations
covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material
findings. (GE 1; Tr. 24) Additional findings follow.
3
Background
                                  
Applicant married in May 2000 and separated from her husband in December
2000. (GE 1) She has one adult child from a prior relationship. (GE 1) Applicant
attended college classes between 2005 and 2009 but earned no degree or diploma.
(GEs 1 and 3) She claimed no military service. 
Applicant accepted employment with her current employer in August 2011. (GEs
1 and 3) She was unemployed for a short period between July 2011 and August 2011.
(GEs 1 and 3) Between February 2008 and June 2011, she worked as a customer
service professional for a national insurance carrier. (GEs 1and 3)
Finances
Applicant took out five individual student loans from Sallie Mae in August 2005
and October 2006. (GE 3) Her five loans totaled $17,500. When Applicant defaulted on
three of the loans in July 2009, her lender transferred the loans to the DOE in March
2013. (GEs 2-3) The three transferred Sallie Mae loans totaled $9,752 and remain in
default with no documented payment action on the loans. (GE 3)
Besides her defaulted Sallie Mae student loans, Applicant defaulted on state
student loans with creditors 1.d ($4,136) and creditor 1.e ($1,676) in 2013. The reported
balances on these loans represent amounts still owing after enforced garnishment of
Applicant’s wages to cover portions of the defaulted loans. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 26-27)
Applicant has not addressed this defaulted student loan, and the reported balance
remains the same.
Other delinquent debts accumulated by Applicant between 2009 and 2012 that
remain outstanding are comprised of the following: creditors 1.c ($4,242); 1.g ($2,189);
1.h ($148); 1.i ($90); and 1.j ($60). Applicant’s creditor 1.c account was opened in April
2009 with a high credit of $15,124 for an automobile purchase and was charged off in
October 2012 with a balance owing of $4,062. (GE 2; Tr. 28-30) Applicant has not since
addressed this debt. (Tr. 30-31, 47)
Applicant defaulted on her creditor 1.g furniture debt in August 2014 with a
balance owing of $2,189. (Tr. 28-30) Credit reports reveal that Applicant defaulted on
her creditor 1.i utility account she has held since 2004. (GE 2; Tr. 31-32) Applicant has
not addressed this debt in recent years. So, too, Applicant’s individual account with
creditor 1.j reflects a default in 2013 with no documented actions by Applicant to address
this debt in several years. (GEs 2-3) 
In 2009, Applicant was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) that has affected
her energy levels. (Tr. 35) Her experiences in working two full time jobs for over ten
years came to an end in 2014 after she became sick with MS. (Tr. 35-36) She currently
nets $1,800  a month and receives child support of $500 a month to provide for the care
of her youngest daughter.  (Tr. 36-37) She has $500 in her checking account and very
4
little in her 401(k) retirement account. (Tr. 37) She estimated her monthly expenses to
be around $700, which leaves her with a monthly remainder of about $1,000. (Tr.  7-41) 
Applicant assured that her finances have improved. (Tr. 42) However, she has not
pursued credit counseling, developed a budget, or established a plan to address her
SOR debts, either through debt consolidation or through working with her individual
creditors. (Tr. 42-43) After the hearing, she expected to look into her student loans and
set up payment plans. Afforded a post-hearing opportunity to do so, Applicant did not
supplement the record 
Applicant’s e-Qip omissions   
Asked to complete an e-QIP in July 2014, Applicant answered “no” to the questions
in section 26 inquiring of whether in the past seven years she had any debts in collection,
charged, or been or currently are 120 delinquent. (GE 1) Applicant denied intentionally
omitting these debts from her e-QIP. She claimed that when she returned from a break to
complete her e-QIP, she accidentally omitted her delinquent debts, and has no
explanation of why she did so. (Tr. 19-21, 50-51) 
When interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in
October 2014, Applicant acknowledged her delinquent debts voluntarily without being
confronted by the agent. (GE 3) Considering all of the circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s e-QIP’s omissions, her denials of intentional falsification, and her ensuing
voluntary corrections when interviewed by an OPM agent several months later, no
inferences of falsification are warranted on this record.  
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf.
Nor did she provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
{privacy] information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
trustworthiness concern [public trust position] and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate [trustworthiness
concerns].” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
5
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. . .  AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
6
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect
privacy information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Executive Order 10865 that all
trustworthiness determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the
applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility.
“[T]rustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent student loan and consumer debts over a period of several years that she
failed to address in material ways. Applicant’s recurrent problems with managing her
finances over a period of years since 2011 while fully employed reflect lapses of
judgment in administering her financial responsibilities. Trustworthiness concerns are
also raised with respect to the omissions of her then delinquent debts in the e-QIP
she completed in July 2014. 
Financial concerns
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulated debts covered
in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence,
§ 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts are fully
7
documented in her credit reports. Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s
insufficiently explained delinquent debts and her failure to demonstrate she acted
responsibly in addressing all of her listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App.
Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive
positions.” See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, ¶ ¶ C3 1.2.
1.1.7 and C3 1.2.3 (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation).  Holding a public trust
position involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the
expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the trust position. While the
principal concern of a trustworthiness position holder’s demonstrated financial
difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are
explicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.  Although ADP I and ADP II positions
are not expressly covered by E.O. 10865 or the Directive, which apply to contractor
personnel, historically, the same principles covering these positions have been
applied in Regulation 5220.2 governing military and civilian personnel. The definitions
used in the Regulation to define ADP I and ADP II positions have equal applicability to
contractors covered by the Directive.
While some extenuating circumstances can be inferred from Applicant’s listed
period of unemployment in 2014, too little information is documented about her
student loans and other debts to credit her with more than partial extenuating
circumstances. Further, Applicant provided no documented follow-up to her
expressed commitments to (a) pursue debt consolidation and (b) work with her
student loan creditors in exploring the availability of forbearance or other payment
arrangements to restore her student loan accounts to current status. Considering the
available documented evidence, extenuating circumstances in this record are quite
limited. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly.” 
Applicant’s payment efforts also lack payment proof. Without documentation of
payment efforts, financial counseling, and more specific steps Applicant is taking to
address her outstanding debts, little mitigation credit is  available to her. Based on the
documented evidence in the record, none of the remaining mitigation conditions apply
to Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her failure to employ more concerted actions to resolve
her delinquent debts. Resolution of her listed delinquent accounts is a critical
prerequisite to her regaining control of her finances. Applicant failed to provide more
specific explanatory material for consideration. 
8
Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in
making a whole-person assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not
provided. Overall, public trust eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable her to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome trust concerns arising out of
her lapses in judgment associated with her accumulation of delinquent student loan
and consumer debts for which she bears legal responsibility. Each of these debts
remains outstanding with no developed payment plan for resolving the debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s lack of more specific explanations for her debt accruals and evidence of
payments made on her listed debts, it is still too soon to make safe predictive
judgments about her ability to resolve her outstanding debts. Applicant fails to mitigate
trust concerns related to her outstanding debt delinquencies and associated judgment
lapses. More time is needed to facilitate Applicant’s documenting the necessary
progress with her debts to enable conclusions that her finances are sufficiently
stabilized to grant her eligibility to hold a public trust position. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j.  
Personal Conduct concerns
Trustworthiness concerns are raised as well over Applicant’s failure to list her
known delinquent debts in her 2014 security clearance application (i.e., creditors 1.a-
1.j). Such concerns are raised when an applicant has committed conduct that reflects
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations. 
Looking at the developed facts and circumstances in this case, Applicant
demonstrated by her testimony and voluntary disclosures of her delinquent debts in
her October 2014 OPM interview that her omissions were inadvertent and manifested
no deliberate intention to falsify her e-QIP. Based upon her manifest inadvertence in
omitting her delinquent debts from her 2014 e-QIP and demonstrated overall honesty
in her hearing testimony, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b of Guideline H.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.j:                Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):              FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 2.a:      For Applicant
9
Conclusions
                                                                    
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
