 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01865 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement security concerns.  Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
June 19, 2014. On September 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 26, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
16, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 14, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant and a character witness testified at the hearing. The record was 
held open to permit Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He submitted 
AE E, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on September 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from approximately 2009 to 2013; 
purchased marijuana from 2011 to 2013; was cited and convicted of possession of 
marijuana in 2012; and use of methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (also known as 
MDMA or “molly”) in 2013. He admitted the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old associate engineer for a defense contractor. He has 
been employed in this position since June 2014. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
electrical and computer engineering in 2014. He is unmarried. He is applying for his first 
security clearance, and listed his past drug involvement in his SCA. 
 
 Applicant first began using marijuana while in high school. He described his use 
in mid-2009 as experimental, then it became recreational in late 2009 to early 2010, and  
habitual from early 2010 to mid-2011. From mid-2011 to the end of 2013, he reduced 
his use to occasional use with friends at events. In December 2011, Applicant was cited 
for possession of marijuana in his college dorm room. He pleaded guilty, was fined and 
attended a drug and alcohol seminar sponsored by his college. Applicant regularly 
purchased marijuana for himself and to use with friends, and on two occasions, used 
“molly” in August 2013. He stopped all illegal drug use in December 2013. Since 2013, 
he improved his grades to achieve a final semester grade point average of 4.0. 
Applicant believes that from the age of 20, he began to mature and eventually learned 
to resist peer pressure to use drugs so that he could pursue a healthy lifestyle and a 
stable career.  
 
 Since graduating from college in 2014, Applicant moved to his parents’ home in a 
different city from his college, and pursued a career with his current employer. He has 
changed his environment by living a healthy lifestyle, ceasing contact with his college 
friends that use drugs, and focusing on his career. He submitted a signed statement of 
intent to refrain from illegal drug use with the understanding that he could receive an 
automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation, and has agreed in writing to 
strictly abide by his employer’s drug and alcohol-free work place policy. 
 
  Applicant’s immediate manager, a retired U.S. Air Force senior officer, testified 
on his behalf and submitted a character letter. He spoke very highly of Applicant’s work 
 
3 
 
ethic, trustworthiness, honesty and reliability. Likewise, a senior member of the 
engineering staff observed Applicant’s adherence to security rules and solid character, 
and highly recommends him for a clearance. Finally, a personal reference submitted 
from a college professor and dean observed Applicant’s maturity since college, and 
attested to his current healthy lifestyle and commitment to a drug-free life. I found 
Applicant to be candid and sincere in his testimony about his past drug use and current 
lifestyle without the use of illegal drugs. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.3 In Department of Navy v. Egan4, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of 
proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.6 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ Drugs are 
defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, 
stimulants, and hallucinogens).  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  
Based on the evidence, I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse,7 and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant has a history of illegal drug use and drug purchases from 2009 to 
2013. He was also cited for possession of marijuana in his college dorm. AG ¶¶ 25(a) 
and (c) apply. 
                                                     
6 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
7 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
5 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his past drug involvement, all while in school. Since 
2013, he has abstained from all use of illegal drugs, changed his environment, 
disassociated from his friends that use drugs, signed a statement of intent, and 
immersed himself in his career, with excellent results. He has won the support of his 
colleagues and senior management, and has shown a renewed healthy lifestyle, free 
from illegal drug use. I was impressed by Applicant’s candor and sincerity expressed 
during his testimony, and his clear intent to leave his past drug use behind. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to his eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the substantive security 
concerns. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
 
6 
 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated the evidence, my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline H in this whole-person analysis. 
 
 Overall, Applicant has acknowledged his past drug involvement and has shown 
that he no longer finds a lifestyle involving drug use compatible with his values and 
career goals. He has immersed himself in his work, changed his environment, and won 
the praise of his colleague and manager. I am convinced of Applicant’s sincerity in his 
promise to abstain from all future use of illegal drugs. Based on the record, Applicant’s 
history of drug involvement no longer casts doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
