 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03057 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that she has a track record of financial 
responsibility and that her financial problems are under control. She failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 22, 2014. After 
reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On November 11, 2015, the DOD issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on February 16, 2016, and requested a 
decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 22, 
2016, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated March 24, 2016. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 30, 2016. She was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the 
concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM and submitted no additional evidence, 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
objections, or material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. The case 
was assigned to me on November 29, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged a charged-off bank account in the amount of $79,352. In her 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation and stated: “Charged off. Not 
seeking collection.” SOR ¶ 1.b. alleged a bank account in collection for about $11,027. 
Applicant admitted the allegation and stated: “Husband was making payments. Creditor 
stopped collecting for unknown reason.” SOR ¶ 1.c. alleged a bank account in collection 
for about $11,283. Applicant admitted the allegation. SOR ¶ 1.d. alleged a delinquent 
account to a telephone service provider for about $37. Applicant denied the allegation 
and claimed it was recently paid. She submitted no documentary evidence to support her 
claim. SOR ¶ 1.e. alleged a foreclosed mortgage. Applicant admitted this allegation and 
stated: “Mortgage foreclosed years ago.” 
 
Applicant’s SOR admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old electronics technician working for a federal contractor. 
She graduated from high school in 1987, and disclosed no further education or training. 
Applicant married her spouse in 2000, and they have a 15-year-old daughter. This is her 
first SCA.  
 
Applicant disclosed in her 2014 SCA that she worked full-time for two federal 
contractors from June 1998 to July 2012, when she was laid off due to a reduction on the 
workforce. She was unemployed from July 2012 until October 2013 (15 months), when 
she was hired by a private company. She worked for the private company from October 
2013 to June 2014, when she was hired by her current employer, a federal contractor. 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2014 SCA asked her to disclose 
whether in the past seven years she had financial problems. She disclosed that in 2008 
she had her home mortgage foreclosed ($380,000). She indicated that the bank 
repossessed the home and sold it. Applicant also disclosed that in about 2012, she and 
her husband returned a 2005 Mercedes to the dealership because the car was too 
expensive to maintain. She claimed the car payments were made from her husband’s 
bank account, and they continued making payments after the car was returned to the 
dealer. Applicant failed to disclose any other delinquent debts.  
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the five 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations 
and the three credit reports in evidence establish all the debts in the SOR.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence about her circumstances when she acquired the 
accounts alleged in the SOR, or about what efforts she took to stay in contact with her 
creditors and resolve her delinquent accounts. I note that the 2014 SCA indicated 
Applicant was laid off from her job during a period of 15 months. However, she has been 
 
3 
                                         
 
employed since October 2013, and she provided no information concerning her efforts to 
resolve or pay her SOR debts since.  
 
In her SOR response, Applicant claimed that she had paid one account and that 
her husband was making some payments on the car loan after it was returned. Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence to support her claims.  
 
Applicant presented no evidence to show that she has been in contact with her 
creditors, or that she has attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve her delinquent 
debts since they became delinquent. I note, however, that the FORM credit reports 
(submitted by the Government) show that Applicant has paid some accounts not alleged 
in the SOR and has other accounts in good standing.  
 
Applicant provided no information about her current financial position. She did not 
provide any information about her salary, monthly expenses, and whether her current 
income is sufficient to pay her living expenses and debts. There is no information to 
indicate whether she recently participated in financial counseling or whether she follows 
a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
 
4 
                                         
 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in her credit reports and 
her SOR response. The evidence establishes the five delinquent accounts alleged in the 
SOR, totaling over $100,000.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
5 
                                         
 
 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and she presented insufficient evidence to show that her 
financial problems are under control, and that her debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant’s finances may have been adversely affected by circumstances beyond 
her control – her 15-month period of unemployment. Notwithstanding, she presented little 
evidence to show what efforts she took since October 2013 to remain in contact with her 
creditors, or what efforts she has taken to pay or resolve her delinquent debts. Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence of payment agreements or payments made on any 
of the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant presented little evidence of efforts to address 
her delinquent accounts. Nor did she present evidence of lifestyle changes, a working 
budget, or that she sought financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant was allowed a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce 
evidence in extenuation and mitigation; however, she failed to provide a reasonable 
explanation for her failure to address her delinquent debts since she acquired them. 
Applicant also failed to establish that she has sufficient income to keep her debts in 
current status and to continue making progress paying her delinquent debts.  
 
6 
                                         
 
 In sum, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). She presented insufficient 
evidence to show that she initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve her debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
federal contractors since 1998 to present, except for a 15-month period of unemployment. 
Her financial problems could have been caused, in part, by circumstances beyond her 
control. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant submitted little evidence of payments to the SOR 
creditors or of efforts to resolve her debts. There is insufficient evidence of progress 
addressing Applicant’s financial problems. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that she does not have a current financial problem, or that her 
financial problems are being resolved, or are under control. Applicant failed to establish 
that she has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that 
granting a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision 
should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the 
state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in the future. With 
more effort towards resolving her past-due debts, and a track record of behavior 
consistent with her obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence 
of her worthiness for access to classified information.  
 
For the above stated reasons, I find that the financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant  
 
 
7 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
