 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-03438 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns raised by his foreign 
connections and contacts, principally consisting of foreign relatives residing in Hong 
Kong. However, he did not mitigate security concerns raised by his marijuana use while 
holding a security clearance and his dishonesty about his past drug use during the 
security clearance process. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On December 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his conduct and circumstances raised security concerns under the personal conduct 
and foreign influence guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
to establish his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 8, 2016, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held.2 
Applicant chose to testify, and Exhibits 1 – 9 and A – E were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel submitted a request for administrative notice 
post-hearing, which was marked Exhibit 10 and admitted into the administrative record 
over Applicant’s objection. Applicant timely submitted a reply to the Government’s 
request for administrative notice, which was marked Exhibit F and admitted into the 
administrative record without objection. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received 
on June 16, 2016, and the record closed on July 11, 2016.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was born in the United States. He attended and graduated from top 
U.S. universities. He earned in succession: a bachelor’s degree in physics, a master’s 
degree in applied mathematics, and a Ph.D. in physics. After attaining his doctorate, 
Applicant was hired by his current employer. He was first granted a security clearance 
in 2011. (Tr. 12-14; Exhibit F) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant admits he used marijuana in approximately November 2011, shortly 
after receiving a security clearance. He further admits that he knew his illegal drug use 
was against his employer’s workplace policy and contrary to rules for clearance holders. 
The same evening that he used marijuana, Applicant was involved in a minor car 
accident (fender bender) after consuming alcohol. He left the scene of the accident 
without reporting it. Applicant notes that his consumption of alcohol contributed to his 
poor decision to use marijuana. Applicant promises not to engage in similar conduct in 
the future. He has not had a drug screen in the past five years. (Tr. 15-17, 31, 34-37, 
58; Answer; Exhibit 1 at 78-79; Exhibit 4; Exhibit 8) 
 
 In April 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) 
requesting a higher-level clearance to perform contract work for another government 
agency (AGA). In response to a question asking if he had used any illegal drugs, 
including marijuana, in the past seven years or while holding a security clearance, 
Applicant responded “no.” (Exhibit 2 at 22, Tr. 37)4  
 
                                                          
2 Correspondence with the parties, notice of hearing, and case management order (CMO) were marked 
and are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 Department Counsel did not provide Exhibit 10 in advance of the hearing due to numerous issues 
beyond his control. Applicant objected to the admission of Exhibit 10, essentially raising a claim of 
collateral estoppel. I overruled the objection, and further found that Department Counsel’s failure to 
comply with the CMO and Directive, Enclosure 3, E.3.1.13, was not in bad faith and excused the late 
disclosure and production of Exhibit 10. (Tr. 6-8, 19-20.) I left the record open to provide Applicant an 
opportunity to review and submit matters in response to Exhibit 10, as well as provide any additional 
evidence. As noted, Applicant did submit post-hearing matters, which were admitted as Exhibit F. 
 
4 Exhibit 2 is of poor quality, but the pertinent questions and responses are legible. 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleges, in pertinent part, that: 
 
1.d. You falsified material facts on a [SCA], signed on April 25, 2012, in 
response to Section 12 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity “In the last 7 
years have you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, 
cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), . . .?” You 
answered “no” and deliberately omitted that you had used marijuana in at 
least November 2011.5 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted that he falsified his SCA by deliberating failing to 
disclose his marijuana use. Specifically, Applicant stated: 
 
1.d. I admit this statement fully. At the time of filling this out, I did not fully 
respect nor weigh the ramifications of my actions on the form. I panicked 
with regards to the November 2011 incident and wished to ignore it and 
not have it be a part of my life.6  
 
Applicant signed his Answer in January 2015, swearing that it was “true and 
correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.” (Answer) 
 
At hearing, Applicant backtracked on his sworn admission. He now claims that he 
negligently responded “no” to the illegal drug use question in his haste to complete the 
SCA. (Tr. 18-19, 37-38, 46-49, 61-66) Applicant’s hearing testimony is not credible.  
 
 After submitting the SCA, Applicant was interviewed on multiple occasions by 
agents for the AGA. In June 2012, during one of these interviews, Applicant lied about 
when his marijuana use occurred. He falsely claimed that it occurred in the summer of 
2010, before being granted a security clearance and beginning his employment as a 
federal contractor. He subsequently corrected the misinformation during a polygraph-
assisted interview. Applicant admits he “intentionally gave the wrong date” during the 
June 2012 interview, because he did not want to reveal that his illegal drug use 
occurred while holding a security clearance. (Tr. 38-45, 61; Exhibit 4 at 3; Exhibit 7 at 2) 
 
 During the June 2012 interview, Applicant admitted to purposefully submitting an 
incorrect income tax return to the IRS. Namely, he listed himself as head of household 
on his 2011 tax year income tax return and claimed his uncle as a dependent. Applicant 
explained that his submission of the false income tax return was, in part, caused by 
improper advice he received from a family member. He has hired a professional tax 
preparer and has submitted proper tax returns ever since. (Tr. 17-18, 45; Ex. 4 at 3)  
 
                                                          
5 Applicant’s falsification of the subsequent question asking if he had used any illegal drugs while holding 
a security clearance was not alleged. This additional matter is only being considered in assessing 
Applicant’s credibility, mitigation case, and whole-person factors. 
 
6 Answer (emphasis in original). 
 
4 
 
 
 In November 2012, the AGA denied Applicant’s request to upgrade his security 
clearance. The basis of the AGA’s denial was, in part, Applicant’s “dishonesty regarding 
his . . . illegal drug involvement was displayed multiple times through his security 
processing.” (Exhibit 4 at 6, Tr. 41; Exhibit 5) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s wife is originally from Hong Kong. She immigrated to the United 
States as a child and became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She earned an undergraduate 
degree from a top-tier U.S. university and works for a large financial services company 
in the United States. Her parents are naturalized U.S. citizens and reside in the United 
States. They do not own property in Hong Kong. Applicant listed his now wife and other 
foreign contacts on his initial SCA. He has freely discussed his foreign relatives and 
contacts during multiple background interviews over the years. 
 
Applicant has a number of relatives, notably, an aunt, uncle, and two cousins 
who are residents of Hong Kong and have British passports. These foreign relatives are 
listed as a security concern on the SOR. At least three of these foreign family members 
are either permanent residents of the United States or naturalized U.S. citizens. 
Applicant has infrequent contact with these foreign relatives. He listed them on his SCA, 
as well as a bank account he previously held while employed as a summer intern at the 
Hong Kong office of a large U.S.-based financial services company over 10 years ago.  
 
The SOR also lists a “family friend” who is a citizen and resident of China as a 
security concern. Applicant disclosed this person on a recent SCA and explained that 
she is a “childhood friend” of his mother. He only has contact with this person when he 
visits China. The record evidence reflects that he last visited China over four years ago.  
 
Applicant’s foreign relatives and other contacts do not have any known 
connection to any foreign government, military, or intelligence service. Applicant does 
not discuss his work with these foreign persons. He does not have any foreign assets, 
property, or business ties. He has received at least one job offer from China, but turned 
it down as he was not interested in the job “nor living in China.” He owns a home in the 
United States and has other significant ties to the United States. (Tr. 15, 20-31, 49-55, 
59-61; Exhibit 1 at 35-44, 73; Exhibit 3 at 19-20, 30; Exhibit 4; Exhibit 9)  
 
In his Answer, Applicant states the following regarding his foreign relatives: 
 
To be clear with regards to this section, with the exception of my wife, I did 
not even really know the complete status of all my family members listed 
above until I did a bit more digging about their personal information.  
 
Applicant made a written statement in June 2013, stating, in pertinent part, that:  
 
I have traveled to China and Hong Kong a lot and have people that I care 
for in these places. I am also very fond and proud of my Chinese heritage 
 
5 
 
 
. . . . My loyalties lie with Americans and American government but I do 
hold a place in my heart for Chinese people and Chinese culture. I have 
no allegiance to Chinese government. (Exhibit 7 at 3)  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of letters from longtime friends, co-workers, 
supervisors, and a company security official. These reference letters collectively provide 
a favorable opinion regarding Applicant’s character and each of the individuals who 
submitted a letter supports Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Applicant’s 
papers have been published in peer-reviewed publications. He has been promoted by 
his employer to a managerial position since the November 2011 drug use incident, and 
received awards for his achievements. He volunteers his time in support of charitable 
events. (Tr. 57-59; Exhibits A – F)  
 
Administrative Notice (Hong Kong and China) 
 
Administrative notice may be taken of uncontroverted facts regarding a foreign 
country set forth in reliable and relevant U.S. Government reports. Additionally, the 
official position of relevant federal agencies or the pertinent statements of key U.S. 
Government officials may be appropriate for administrative notice. Generally, the party 
requesting administrative notice must provide the source document, either the full 
document or relevant portion, to allow an administrative judge to assess the reliability, 
accuracy, and relevancy of any matter requested for administrative notice.7 After 
reviewing Department Counsel’s request, to include the source documents cited therein, 
the following pertinent facts regarding Hong Kong and China are noted:8 
 
From 1842 to June 30, 1997, Hong Kong was a British colony. Those born in 
Hong Kong during this time were considered British subjects. On July 1, 1997, Hong 
Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of the 
People’s Republic of China (China or PRC). As an SAR, Hong Kong maintains some 
autonomy from the PRC, which the United States supports under the “one country, two 
systems” framework. However, the PRC maintains authority on foreign relations and 
national defense. The PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party. The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses 
political dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007). See also, Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.19 (the Federal Rules of Evidence (F.R.E.) shall serve as 
a guide in DOHA proceedings and technical rules of evidence may be relaxed to permit the development 
of a full and complete record); F.R.E. 201; F.R.E. 1006. 
 
8 Applicant objected to certain portions of the Government’s administrative notice request, namely, Justice 
Department press releases regarding “actual or attempted espionage and/or illegal export of sensitive 
technology to China.” Exhibit 10 at 6-7, 11-12. Applicant concedes that “[t]he press releases were 
presented apparently to substantiate that the PRC actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and 
proprietary information, and, therefore, Applicant’s relationships with his family members and extended 
family members in the PRC” raise a security concern. Exhibit F at 1. Applicant’s objection is overruled. 
However, I have afforded these matters the appropriate weight in light of official U.S. government reports 
“describing in broader terms the political and intelligence profile, or the human rights record, of [the PRC]” 
that were admitted into the record. ISCR Case No. 04-11571 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2007). 
 
6 
 
 
confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. The PRC actively engages in acts 
of espionage against the United States. The U.S. State Department warns visitors to 
China that they may be placed under surveillance. Hotel rooms, offices, cars, taxis, 
internet usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely, and personal 
possessions in hotel rooms, including computers, may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, 
an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations 
and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has 
held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 An individual who is granted access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern, and the following were raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a):  deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . .  or similar form used 
to conduct investigations . . . determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
AG ¶ 16(b):  deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
AG ¶ 16(c):  credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that . . . when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(f):  violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
Falsifications 
 
 The SOR alleges at 1.a and 1.d that Applicant provided false and misleading 
information on his 2012 SCA and during an interview by an AGA agent regarding his 
past illegal drug use. The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of 
all applicants. It begins with the answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout 
the security clearance process. The omission of material, adverse information standing 
alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified his or her SCA. 
An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the information requested, 
inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the 
 
8 
 
 
information did not need to be reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts 
and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.9 
 
 Applicant falsified his SCA when he deliberately omitted the negative information 
about his November 2011 marijuana use. I did not find his hearing testimony, in which 
he claimed that his failure to reveal the information was a mistake brought on by faulty 
memory, to be credible. Applicant’s marijuana use occurred just five months before he 
submitted the April 2012 SCA. Additionally, the use occurred under unique 
circumstances. Notably, Applicant was involved in a car accident earlier in the evening 
while under the influence of alcohol – an accident he did not to report to the authorities 
or the owner of the other car. Thus, this experience would have been memorable and, 
even in haste, would not have been something Applicant easily forgot.10  
 
 Furthermore, even if Applicant had tried to forget or put aside the events of that 
evening, the very next question on the 2012 SCA should have oriented him to his 
potential disqualifying conduct. The question specifically asked Applicant whether he 
had used any illegal drugs, to include marijuana, while holding a security clearance. The 
security significance of his conduct would not have been lost on Applicant. It was clearly 
apparent to Applicant just a few months later when he was being interviewed by the 
AGA and he lied to hide the fact that his drug use occurred while holding a clearance.  
 
 After considering all the evidence, to include Applicant’s age, education, and the 
straightforward nature of the question involved, as well as his demeanor at hearing, I 
find that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA as alleged in SOR 1.d. I further find that 
Applicant intentionally provided false and misleading information about his past drug 
use during his June 2012 AGA interview. Accordingly, the falsification allegations, SOR 
1.a and 1.d, were established. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) fully apply.  
 
 Guideline E lists a number of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could potentially 
mitigate the personal conduct security concern. I have considered all the mitigating 
condition and do not find any apply to Applicant’s dishonesty during the security 
clearance process. Applicant has yet to take full responsibility for his dishonesty. He 
only revealed the adverse information about his past drug use under the pressure of an 
impending polygraph examination. He continues to provide false and misleading 
information about his past drug use. Overall, unresolved doubts about Applicant’s 
honesty and reliability remain.  
 
                                                          
9 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
10 Tr. at 18-19 (Question: “Why did you answer no on the drug question on the SF-86, or the e-QIP, when 
they asked about any prior marijuana use?” Answer: “So that was one of these things where in my haste 
to get the application out I basically was using a lot of the same answers that I had when I was applying 
from the previous secret clearance.  I -- you know, in my mind, that one night was so something that I 
was -- not something that stuck with me and I did not have it active in my mind. Upon filling out the form, I 
neglected to put it on.”) 
 
9 
 
 
Illegal drug use while holding a clearance and other past questionable conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges at 1.b and 1.c Applicant’s car accident while under the 
influence of alcohol in November 2011 and submission of a false federal income tax 
return in approximately April 2012. Both allegations are established through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence admitted at hearing. AG ¶ 16(c) applies to these 
allegations. This conduct is mitigated by the passage of time. AG ¶ 17(c). 
 
 On the other hand, Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden of proof and 
persuasion to mitigate the serious security concerns raised by his past use of marijuana 
while holding a security clearance. Although the drug use occurred some five years ago, 
Applicant’s dishonesty about his past drug use during the 2012 security clearance 
process, coupled with his implausible hearing testimony, undercut the mitigating value 
of the passage of time and other favorable record evidence. Specifically, I find that AG 
¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) apply and, although AG ¶ 17(c) has some applicability, it is 
insufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by Applicant’s past illegal drug use 
while holding a security clearance.11  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because s/he has connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing a 
person’s vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must take into 
account the foreign government involved; the intelligence-gathering history of that 
government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.12 A person 
with connections and contacts in a foreign country, such as China, faces a very heavy 
burden of persuasion due to the significant security concerns raised by such 
circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 14-03522 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2016) (three decades of holding a security clearance 
without issue did not mitigate concerns raised by five-year old marijuana use for the treatment of a 
serious medical condition); ISCR Case No. 14-02203 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2015) (passage of five years 
since applicant last used marijuana did not mitigate concerns raised by use while holding a clearance); 
ISCR Case No. 14-01551 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2014) (denial sustained where applicant’s puff from a 
marijuana cigarette occurred while holding a clearance); ISCR Case No. 13-01281 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2014) (personal conduct concerns not mitigated because drug use occurred while holding a clearance). 
  
12 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge 
must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
10 
 
 
Based on the record evidence, Applicant’s connections to his wife, in-laws, and 
mother’s childhood friend, as alleged in SOR 1.d – 1.f, do not raise a foreign influence 
security concern. However, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Hong Kong, 
coupled with the facts administratively noticed regarding the PRC, raise the foreign 
influence security concern and the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to Applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15). The adjudicative guidelines set forth a number of potential conditions that may 
mitigate the foreign influence security concern. I have considered all the applicable 
mitigating conditions, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts . . . from a foreign 
country. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant’s contact with the listed foreign relatives is infrequent. His relationship 
to these foreign relatives is not strong. In reaching this conclusion I considered 
Applicant’s 2013 affidavit, wherein he declares that he cares for his foreign relatives.13 I 
also considered that in responding to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he barely knew 
his foreign relatives and could not answer even basic biographical information about 
them without conducting further research. However, in light of the matters accepted for 
administrative notice, even these relatively weak foreign connections could be a source 
of foreign influence. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have only limited applicability.  
 
 Applicant disclosed his foreign connections and contacts beginning with his initial 
SCA in 2012. He fully discussed these connections and contacts over the years with 
government investigators. However, in light of the matters accepted for administrative 
notice regarding the PRC’s espionage efforts targeting the United States, AG ¶ 8(e) has 
limited applicability. Cf. ISCR Case No. 13-01341 (App. Bd. Nov. 10, 2014). 
 
 Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the United States. His immediate 
family members are U.S. citizens, living in the United States. His entire professional 
career has been in the employ of a single U.S. Government contractor. He chose this 
employment over multiple lucrative job offers, including rejecting a job offer from China. 
Furthermore, in the last several years, he has established his own significant ties to the 
United States that are separate and apart from his parents and the rest of his immediate 
family members in the United States. Notably, he is married to a U.S. citizen, holds a 
managerial position at his job, and owns a home in the United States. He has also 
established close relationships with coworkers and others in his community. AG ¶ 8(b) 
fully applies. After weighing the favorable and unfavorable evidence, including the 
whole-person factors, I find that Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security 
concern.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s educational and professional 
accomplishments, volunteer efforts for charitable causes, and favorable character 
references. However, this and the other favorable record evidence are insufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by his conduct, notably, his use of an illegal drug 
while holding a clearance and his dishonesty about his past drug use during the security 
clearance process. The Appeal Board has held that such dishonesty “strikes at the 
                                                          
13 After reviewing the statement in the context of the entire record, I do not find it is a statement declaring 
a preference for any foreign country over the United States. Instead, it is a benign statement by a first 
generation American expressing his affection for his extended family overseas and his heritage.   
 
12 
 
 
heart of the security clearance process.”14 Furthermore, the Directive specifically states 
that failure to provide truthful responses on an SCA or during security processing “will 
normally result in an unfavorable clearance action.” AG ¶ 15. Applicant’s favorable 
evidence is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by his personal conduct. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for 
continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:        For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.f:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011). 
