 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01583 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline J, 
criminal conduct and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 28, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct and Guideline E, personal conduct. DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2016, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 20, 2016, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on August 23, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but 
did not offer any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 31, 2016. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Upon motion by Department Counsel, I amended the SOR by cross-alleging 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g, and 1.i – 1.r as allegations under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The 
amended allegations are numbered SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.g, and 2.i – 2.r. Applicant did not 
object to the amendment and the motion was granted.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations (with explanations) in the 
SOR, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.j, 1.q, 2.f, 2.j, and 2.q. The admissions are adopted as 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, transcript, and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is divorced, but now engaged and has two children. 
His fiancée is expecting. Since March 2014, he has worked for a defense contractor as 
a technician. He has an associate’s degree. He has no military background and has 
never held a security clearance.2   
 
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR and the amended SOR includes:  
 
(1) in June 2001 arrested and charged with battery and disorderly conduct;  
(2) in June 2002 arrested and charged with battery, disorderly conduct, and 
obstruction;  
(3) in November 2002 arrested and charged with burglary, criminal damage, and 
theft; 
(4) in June 2003 arrested and charged with aggravated assault and disorderly 
conduct; 
(5) in April 2004 arrested and charged with disorderly conduct; 
(6) in August 2004 arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) 
and purchasing liquor as a minor; 
(7) in April 2005 arrested and charged with DUI, fleeing, driving on a suspended 
license, and reckless driving; 
(8) in December 2005 fired from job because of excessive absences; 
                                                          
1 Tr. 10-13. 
 
2 Tr. 73-74; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
(9) in May 2006 arrested and charged with making a false report and liquor law 
violation; 
(10) in August 2006 arrested and charged with license suspension and 
possession of controlled substance; 
 (11) in August 2006 arrested and charged with DUI and marijuana possession; 
(12) in March 2011 arrested and charged with open alcoholic container;  
(13) in August 2011 arrested and charged with disorderly conduct; 
(14) in November 2011 arrested and charged with domestic violence; 
(15) in March 2012 arrested and charged with felony assault and false reporting; 
(16) in October 2012 arrested and charged with DUI; 
(17) in December 2012 arrested and charged with DUI (duplication with (16) 
above); 
(18) in July 2015 arrested and charged with interference with law enforcement, 
open container, and speeding. 
  
 Applicant explained that he grew up in a small town with very little to do but drink 
alcohol and get into trouble. All the conduct recited above in (1) through (7) fell into that 
category. During his short marriage from 2011 to 2012, he drank heavily and this 
resulted in disputes with his ex-wife where law enforcement was called and charges 
were filed against Applicant. These charges were either dismissed or reduced to lesser 
charges. He was found not guilty of the October 2012 charges by a jury. The July 2015 
charges happened when his cousin used his truck to evade the police and Applicant 
was charged because of the incident. The charges were dropped after Applicant agreed 
to make a charitable donation.3 
 
 Applicant stopped drinking alcohol and spends time with his family. He has not 
been on probation since 2013. He is working on his bachelor’s degree. Applicant 
admitted his wrongdoing, but believes he has turned the corner and matured. Applicant 
listed all his criminal activity in his security clearance application. I found Applicant’s 
testimony credible.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
3 Tr. 27-29; 34, 36-38, 40, 42. 
 
4 Tr. 30-32. 
 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
5 
 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s numerous criminal charges meet both disqualifying conditions.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s has turned his life around and now finds importance in spending time 
with his family. He no longer drinks alcohol and his last conviction dates back to 2006. 
Given his turnaround of behavior, I find it is unlikely that future criminal behavior will 
recur. His recent behavior no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Under these circumstances, his last criminal act is sufficiently 
attenuated after considering his behavior in its totality. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
6 
 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
Applicant’s firing from a job falls under AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e). The remaining 
criminal acts meet the conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e).  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s job firing was minor and occurred 11 years ago. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
He has turned his life around and now finds importance in spending time with his family. 
He no longer drinks alcohol and his last conviction dates back to 2006. Given his 
turnaround of behavior, I find it is unlikely that future criminal behavior will recur. His 
recent behavior no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Under these circumstances, his last criminal act is sufficiently attenuated 
after considering his behavior in its totality. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) apply.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s youth and 
immaturity at the time many of the criminal offenses occurred. I also considered that 
Applicant admitted all his criminal conduct in his security clearance application. 
Applicant cleaned up his act by stopping his alcohol consumption and focusing on his 
family. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the Guidelines. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.r:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   2.a - 2.g:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs   2.i - 2.r:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
