                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        -------------------------------------                  )   ISCR  Case No.  15-02765            
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his criminal conduct.
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of Case
On November 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (E.O. 10865), Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 22, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 17, 2016, and scheduled for hearing on August 5,
2
2016. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of one exhibit (GE 1). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B). The transcript (Tr.) was
received on August 16, 2016.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant was (a) charged with murder-intentionally causing
death, a felony-first degree- by a local police department in approximately July 1994; (b)
incarcerated from July 1994 to March 2013 as the result of his murder conviction; and (c)
conditionally paroled as a consequence of his conviction from approximately March 2013
to approximately July 2014.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He added
no explanations or claims. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old ship buddy of a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted are incorporated herein.
Additional findings will follow. 
Background
Applicant married in August 2002 while still in prison and has one child from this
marriage, age two. (GE 1; Tr. 39) He earned a GED diploma while in prison and claimed
no post-high school educational credits or military service.
Applicant has worked for his current employer since June 2014 and was recently
promoted to a position of ship buddy. (GE 1; Tr. 24) During his current employment, he
has received no reprimands or disciplinary actions. (Tr. 43) Following his release from
prison in March 2013, he worked for another firm for about nine months. (Tr. 42) Prior to
March 2013, he was unemployed while serving a 20-year prison term from July 1994 to
March 2013. (GE 1; Tr. 25) He has never held a security clearance. (GE 1) 
Criminal murder conviction and sentencing 
At the age of 17, Applicant and a friend were out drinking and consuming cocaine
at a local bar and became severely intoxicated. (Tr. 22, 28-30) Both he and his friend
became embroiled in an argument with a bar patron that carried over outside of the bar.
(Tr. 26-27 ) When the argument intensified, the patron pulled a knife on Applicant and his
friend. (Tr. 27) Applicant recalls the patron fleeing on foot and Applicant and his friend
giving chase in their vehicle. Applicant struck a fence while operating his vehicle and
caused severe injuries to the victim who reportedly died at the local hospital where he
was taken. (Tr. 27-30) Applicant and his friend left the scene of the incident without
checking on the victim and returned to his home. (Tr. 28)
3
Applicant pled guilty in court to murder in the first degree and was sentenced to 20
years of incarceration. (GE 1; Tr. 30-31)  During his term of incarceration, prison officials
moved Applicant several times to different prisons in response to prison fights that
involved  Applicant. (Tr. 32-33) He served his full sentence (i.e., July 1994 to March
2013). Applicant was released from prison in March 2013 and placed on supervised
parole. Before his release, he came up for parole in 2010, but was denied for insufficient
time in custody. (Tr. 36) In July 2014, he was released from his parole without any
continuing parole conditions. (GE 1; Tr. 37-38) 
Following his parole release, Applicant stayed with his parents for several months.
(Tr. 38) Since 1994, he has not consumed any alcohol or illegal drugs and has avoided
any other criminal incidents. He has been active in his church since his release from
prison and started a prison ministry in April 2015.  (Tr.  40-41) Applicant recognizes his
mistakes and credits himself with growth and maturity to the point where his major focus
today is working and supporting his family. (Tr. 22-23)
Character References
Applicant is well-regarded by his depot manager. (AE A) His depot manager
described Applicant as a valued employee. He credited Applicant with being a top tier
level producer who has been assigned leadership roles and and responded well.
Applicant exhibited exemplary skills in relaying safety procedures and job safety analyses
to keep his fellow co-workers informed of possible hazards. (AE A) His depot manager
recommended Applicant for future positions at other facilities, citing Applicant’s
consistency of performance, honesty, safety-oriented qualities, and demonstrated high
production levels. (AE A) 
Applicant’s pastor expressed a great deal of confidence in Applicant’s character.
He credited Applicant with being a faithful member and true leader of their church. (AE B)
His pastor was notably impressed with Applicant’s leadership qualities, citing Applicant’s
election to a church board member position as treasurer in 2014. (AE B; Tr. 44-45)
Applicant’s pastor found Applicant to be of good moral character. (AE B)
                      Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and any of the
"[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on
the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
4
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Criminal Conduct
           The Concern. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
    Sec. 3002(c) of this new Bond  Amendment  provision continues the requirement for disqualification, absent a1
meritorious waiver, for persons who were sentenced to and served imprisonment for more than a year. However, this
disqualification only applies to prevent clearances that would provide access to SAP, RD, or SCI. As none of these
highly restrictive programs are involved here, DC ¶ 31(f) has no application to the facts of Applicant’s case.
5
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately
or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  E. O. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s conviction for murder-intentionally
causing death, a felony-first degree offense, and his 20-year prison sentence. Under the
sentencing terms imposed by the state court, Applicant was incarcerated for 20 years
(i.e., from July 1994 to March 2013) and served over a year of parole (i.e,, March 2013 to
July 2014) before his release with no continuing parole obligations. 
Based on the developed record to date, one disqualifying condition (DC) of the
criminal conduct guideline (Guideline J) warrants application: DC ¶ 31(a), “a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” Potentially available to security clearance
cases falling under special access programs (SAP), restricted date (RD), and special
compartmented information (SCI) programs is DC ¶ 31(f), “conviction in a Federal or
State court, including a court-martial of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year and incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a
year.” Under Smith Amendment prohibitions (10 U.S.C. § 986), Applicant’s sentence and
prison time (20 years) served would have subjected him to the Amendment’s per se
clearance bar. But the Smith Amendment was repealed in January 2008 by the National
Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2008 and replaced by Sec. 3002 to 50 U.S.C. §
435b (the Bond Amendment), which applies throughout the Federal Government.  1
Applicant’s first degree murder conviction that resulted in a 20-year prison
sentence and two years of ensuing parole limits the availability of any of the mitigating
conditions covered by Guideline J. While Applicant’s criminal behavior occurred over 20
years ago and has not been repeated, the incident for which he was convicted and
sentenced to 20 years of incarceration involved such a serious offense, with prolonged
time in incarceration and parole, that mitigating conditions that assess the elapse of time
6
since the incident, circumstances surrounding the incident, and recurrence risks cannot
be considered and weighed in customary ways. Few analogies are available in DOHA
case history to draw any meaningful bright lines for guidance purposes. DOHA Case No.
96-0362, at 2-6 (App. Bd. Feb. 19. 1997) contains some factual similarities, but is mostly
distinguishable. In Case No. 96-0362, the applicant served 9 years of his sentence on a
murder conviction before being paroled in December 1989. (id.)  For the ensuing six
years following his parole, the applicant compiled an impressive record of rehabilitation
with college credits, marriage, raising his two step-sons, and excellent work performance
evaluations. (Id.) 
By contrast, Applicant completed a much longer prison sentence (20 years) and
was released from his parole just a little over two years ago. While his work and church
activities have produced some impressive recommendations from his depot manager and
pastor, his rehabilitation efforts are still relatively fresh and lack the track record
necessary to make safe predictions about his ability to avoid recurrent criminal offenses.
While Applicant has certainly shown progress in avoiding criminal activity and
associations with persons with histories of criminal activity, more time is needed to dispel
all reasonable doubts about his ability to avoid criminal conduct in the future. Other
mitigating conditions covered by Guideline J are not available to Applicant. 
Historically, the Appeal Board has emphasized the importance of a strong
rehabilitation program and a seasoned track record in mitigating serious criminal
offenses. See ISCR Case No. 95-0622 at 4-5 (App. Bd. April 18, 1997). Holding a security
clearance requires a high degree of trust and confidence in the person entrusted with
classified information. Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980) 
Criminal conduct that is very serious weighs heavily against reposing in an
applicant the trust and confidence required of persons granted access to classified
information. Applicant has met some of these requirements with an impressive post-
parole rehabilitative showing of marriage, church activity, and excellent work
performance. Because of the gravity of his murder offense, his time spent in
incarceration, and his ensuing 16 months of supervised parole, satisfaction of Appeal
Board requirements of public confidence and trust requires a much stronger showing of
reform and rehabilitation over a significant period of time before safe conclusions can be
made that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant an applicant a security
clearance. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has shown considerable growth and
maturity in the two-plus years since he has been released from supervised parole. He has
accepted personal responsibility in raising his two-year old son in a good-nurturing
environment and holds down a gainful job with many notable contributions to his
employer and church. He enjoys strong support from his depot manager and church
pastor. 
With due consideration to Applicant’s positive contributions following his parole
release in 2014, Applicant fails to overcome the judgment and trust questions raised by
7
his first degree murder conviction in 1994. His positive endorsements from his depot
manager and church pastor merit a good deal of praise and commendation, but are not
enough to overcome doubts about his recurrence risks and ability to sustain his current
stabilization efforts with his relatively short track record of rehabilitation since his prison
release. 
Taking into account both Applicant’s murder conviction, his time spent in
incarceration, and the recency of his release from supervised parole, the encouraging
probative evidence of his rehabilitation without parole reporting requirements, the
applicable guidelines, and a whole-person assessment of his avoidance of recurrent
incidents of criminal conduct in the two-plus years of his release from supervised parole,
conclusions are warranted that it is still too soon to conclude that Applicant is absolved of
any risks of recurrent criminal offenses. Concerns over his murder conviction and ensuing
20 years of incarceration are not mitigated. 
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact, conclusions,
and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate formal findings
with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT)    AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs: 1.a-1.c:                                       Against Applicant           
                    
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
8
