 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03976 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 13, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
11, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 2, and 4 through 7 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. The objection to GE 3 was sustained. Applicant testified, but 
he did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on October 3, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2006. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has 
held since about 2006. He has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 1999. He is 
divorced with no children.1 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related conduct. He was arrested in 1993 and 
charged with public intoxication. He stated that “the judge agreed that [he] was 
wrongfully arrested and the case was dismissed.” He was arrested again in 1994 and 
charged with public intoxication.2 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2004 and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) 
and obstructing highway passageway. He stated that he “had not been drinking heavily 
that evening, but refused the officer’s breathalyzer test and was therefore arrested.” He 
pleaded guilty to obstructing highway passageway.3 
 
Applicant was cited in 2005 with having an open container. He stated that he was 
the designated driver in a friend’s vehicle. The friend had the open container, but they 
both were cited. Applicant received a deferred adjudication.4 
 
Applicant was arrested in 2008 and charged with DWI and obstructing highway 
passageway. He stated that he “had not been drinking heavily that evening, but refused 
the officer’s breathalyzer test and was therefore arrested.” He pleaded guilty pursuant to 
a deferred adjudication to obstructing highway passageway. He was sentenced to a 
$400 fine, $268 in fees, and probation for a year.5 
 
Applicant was arrested in May 2010 and charged with DWI and obstructing 
highway passageway. He pleaded guilty to DWI. He was sentenced to a $750 fine, 
$383 in fees, 180 days in jail, and probation for a year. He was given the choice of 
confinement or paying the fine. He completed the terms of his probation.6 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 50; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 24-25; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6. 
 
4 Tr. at 30-32; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 17-19, 25-26, 33-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6. 
 
6 Tr. at 40-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant has not been arrested for anything since his 2010 arrest. He reported 
his arrests to his security officer, who reported them to the DOD via the Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System (JPAS). He is remorseful for his actions, and he stopped drinking 
alcohol about a year ago. He stated that he has gotten older and matured. He has a 
girlfriend with a young child, and he does not want to risk his career by abusing 
alcohol.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 16-17, 20-23, 47-48, 51-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 7. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant has several alcohol-related arrests. He drank alcohol to excess and to 
the point of intoxication. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable. 
 
 The evidence does not substantiate the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. 
Those allegations are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in May 2010, more than six years ago. 
He reported his arrests to his security officer, who reported them to the DOD via JPAS. 
He is remorseful for his actions, and he stopped drinking alcohol about a year ago. He 
has a girlfriend with a young child, and he does not want to risk his career by abusing 
alcohol.  
 
 I find that Applicant has established a pattern of abstinence and that 
uncontrolled drinking is unlikely to recur. His alcohol-related criminal activity no longer 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 
23(b) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant exhibited extremely poor judgment when he drove on three occasions 
after drinking. However, I am satisfied that he finally learned his lesson, and the conduct 
will not be repeated.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
