                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
         
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 15-01464
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 7, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On October 28, 2015, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive
5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 24, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On January 25, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on March 10, 2016. Applicant filed a
timely response, and the documents submitted have been entered into evidence without
1
objection as Items A through K.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
April 26, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access
to a sensitive position is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and Items A through K, and upon due consideration of
that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 56 years old. She has a Bachelor’s Degree and she is pursuing a
Master’s Degree. She has been employed as an Early Child Care Service manager
since 2012, and she seeks access to a sensitive position in connection with her
employment in the defense sector. (Items 2, 4.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 51 allegations (1.a. through 1.yy.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts totaling more than $38,000, under Adjudicative Guideline F.
All of the SOR debts will be discussed below:
According to Applicant’s post-FORM response, the following 40 allegations of
debts in the SOR have all been consolidated and are owed to one medical collection
service: 1.a., b., d., f., g., h., i., j., k., l., m., n., o., p., q., r., s., t., u., v., w., x., y., z., aa.,
bb., cc., dd., ee., ff., gg., hh., qq., rr., ss., tt., uu., vv., ww., and xx, totaling $14,837.
(Items A, B.) The evidence does not establish that this debt has been resolved or
reduced in any manner. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,569. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she is paying $25 a month
toward this debt. Item C confirms that she is to begin being billed in monthly payments
of $25. The evidence does not establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced in
any manner. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,608. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she has made a payment
plan for this debt. Item D confirms that she is to begin being billed in monthly payments
of $50.25 beginning on March 4, 2016, to July 21, 2017. Item E establishes that one
payment of $50.25 was made on March 7, 2016. The evidence does not establish that
this debt has been resolved or reduced beyond that one payment. 
1.ii. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in an unspecified amount. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote that she has been unable to
contact the creditor about this delinquent debt. 
1.jj. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in an unspecified amount. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she has made a payment
2
plan for this debt of $292.72 . Item F confirms that she is to begin being billed in monthly
payments of $58.54 beginning on March 4, 2016, to July 15, 2016. Item E establishes
that one payment of $58.54 was made on March 7, 2016. The evidence does not
establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced beyond that one payment. 
1.kk., ll., and mm. These three overdue debts for State tax liens to State A are 
cited in the SOR in the amounts of $4,535, $1,496, and $2,296. Applicant admitted
these SOR allegations in her RSOR, and she wrote that she intends to pay these debts
in full. Item G establishes that $1,115 was used from her state tax refund to reduce
these three debts. The evidence does not establish that these debts have been
resolved or reduced beyond that one refund amount. 
1.nn. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $530. Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she this debt is for cell
service for her daughter’s phone, and she is currently in negotiations with the creditor to
settle this debt. The evidence does not establish that this debt has been resolved or
reduced.
1.oo. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $382. Applicant
denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she is disputing this debt. Item J
establishes that Applicant has disputed this debt. However, there is no evidence of the
outcome of the dispute. The evidence does not establish that this debt has been
resolved or reduced.
1.pp. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $262. Applicant
denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she is disputing this debt. Item J
establishes that Applicant has disputed this debt. However, there is no evidence of the
outcome of the dispute. The evidence does not establish that this debt has been
resolved or reduced.
1.yy. This overdue debt for Federal taxes for tax years 2007 and 2008 are cited in
the SOR in the amounts of $10,000. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her
RSOR, and she wrote that she has made a payment plan for this debt. Item K confirms
that she is to begin being billed in monthly payments of $50 toward this debt, and that
she has made at least six payments of $50 toward this debt. The evidence  establishes
that this debt is being reduced, but there is still more than $9,000 owed toward this debt. 
In explanation for her financial difficulties, Applicant wrote in her RSOR that her
husband abandoned her twice, resulting in her being hospitalized. She also had periods
of unemployment, received unexpected medical bills, and was the sole provider of her
household. (Item 2.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for access to a sensitive position, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
3
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to a sensitive position.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive
position] will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable access
decision. 
A person who seeks access to a sensitive position enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, most of which has been overdue
for several years. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant’s
unemployment, and her medical treatment, could potentially make this condition
applicable in this case. However, since there is evidence that these debts were incurred
over several years, and that very few of the debts have only minimally been resolved,  I
do not find that Applicant has acted responsibly. Therefore, this mitigating condition is
not applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has not
“initiated a good-faith effort to repay [the majority of] overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.” Finally, because Applicant has not significantly reduced or resolved her
overdue debts, and because the evidence has not established that her current financial
situation is stable, I do not find any other mitigating condition applies to this case.
Therefore, I find Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a sensitive position by considering the totality of
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
5
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a sensitive position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has significantly resolved or reduced the past-due debts listed on
the SOR, I find that the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a sensitive position, under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
trustworthiness concerns under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.yy.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to a
sensitive position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
6
