KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not raise an issue of harmful error.  Our authority is limited to cases in
which the appealing party has asserted harmful error.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 15-04623.a1
DATE: 12/29/2016
DATE:  December 29, 2016
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-04623 
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 7, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision-security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On October 6, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains Applicant’s statements that:  she takes the resolution of her debt, along with her
employment and security clearance, seriously; she is living within her means and is in need of
financial guidance; she is willing to attend any suggested financial programs that would help reflect
how seriously she is taking the resolution of her debts; and if her clearance is reinstated at her
current salary she would be able to resolve her debts within five years without accruing any further
debt.  She also details the current status of each of her debts and her plans for satisfying them. 
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing
party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  The Board does not
review a case de novo.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
  Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom     
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
