 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02976 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 4, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) and it was mailed to Applicant. It was received on March 4, 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence, which are identified as Items 2 through 6. 
Applicant did not provide additional material. The Government documents are admitted 
into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f. He denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He was briefly married in 1985 and divorced. He 
remarried in 2005 and has been separated from his wife since 2009. He has an adult 
child from a previous relationship. He served in the Air Force from 1983 to 1991 and 
was honorably discharged. He has been steadily employed from 1992 to the present.1  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in January 2013 and 
was interviewed by a government investigator in February 2013. In his answer to the 
SOR, he stated he had settled the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a in July 2014, and he also 
settled the judgment in ¶ 1.b, but did not provide a date. He indicated he paid the 
accounts or settled the debts in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e and 1.f. His January 2013 credit report 
reflects the above debts. His credit report from March 2015 reflects the judgment in 
SOR ¶ 1.a, but the February 2016 credit report does not. His credit reports from March 
2015 and February 2016 do not reflect the other debts noted above. All of these debts 
are resolved in his favor.2  
 
 Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g stating this account is from the same 
creditor as in SOR ¶ 1.f, and it was paid. Neither debt is reported on his two most recent 
credit reports. In his background interview, Applicant indicated the account in SOR ¶ 1.h 
did not belong to him, and when he contacted the creditor he was advised the account 
did not exist. It is not reported on his two most recent credit reports. During his 
background interview, Applicant acknowledged that the account in SOR ¶ 1.c was 
opened by his wife after they separated. He indicated he intended to pay it. It is not 
reported on his two most recent credit reports.3  
 
Applicant attributed his past financial problems to his wife controlling their 
finances and spending beyond her means. She used his Social Security number and 
opened credit cards in his name. A review of Applicant’s February 2016 credit report 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
reflects that all of his accounts are being paid on time and there are no negative 
reports.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.5 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant experienced financial difficulties in the past, which resulted in 
delinquent debts and judgments. There is sufficient evidence to support the application 
of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he had delinquent debts as a result of his wife’s 
excessive spending. He indicated in his answer to the SOR that he paid, settled, or 
disputed the alleged debts. He and his wife have been separated since 2009. None of 
the debts alleged in the SOR are on his most recent credit report. Future financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. His past financial problems do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s overspending. This was 
somewhat within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not lived with his wife since 
2009 and manages his finances separately. His two most recent credit reports show he 
is paying his bills on time, and he has resolved his past financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. There are no 
delinquent debts reflected on Applicant’s most recent credit report. Applicant indicated 
that he paid, settled, or resolved the alleged delinquent debts. There are clear 
indications his financial problems are resolved, and he is living within his means. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) apply. Those debts Applicant disputed as paid or settled are no longer 
reported on his credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He is a military veteran and has been steadily 
employed since 1992. He experienced financial difficulties because of his wife’s 
spending habits. He has been separated from her since 2009 and manages his finances 
separately. The debts alleged in the SOR are paid, settled, or resolved, and are not 
reported on his most recent credit report. He is timely paying his expenses. Applicant 
has met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  For Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
