 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 15-08411 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas R. Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence and foreign 
preference. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On March 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated March 4, 2015). 
 
2 
                                      
 
1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 30, 2016. In a sworn statement, erroneously 
dated March 31, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.2 Department Counsel indicated the Government 
was prepared to proceed on May 6, 2016. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2016. 
A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 28, 2016, and I convened the hearing, as 
scheduled, on July 14, 2016.  
 
During the hearing, 3 Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 3) and 14 Applicant 
Exhibits (AE A through AE N) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on July 26, 2016. I kept the 
record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. She took advantage of that opportunity 
and timely submitted an additional document, which was marked and admitted as AE O, 
without objection. The record closed on August 11, 2016. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Republic of Colombia (Colombia) appearing in six U.S. 
Government publications which were identified but not attached to the request. They were 
subsequently furnished to me. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are 
easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this 
instance, the Government relied on source information regarding Colombia in publications 
of the U.S. Department of State.3  
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 201, 
Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,4 as set forth below 
under the Colombia subsection. 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, erroneously dated March 31, 2015. It should be noted that the affidavit form 
upon which Applicant was to choose either a hearing or a decision based upon the administrative record, and list her 
contact information, and which the notary public was to sign, was a boilerplate preprinted form with “2015” furnished 
by the DOD CAF. The correct date should be “2016.” 
 
3 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Relations With Colombia, Fact Sheet, 
dated July 27, 2015; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices for 2014 - Colombia, undated; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Counterterrorism, Western 
Hemisphere Overview, Country Reports on Terrorism 2014, Chapter 2 (extract), dated October 14, 2015; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Colombia Travel Warning, dated April 5, 2016; U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of Counterterrorism, Foreign Terrorist Organizations, Chapter 6 (extract), dated October 14, 2015; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Colombia, dated December 10, 2014. 
 
4 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
 
3 
                                      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to foreign influence and foreign preference in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a., 2.a., and 2.b.). 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving 
as an industrial engineering manager since July 2002.5 She received a bachelor’s degree 
in industrial engineering August 2002, and a master’s degree in industrial engineering in 
December 2015.6 Applicant has never served in the U.S. military or any other military.7 
She held a secret security clearance from July 2008 until July 2012, when it was 
“downgraded” as no longer required for the position.8 Applicant was married the first time 
– to a native-born U.S. citizen – in 1997 and divorced in 2002.9 She married again – to a 
native-born U.S. citizen – in 2005.10 She has two children born in the United States: a son 
born in 2008 and a daughter born in 2012.11 
 
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant was born and raised in Colombia. She entered the United States in 1997, 
and in 2006, she became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She has been a dual citizen of the 
United States and Colombia since 2006. Nevertheless, she considers herself as an 
American, and she has no other allegiances to any other country.12 If required, she is 
willing to renounce her Colombian citizenship.13 Her mother is a Colombian-born citizen 
                                                          
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts 
that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative 
information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing internet sources 
for numerous documents). In this instance, although Department Counsel has selected only certain pages of facts 
appearing in the identified publications, I have not limited myself to only those facts, but have considered the 
publications in their entirety. 
 
5 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
6 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13; AE M (Official Transcript, dated December 28, 2015). 
 
7 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
8 GE 1, supra note 1, at 40; AE C (Security Clearance Correspondence, various dates). 
 
9 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
10 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18: AE L (Marriage Record, dated September 6, 2005); AE I (U.S. Passport, dated 
April 18, 2011). 
 
11 GE 1, supra note 1, at 26-27; AE K (Certification of Birth, dated August 8, 2008); AE J (Certification of Birth, 
dated May 3, 2012). 
 
12 GE 1, supra note 1, at 5, 7; AE H (Colombian Passport, dated January 27, 1997); GE 3 (Personal Subject 
Interview, dated May 27, 2008), at 1; Tr. at 31. 
 
13 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
4 
                                      
 
of Columbia, legally residing in the United States with her second husband, a native-born 
United States citizen.14 Formerly an employee of a supermarket in the United States, she 
is now a full-time homemaker.15 Because they live within relatively close proximity, 
Applicant sees her mother every weekend.16 Applicant’s father is a Chinese-born citizen 
of the Republic of China (Taiwan) who was legally adopted when he immigrated to 
Colombia at the age of nine.17 He has resided in Colombia ever since his arrival, and he 
has never returned to Taiwan. Formerly a restaurant employee and manager, he owns a 
fleet of taxis and owns other businesses.18 Applicant’s relationship with her father is 
distant and somewhat strained, essentially because with her parents’ divorce, Applicant’s 
father also decided to “divorce” the rest of the family, and there is no continuing close 
relationship.19 Although they speak from time to time (“every six months or so”) by 
telephone, she has not seen him in person for a decade.20  
 
Applicant has one sister, born in Colombia, but a dual citizen of Colombia and the 
United States. Her sister immigrated to the United States at the age of 17, and she 
eventually became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She is employed by a U.S. financial 
institution in the United States, and she has resided in the United States for the past 17 
years. Applicant’s relationship with her sister is close, and they have weekly telephone 
contact and periodic direct contacts.21  
 
Applicant’s mother has a sister, brother-in-law, a nephew, and a niece who are 
Colombian citizens-residents.22 Applicant’s aunt was an employee of a large retail store, 
but is now retired. She has had a U.S. tourist visa for many years and periodically visits 
Applicant’s mother in the United States. As of May 2008, Applicant used to speak with 
her aunt every few months, and they would see each other during Applicant’s trips to 
Colombia and her aunt’s visits to the United States. In March 2015, Applicant reported 
that she had monthly contact with her aunt.23 Applicant’s uncle is physically challenged. 
While he has traveled to the United Sates on a few occasions, and Applicant has visited 
with him and her aunt when she traveled to Colombia, Applicant’s contacts with him are 
                                                          
 
14 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20-21, 26; GE 3, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
15 GE 3, supra note 12, at 1; Tr. at 58. 
 
16 Tr. at 58. 
 
17 Tr. at 38-39; AE B (Taiwanese Passport, dated May 19, 1997); AE A (Taiwanese Passport, dated April 21, 
2003; GE 3, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
18 Tr. at 38-40. 
 
19 Tr. at 41, 56. 
 
20 Tr. at 41; GE 1, supra note 1, at 23. 
 
21 Tr. at 45-46; GE 3, supra note 12, at 1. 
 
22 GE 1, supra note 1, at 28-31. It should be noted that although Applicant has two cousins, the SOR focused 
on only one cousin, and there is no indication which cousin was the one raising a security concern. 
 
23 Tr. at 48; GE 1, supra note 1, at 28; GE 3, supra note 12, at 1-2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
much less frequent. She estimated that she has annual contact with him.24 One of 
Applicant’s two cousins is an industrial engineer for a retail store. While Applicant used 
to have contact with him much as she did with his parents, they no longer maintained 
contact after he was married.25 Her other cousin is a physician employed by an insurance 
company. Applicant has seen her during her visits to the United States, and they generally 
have telephone contact on an annual basis.26 Applicant’s parents and her extended family 
members have had no relationship with the Colombian government or its military or 
intelligence services.27 Likewise, there is no evidence that any family member has ever 
been approached or threatened by a terrorist or anyone affiliated with the Colombian 
government, its military, or intelligence services. 
 
When Applicant’s parents were divorced, they gave title to the family residence in 
Colombia to Applicant and her sister to insure that it was made a part of their inheritance. 
At the time the residence was initially acquired, it was worth an estimated $70,000. By 
2008, the value of the property had increased to approximately $100,000. Applicant and 
her sister sold the property in March 2012.28 Applicant no longer maintains any financial 
interests or assets in Colombia.29 
 
When Applicant arrived in the United States, she used a Colombian passport that 
had an expiration date of January 27, 2007.30 When she became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen, she allowed that passport to expire, because she already had a U.S. passport 
that had been issued in June 2006.31 However, when a decision was made by Applicant 
and her sister to sell the family residence in Colombia, Applicant renewed her Colombian 
passport for the sole purpose of having documentation to enable her sister to sell the 
residence using Applicant’s power of attorney and her Colombian passport.32 That 
Colombian passport was not expected to expire until March 2022.33 The Colombian 
passport was destroyed by Applicant in the presence of her corporate security analyst on 
July 18, 2016.34  
 
                                                          
24 Tr. at 49; GE 1, supra note 1, at 30-31; GE 3, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
25 Tr. at 50; GE 3, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
26 Tr. at 50; GE 1, supra note 1, at 29-30. 
 
27 GE 3, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
28 GE 1, supra note 1, at 32-33; GE 3, supra note 12, at 3; AE N (Dissolution and Liquidation of the Community 
Property, dated August 18, 2006). 
 
29 GE 1, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
30 AE H, supra note 12. 
 
31 AE F (U.S. Passport, dated June 17, 2006). 
 
32 Tr. at 32-33; AE G (Colombian Passport, dated March 12, 2012). 
 
33 AE G, supra note 31. 
 
34 AE O (Memorandum of Record, dated July 18, 2016). 
 
6 
                                      
 
Work Performance 
 
 Applicant’s most recent performance review highlighted several positive areas of 
performance:35 
 
[Applicant] entered the 2015 performance period as a talented manager and 
has significantly exceeded my expectations. She has established herself as 
a leader with strong ethical traits, attention to detail, a caring personality, 
passion for execution and ability to build an engaging team. She is well 
respected by the team leaders she supports, peer managers and team 
members. She has met all of her performance goals and exhibits special 
leadership characteristics. . . . Her integrity is unwavering and she insists 
upon doing things right the first time. . . . [Applicant] is truly a role model to 
her peers and subordinates. 
 
Colombia 
 
Formerly under the control of Spain, Colombia’s independence was recognized in 
1822. It has common borders with Venezuela and Brazil on the east, Ecuador and Peru 
on the south, and Panama and the North Pacific Ocean on the west, with the Caribbean 
Sea on the north.  It is a middle-income country and one of the oldest democracies in 
Latin America. For the past 50 years, Colombia has been engaged in intense armed 
conflict with insurgent and paramilitary groups perpetuated by their involvement in 
widespread illegal drug production and trafficking, along with criminal and narcotics 
trafficking organizations. Peace talks between the Government of Colombia and the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) began in October 2012, and are close 
to being finalized. Long-term U.S. interests in the region include promoting security, 
stability, and prosperity in Colombia, and according to the U.S. Department of State, 
Colombia has made progress in addressing its security, development, and governance 
challenges. 
 
The Secretary of State has designated three organizations operating within 
Colombia as foreign terrorist organizations: the leftist FARC, the leftist National Liberation 
Army (ELN), and the demobilized rightist paramilitary United Self Defense Forces of 
Colombia (AUC).  Colombia has experienced a number of terrorist attacks by the FARC 
and the ELN, with the most notable 2011 incidents directed primarily at Colombian 
National Police and the Colombian Army, with a number of civilians also killed or 
wounded. The AUC membership dwindled, and while it remained inactive as a formal 
organization, some former members continued to engage in criminal activities, mostly 
drug trafficking, in newly emerging criminal organizations known as Bacrim. The ELN has 
a dwindling membership with diminished resources and reduced offensive capability, but 
has continued to inflict casualties through the use of land mines and ambushes, and 
continues to fund its operations through drug trafficking. The FARC has been weakened 
significantly by the government’s military campaign against it. Nevertheless, FARC 
remains responsible for terrorist attacks, extortion, and kidnappings. The incidence of 
                                                          
35 AE E (Performance Review, undated), at 1. 
 
7 
                                      
 
kidnapping in Colombia has diminished significantly from its peak at the beginning of the 
decade, but kidnappings and holding civilians for ransom or as political bargaining chips 
continues. No one is immune from kidnapping on the basis of occupation, nationality, or 
other factors. 
 
Overall law enforcement cooperation between Colombia and the United States has 
been outstanding, and Colombia has extradited more people to the United States than 
any other country. Although the Colombian Government has continued to address human 
rights abuses, significant problems remain. Extrajudicial killings, insubordinate military 
collaboration with members of illegal armed groups, forced disappearances, overcrowded 
and insecure prisons, harassment of human rights groups and activists, violence against 
women, trafficking in persons, illegal child labor, societal discrimination against 
indigenous persons, corruption, and an overburdened and inefficient judiciary are but a 
few of the continuing issues. On August 20, 2012, the Department of State certified to 
Congress that the Colombian Government and armed forces are meeting statutory criteria 
related to human rights. 
 
Tens of thousands of U.S. citizens safely visit Colombia each year for tourism, 
business, university studies and volunteer work. Security in Colombia has improved 
significantly in recent years, but violence linked to narco-trafficking continues to affect 
some rural areas and parts of large cities. There have been no reports of U.S. citizens 
being targeted because of their nationality.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”36 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”37   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
                                                          
36 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
37 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”38 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.39  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”40 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”41 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
38 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
39 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
40 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
41 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.42 Applicant’s somewhat longstanding distant 
relationship with her father and one cousin, as well as her closer relationships with her 
aunt, uncle, and one cousin, all of whom are residents of Colombia, are current security 
concerns for the Government.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), it is potentially disqualifying where there is “contact with a foreign family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” In addition, it is potentially 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 7(b) where there are “connections to a foreign person, group, 
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help 
a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
apply in this case. However, the security significance of these identified conditions 
requires further examination of Applicant’s respective relationships to determine the 
degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
                                                          
42 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                      
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s relatives 
or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant factors, including 
the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances in light of any realistic potential 
for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the foreign power in 
question, including the government and entities controlled by the government within the 
relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is limited to countries that are 
hostile to the United States.43 In fact, the Appeal Board has cautioned against “reliance 
on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ nations when 
adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”44 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the United 
States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the existence 
of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely that a foreign 
government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in that 
foreign country. 
 
As noted above, the United States and Colombia share a strong relationship and 
cooperate on numerous matters. The evidence does not indicate that the Colombian 
government targets U.S. classified information. To the contrary, it appears that the 
Government’s main concern is not the actions of the Colombian government, but rather 
the actions of criminals, terrorists, and narco-terrorists in conducting illegal terrorist 
attacks, extortion, and kidnappings. Applicant maintains a distant and rather infrequent 
relationship with her father and one cousin. She maintains a somewhat closer relationship 
with her aunt, uncle, and other cousin. They all maintain a low profile in Colombia. They 
have all worked in private industry and none of them have connections to the Colombian 
                                                          
43 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
44 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
11 
                                      
 
government or military. Her family members have never experienced violence since they 
have lived there. It is unlikely that Applicant would have to choose between the interests 
of her family and the interests of the United States.  
 
Tens of thousands of U.S. citizens safely visit Colombia each year for a variety of 
reasons, including tourism, business, university studies, and volunteer work. Security in 
Colombia has improved significantly in recent years. Nevertheless, violence linked to 
narco-trafficking continues to affect some rural areas and parts of large cities. In some 
ways, the risk of residing in Colombia is somewhat similar to the risks of residing in 
Boston, New York City, Chicago, Detroit, Washington, D.C., Orlando, Dallas, San 
Bernardino, Oklahoma City, or other metropolitan areas in the United States that have 
experienced substantial criminal or terrorist-related incidents. There is always the 
possibility of kidnappings, drug-related violence, or terrorist attacks, against otherwise 
innocent individuals. Moreover, there have been no reports of U.S. citizens being targeted 
in Colombia because of their nationality.  
 
Applicant’s father and extended family members still reside in Colombia and there 
is some risk – perhaps a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security 
clearance because of her continuing relationship with them. However, because 
Applicant’s mother, sister, husband, and children all reside in the United States, the 
impact of her father’s citizenship and residence, as well as the citizenship and residence 
of her more distant relatives (aunt, uncle, and cousins) is considerably diminished and 
there is little continuing substantial risk of any kind of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security 
clearance. Under the circumstances, there is little likelihood that those “foreign” 
relationships could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. I am persuaded that 
Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided, and that she has “such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [she] can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) 
apply.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member” is 
potentially disqualifying. This includes AG ¶ 10(a)(1), “possession of a current foreign 
passport,” which may raise security concerns. Applicant was initially issued a Colombian 
 
12 
                                      
 
passport when she was a child, and she subsequently renewed it. That Colombian 
passport was not expected to expire for several more years. There is no evidence that 
she was ever advised or asked to relinquish her Colombian passport. By her actions in 
continuing to possess her Colombian passport after she became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen, Applicant exercised the rights and privileges of foreign citizenship. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) 
applies. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference.  Under AG ¶ 11(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the “dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or 
birth in a foreign country.” Similarly, AG ¶ 11(b) may apply where “the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” In addition, AG ¶ 11(e) may apply 
where “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, 
or otherwise invalidated.” 
 Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen, was born of a Colombian mother and 
Taiwanese father in Colombia, and her Colombian citizenship was based solely on those 
factors. Dual citizenship, by itself, is not an automatic bar to a security clearance. It is only 
a security concern if the individual has actively exercised the rights and privileges of the 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. Applicant explained that her only 
motivation for renewing her Colombian passport was not an indication of a preference for 
Colombia over the United States, but rather solely to enable her sister to sell her share of 
the family residence in Colombia. Such action, since 2006, has security significance. 
Applicant stated unequivocally that she is willing to renounce her Colombian citizenship 
and relinquish her Colombian passport. In fact, the Colombian passport was destroyed 
by Applicant in the presence of her corporate security analyst on July 18, 2016. Thus, as 
to Applicant’s dual citizenship, and her possession of the Colombian passport after 
becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, considering Applicant’s explanations, and her 
subsequent actions, I find ¶¶ 11(a), 11(b), and 11(c) apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.45       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because her father 
remains a Taiwanese citizen and Colombian resident, and members of her extended 
family remain Colombian citizen-residents. Everyone, including residents and visitors, 
could possibly be the intended or unintended victims of kidnappings, drug-related 
violence, or terrorist attacks.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant declared that her life is here in the United States and that she loves this country 
and has started a family here.  Her mother and sister are here. Applicant is fully aware of 
the risks to her mother and extended family members in Colombia to the possibility of 
kidnappings, drug-related violence, or terrorist attacks. These risks increase the 
probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign 
power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit her.46 Moreover, while the 
“heightened risk” of terrorist activities occurring in Colombia is of significance, it should 
also be remembered that terrorists and would-be terrorists are also active in the United 
States, creating a substantial risk here as well. Considering Applicant’s varied 
relationships with those family members remaining in Colombia, there is a minimal risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign influence and foreign preference. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:    For Applicant 
     
                                                          
45 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
46 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
14 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
 
           ________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
