 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03902 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to show he has filed his delinquent 2013 income tax return. His 
evidence is insufficient to establish that he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
He failed to mitigate the Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 12, 2014. 
On December 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on January 12, 2016, and requested a 
decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 26, 
2016, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated February 29, 2016. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 11, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections 
to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any additional evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on December 6, 2016. 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
his unauthenticated summary of interview with a government investigator from 
February 13, 2015. Applicant was informed he could object to the summary of his 
interview and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, 
deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that 
his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as 
a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant failed to respond 
to the FORM, and he raised no objections. I considered the FORM proposed 
evidence, including the summary of interview.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted that he failed to timely file his 2013 
income tax return. Applicant’s SOR admission is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After graduating from 
high school, he enlisted in the U.S. Army where he honorably served on active duty from 
1983 to 1988. After his discharge, Applicant enlisted in the Army National Guard Active 
Reserve where he honorably served until 1991. Applicant has never been married, but 
has been living with a cohabitant since 2002. He has a child born out of wedlock (age 
unknown) with whom he has no contact. 
 
Applicant worked for private companies between 1988 and 2012. He was fired 
from his job for being late to work and not calling his supervisor in 2012. He was 
unemployed between May and August 2013; temporarily employed during September 
and October 2013; and unemployed from November 2013 to November 2014. Applicant 
has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since November 2014. This is 
his first SCA. 
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2014 SCA, he 
disclosed that he failed to file his federal 2013 income tax return. He stated that he 
collected unemployment benefits during most of 2013, and did not file his 2013 income 
tax return. He estimated that he owed the IRS $2,000. As of his 2014 SCA, Applicant had 
not filed his 2013 income tax return. He stated that he would resolve his tax problem when 
“I have steady income starting in December 2014.”  
 
During follow-up interviews with a government investigator in February 15-16, 
2015, Applicant confirmed his failure to file his 2013 income tax return. He further stated 
that he believed he did not owe any taxes, but he did not contact the IRS to determine his 
tax liability, if any.  
 
A review of Applicant’s credit reports disclosed no delinquent or in collection 
accounts. I note that, if Applicant made less than $10,300 gross income in 2013, as a 
 
3 
                                         
 
single filer he would be exempt from filing an income tax return. If his filing status was 
“married filing jointly,” he would not have to file a tax return if his gross income was less 
than $20,600. (www.irs.gov/publications/p17/ch01.html - IRS Publication 17)  
 
Applicant’s 2014 SCA disclosure, his February 2015 summary of interviews, and 
his admission to the SOR allegation, establish the SOR allegation. He presented no 
documentary evidence to show that he has filed his 2013 income tax return or that he has 
been in contact with the IRS to resolve his failure to file and his possible tax debt. He 
provided no information about his current financial position. He did not provide any 
information about his current income, monthly expenses, and whether his income is 
sufficient to pay his living expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether 
he has participated in financial counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
 
4 
                                         
 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2013 income tax return. AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required.” The Government established the above disqualifying conditions requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problem is recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show that he filed 
his 2013 income tax return or that he was not required to file one. It is not clear whether 
he owes money to the IRS. Applicant failed to establish that his financial problem is under 
control, and that his failure to file occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
Applicant presented no evidence of efforts taken to contact the IRS, or of efforts taken to 
resolve his tax problem.  
 
Applicant presented some positive financial information. He was unemployed 
during two periods totaling about a year and one-half. If he was unemployed due to 
circumstances beyond his control (not due to his own misconduct) that information may 
help him mitigate the concerns. His evidence is insufficient to make this determination. 
Also, his credit reports reflect no delinquent or in collection accounts.  
 
The negative financial considerations concerns are more substantial. Applicant 
failed to timely file his 2013 income tax return for tax year 2013. The DOHA Appeal Board 
has commented: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we 
have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is not directed at collecting 
debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By 
the same token, neither is it directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax 
returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
 
6 
                                         
 
judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her 
legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment 
and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See 
Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 
183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). See ISCR Case No. 14-
05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2002)). ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). The Appeal Board 
clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has purportedly corrected [the 
applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is now motivated to prevent 
such problems in the future, does not preclude careful consideration of [a]pplicant’s 
security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax returns. See ISCR Case 
No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no harm, no foul” 
approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and employed an “all’s well that ends well” 
analysis as inadequate to support approval of access to classified information with focus 
on timing of filing of tax returns after receipt of the SOR).   
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 2 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board 
reversed the grant of a security clearance, and noted the following primary relevant 
disqualifying facts:  
 
Applicant filed his 2011 Federal income tax return in December 2013 and 
received a $2,074 tax refund. He filed his 2012 Federal tax return in 
September 2014 and his 2013 Federal tax return in October 2015. He 
received Federal tax refunds of $3,664 for 2012 and $1,013 for 2013. 
 
Notwithstanding the lack of any tax debt owed in ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. 
Bd. June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board provided the following principal rationale for 
reversal: 
 
Failure to comply with Federal and/or state tax laws suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established Government rules 
and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is 
essential for protecting classified information.  .  .  .  By failing to file his 
2011, 2012, and 2013 Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, 
Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of persons granted access to classified information.  
 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 4 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (citations omitted).  
 
The negative financial and judgment information in Applicant’s case is more 
significant. He failed to timely file his federal income tax return for 2013, or to show he did 
not have to file. He did not explain what efforts he has taken to file or resolve any possible 
 
7 
                                         
 
tax debt. His evidence is insufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations security 
concerns caused by his failure to file his income tax return when he answered questions 
about filing his income taxes when he completed his 2014 SCA, and when he was 
questioned by a government investigator during his 2015 interview. He was allowed a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and 
mitigation. He failed to provide any documentary evidence to show that he filed his 2013 
income tax return or that he has been in contact with the IRS and attempted to resolve 
his tax problem.  
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment cannot excuse his failure to file his income 
tax return because the filing of tax returns is required by law. It also cannot be considered 
as a circumstance beyond his control that contributed to or aggravated his financial 
problems because, at least during one period, he became unemployed because he was 
fired for being late to work. For mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) to apply, Applicant must 
establish that he was responsible under the circumstances. Applicant did not submit 
sufficient evidence to show his financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant submitted no evidence to show he has filed his 2013 income tax return. 
He also submitted no evidence of any efforts to resolve his tax problem. There is 
insufficient evidence of progress addressing his financial problem. The available 
information is insufficient to establish clear indications that he does not have a current 
financial problem, or that his financial problem is being resolved. In sum, Applicant failed 
to establish that he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Moreover, when a tax issue is involved, an administrative judge is required to 
consider how long an applicant waits to file their tax returns, whether the IRS generates 
the tax returns, and how long the applicant waits after a tax debt arises to begin and 
complete making payments.2 The primary problem here is that Applicant presented no 
evidence he has filed his 2013 income tax returns.  
                                            
2 The recent emphasis of the Appeal Board on security concerns arising from tax cases is 
instructive. See ISCR Case No. 14-05794 at 7 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (reversing grant of security clearance 
and stating, “His delay in taking action to resolve his tax deficiency for years and then taking action only 
after his security clearance was in jeopardy undercuts a determination that Applicant has rehabilitated 
himself and does not reflect the voluntary compliance of rules and regulations expected of someone 
entrusted with the nation’s secrets.”); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) (reversing 
grant of a security clearance, discussing lack of detailed corroboration of circumstances beyond applicant’s 
 
8 
                                         
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed 
as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary 
for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior consistent 
with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
control adversely affecting finances, noting two tax liens totaling $175,000 and garnishment of Applicant’s 
wages, and emphasizing the applicant’s failure to timely file and pay taxes); ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014) (reversing grant of a security clearance, noting not all tax returns filed, and 
insufficient discussion of Applicant’s efforts to resolve tax liens). More recently, in ISCR Case No. 14-05476 
(App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) the Appeal Board reversed a grant of a security clearance for a retired E-9 and 
cited applicant’s failure to timely file state tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2013 and federal returns 
for tax years 2010 through 2012. Before his hearing, he filed his tax returns and paid his tax debts except 
for $13,000, which was in an established payment plan. The Appeal Board highlighted his annual income 
of over $200,000 and discounted his non-tax expenses, contributions to DOD, and spouse’s medical 
problems. The Appeal Board emphasized “the allegations regarding his failure to file tax returns in the first 
place stating, it is well settled that failure to file tax returns suggest that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and 
systems is essential for protecting classified information.” Id. at 5 (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 
(App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). See also ISCR Case No. 14-
03358 at 3, 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (reversing grant of a security clearance, noting $150,000 owed to the 
federal government, and stating “A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal Government 
for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations to the Government has 
a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”).  
