 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00869 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 5, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On December 23, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on January 20, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
from receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence. He 
provided material within the required timeframe. The Government’s documents 
identified as Items 2 through 8 are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s documents are 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G and admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on October 6, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR, except ¶ 1.ll, which he disputed 
the date alleged. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 64 years old. From 1972 to 2008, he has married and divorced five 
times. He has two adult children. He has been cohabitating with an individual since the 
end of his last marriage in 2008. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1974 and attended 
post-graduate school.1 He has worked in the defense industry throughout his career and 
has held a top secret clearance since approximately 1974. He has been employed since 
2012 with his current employer, a defense contractor. Before then he worked for a 
defense contractor from January 2001 to November 2010, when he was laid off after the 
project he was working on was canceled due to budget cuts. He received a severance 
package.2 Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR:  
 
I wish to continue contributing to this nation’s defense. If I cannot regain 
my Top Secret Clearance then I would at least like to obtain a Secret 
Clearance. If I cannot work for the United States then I will be forced to 
assist our allies (Israel, South Korea, Japan, UAE, etc.) who would be 
anxious to have a world expert on these systems.3 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, credit reports from December 2012, January 2014, and 
August 2015, and court documents substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
has 37 delinquent accounts totaling approximately $1,029,681. He petitioned for and 
received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 1999. Although Applicant disputed the 
date of the bankruptcy in his answer to the SOR, he confirmed the 1999 date in his 
response to the FORM. He attributed his bankruptcy to his wife’s overuse of credit 
cards. His delinquent accounts consist of seven Federal and state tax liens totaling 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4; AE G. Applicant’s provided a copy of his resume. In it he indicated he earned a master’s 
degree in Mathematical Physics in 1976 with a 3.7 grade point average. His security clearance 
application indicated that he was a candidate for the degree. When questioned by the government 
investigator in 2013, Applicant explained that he had completed the requirements for a degree, but due to 
time constraints, he could not complete the required thesis and additional examination. It is unknown if he 
subsequently completed the requirements. 
 
2 Item 2, 4. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
approximately $330,655, two judgments totaling approximately $225,801, several 
consumer accounts, and more than 20 mortgage accounts.4  
 
 During his February 2013 personal subject interview with a government 
investigator, Applicant provided the following information. He started his own property 
management company and incorporated it in 2005 or 2006 in State A. He was the sole 
employee. He did not incorporate it in any other state. He purchased his first property 
around the same time. He continued to purchase property and owned about 20 
properties, which included 15 residential properties and 5 commercial properties. They 
were rented and their value was increasing. He personally managed the properties until 
he was transferred to State B in approximately April 2007. His wife, who remained in 
State A, managed his properties. The properties began to experience vacancies in late 
2007 and 2008. He attempted to sell the properties, but was unable to do so due to the 
real estate market decline. He incurred additional financial problems as he was going 
through a divorce in 2008. Applicant’s employer transferred him to Japan in December 
2008, and he lived there until March 2010. He attributed his financial problems to the 
collapse of the real estate market and his wife’s mismanagement of the properties. He 
indicated that he used some of his pension funds to pay the expenses on some of the 
properties. It was difficult for him to manage the properties while in Japan. The lenders 
started to foreclose on the various properties, including his residence in State A. He 
again attempted to make payments in 2010 and 2011 from a pension fund. All of his 
properties except two were foreclosed.5  
 
 Applicant indicated to the investigator that he was self-employed beginning in 
November 2010 after he was laid off. He estimated he was earning about $4,260 from 
rental income property. He also received about $3,200 in pension benefits. The 
properties were located in State A. He was living in State B. He told the investigator that 
he collected unemployment benefits from State B from November 2010 until April 2012. 
During this period he was traveling from State A to State B to manage his properties. 
Applicant stated that in March 2011 he had medical issues, and in March 2012 he had 
surgery.6 
 
 Applicant filed his Federal income tax returns, but was not able to pay the taxes 
he owed for tax years 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012. During his interview, he indicated 
that he had contacted the IRS to arrange a payment plan. In his response to the FORM, 
he stated “the Internal Revenue Service stat[ed] that the tax case is closed and in not-
collectible status.”7 The document he provided from the IRS states “we have temporarily 
closed your collection case for the tax types and periods listed below. We have 
determined that you do not have the ability to pay the money you owe at this time. 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8; AE A. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 4.  
 
7 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Although, we have temporarily closed your case, you still owe the money to the IRS. We 
may re-open your case in the future if your financial situation improves.”8 Applicant 
indicated in his response that once he is employed with a “fairly high salary” he will 
resolve his debts and submit an offer in compromise offer to the IRS and for the state 
taxes owed. He also indicated he may resolve his debts through bankruptcy.9  
 
 In 2014, Applicant began making automatic withdrawals for monthly payments to 
State B for delinquent state taxes. He has consistently made $50 monthly payments 
since June 2014. As of April 2016, the balance owed was $77,474 (SOR ¶ 1.c - a tax 
lien for $4,057; ¶1.f - a tax lien for $13,934; ¶ 1.h - a tax lien for $3,108; ¶ 1.i - a tax lien 
for $35,479 - all filed in 2013). Applicant did not provide any information or evidence of 
actions he has taken for the 2013 tax liens filed by State A (SOR ¶ 1.d - $11,333 and ¶ 
1.e - $23,754).10 
 
 While living in Japan, Applicant was providing monetary support to a woman 
living there, but was from another country and was having financial difficulties. He would 
withdraw money from an automatic teller machine in Japan from his U.S. account and 
give her cash. He estimated he gave her $2,000 a month. Although he could not 
remember the specific period he gave her this money, he estimated that while he was in 
Japan, he gave her a total of approximately $20,000. He told the investigator that 
initially he was not aware that he was having financial difficulties with his rental 
properties. He told the investigator that he had left his ex-wife in charge of the property 
management company, and she did not keep him up-to-date with the details. He further 
said that even when he became aware of his financial problems, he continued to 
provide the woman money because she was a friend in need of assistance, and he is a 
very giving, caring person who enjoys helping people. Since returning to the United 
States, Applicant has sent her money on four different occasions. He could not recall 
when or the amount he sent. He indicated the last time he sent her money was 2011, 
despite her calling him asking him for money after then.11  
 
 Applicant provided documents to show he received financial counseling and 
made a budget in January 2013, which was required in order for him to participate in a 
loan rehabilitation program for his primary residence. The budget only includes 
expenses and does include his income, pension, or rental income. The budget does not 
include payments for any of the delinquent debts. He did not provide a more recent and 
accurate budget.12 
 
                                                          
8 AE A, C. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
10 AE B.  
 
11 Item 4.  
 
12 AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant was unable to provide specific information to the investigator regarding 
each mortgage foreclosure and line-of-credit debts. He did not provide specific evidence 
on these debts in his answer to the SOR or the FORM. In his response to the FORM, he 
stated that the past-due mortgage on the condominium where he is currently living was 
current. He also provided court documents to show he has entered into a settlement 
agreement for delinquent fees owed to his condominium’s homeowner’s association. 
This debt is not alleged. He provided proof that he has been making the required 
payments. Applicant did not provide sufficient information to determine which debt 
alleged in the SOR applies to his current residence as there are numerous accounts 
from the same creditor.13  
 
 Applicant has other consumer and credit card debts that are unpaid (SOR ¶ 1.k - 
$8,903; ¶ 1.n - $1,593; ¶ 1.o - $897; ¶ 1.p - $4,501; ¶ 1.g - $360).  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his resume and career highlights.14 He also 
provided a letter of recommendation from 2010 from a colleague sent to his employer 
for a performance award. He is described as a loyal and dedicated self-starter who 
worked diligently for long hours to ensure success. He exercised initiative and was 
diligent in providing resolutions for issues. He performed superbly.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
13 Item 2; AE A, E. 
 
14 Item 2, AE G.  
 
15 AE G. 
 
6 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
7 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.16 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has numerous debts, mortgages, and  Federal and state tax liens 
totaling more than a million dollars that he is unable or unwilling to pay or resolve. He 
had debts discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent Federal and state tax liens, judgments, and other 
delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. He attributes his financial problems to 
a downturn in the real estate market in 2007 and his ex-wife mismanaging his property 
management business. Applicant invested heavily in the real estate market, was aware 
that his investments were failing, and left his ex-wife to manage his company while he 
worked in another country. During this time, he gave approximately $20,000 to a woman 
who was having financial difficulties. Applicant conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
 
 
 The collapse of the real estate market was beyond Applicant’s control. Having his 
ex-wife manage his property when he was already aware that the market was declining 
was within his control. Applicant gifted approximately $20,000 to a woman while he was 
experiencing financial difficulties. These actions were within his control. Applicant also 
attributed his financial difficulties to his 2008 divorce, but did not provide specific 
information. This was beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant indicated 
that he attempted to use some of his pension to pay the mortgages on his 23 properties, 
but it was insufficient. He attempted to sell properties, but was unable to do so. He 
modified the mortgage where he currently resides and his payments are current. He has 
a modest payment plan for a state tax lien he owes with a balance over $77,000. He 
has not addressed tax liens filed by another state. He is unable to pay a large Federal 
tax lien. He has not paid any of the smaller delinquent consumer debts. Applicant had 
an extensive real estate property management company. He willingly took the risk and 
enjoyed the profits until the market collapsed. He has not provided any information 
about actions he has taken to contact any of the other creditors to resolve his debts. He 
does not have the money to pay his creditors. AG 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant was required to take financial counseling to obtain a loan modification. 
It appears he did so and completed a budget. The 2013 budget is incomplete. He has 
not provided information about his current income and finances. The first part of AG ¶ 
20(c) applies. However, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being resolved. He is making minimal payments on a state tax liens, has 
not contacted State B about the delinquent tax lien he owes and currently owes more 
than $239,000 for a Federal tax lien that continues to accrue interest and penalties, but 
is currently in an uncollectable status. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the state tax lien in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.f, 1.h and 1.i. He failed to provide detailed information as to which debt in the 
SOR pertains to his current residence. Applicant has not made good-faith efforts to 
repay the remaining creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to the remaining debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 64 years old. He has worked in the defense industry for many years. 
I have considered his accomplishments and contributions to the industry. He started a 
property management company in 2005 or 2006 where he was the sole employee and 
purchased 23 properties. The market declined, he was unable to pay the mortgages on 
most of the properties, and they were foreclosed. He owes Federal and state taxes. He 
has other consumer debts. Applicant is heavily in debt and is unable to pay his 
creditors. He indicated that he intends to pay his delinquent debts after he is employed 
with a fairly high salary. He failed to provide a viable plan to resolve his financial 
problems. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are 
not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.”17 
He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.ll:  Against Applicant 
     
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
17 See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 
(App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)). 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
