KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: We examine a Judge’s findings of fact to see if they are supported by substantial
evidence.  In this case, the Judge’s material findings are sustainable.  Applicant did not rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Adverse decision
affirmed. 
CASE NO: 15-01285.a1
DATE: 12/22/2016
DATE: December 22, 2016
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01285
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 19, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 7, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Chief Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is sponsored by a DoD contractor who will hire him if he receives a clearance. 
His SOR lists several delinquent debts, and  Applicant admitted the allegations.  Divorced,
Applicant has two children, ages 18 and 20.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges a $62,000 debt for past-due child support payments.  Applicant
contends that he had been making payments to his spouse since their separation.  However, the court
in the subsequent divorce action did not accept Applicant’s contention and, as part of the decree,
ordered him to make two year’s worth of retroactive payments.  Applicant’s other debts include
Federal tax liens for 2012 and 2014 and a state tax lien for 2011.  Applicant admitted that he had not
filed his tax returns, although this was not alleged in the SOR.  The Judge stated that it was not clear
whether Applicant’s tax returns had actually been filed and whether the IRS had assessed any
penalties.  Applicant also owes over $11,000 resulting from a vehicle repossession, a $10,000
judgment on behalf of a bank, and a debt of under $500, also to a bank.  The Judge found that
Applicant had not provided information about the status of his delinquent debts.
Applicant has been unemployed since 2011.  He has supported himself with unemployment
compensation and with income from odd jobs.  He also owns a company, though it is not clear how
much income he receives from this.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant has had financial problems for many years, including
delinquent child support and failure to pay taxes.  She stated that someone who is irresponsible with
his debts may well be equally so with classified information.  In evaluating Applicant’s case for
mitigation, the Judge concluded that his debts are recent and ongoing.  Although Applicant’s
problems were affected by a divorce, which was a circumstance outside his control, she stated that
he had not evidenced responsible action.  The Judge also stated that she was considering the non-
alleged conduct–failure to file tax returns–for its bearing upon mitigation.  She stated that Applicant
had not demonstrated a good-faith effort to pay his debts, nor had he provided proof that he had
actually filed or paid his debt to the IRS.  Although he provided a child support payment history up
through 2014, there is nothing in the record to show payments after that.
Discussion
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact, for example, that he had admitted
all of the debts in the SOR, the age of his children, his employment status, and that he was in arrears
on child support.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
2
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 14-04226 at 3
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
Applicant is correct that he did not admit all of the allegations.  In fact, he denied two SOR
debts.1  Therefore, to the extent that the Judge found that he had admitted all of the SOR allegations,
she erred.  The Judge also may have misstated the ages of at least one of Applicant’s two children,
based upon the information provided in his security clearance application (SCA).  Item 3, SCA, at
23-24.  These two things are of minimal significance.
On the other hand, the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s employment are supportable.  In
his clearance interview he stated that he had yet to start employment with the company that is
sponsoring him for a clearance and that he had been unemployed since 2011.  Item 4, Clearance
Interview Summary, at 4.  We also find no reason to disturb the Judge’s findings about child
support.  Her findings addressed Applicant’s contention that he had actually made payments to his
estranged wife before the date of his divorce.  However, the record supports the Judge’s observation
that there is nothing in the record to show payments after 2014.  Child Support Payment Summary
Report, dated April 2014, included in Item 2, Response to SOR.  Indeed, in Applicant’s 2014
clearance interview, he agreed that, at that time, he owed nearly $53,000 in back child support and
only made payments of $200 to $400 “when he can.”  Item 4 at 6.  Moreover, Item 8, Credit Report
dated September 2015, shows a remaining balance of over $62,000 in past-due child support
obligations, suggesting that his debt had grown since the time of his interview.  The Judge’s findings
about Applicant’s child support debt, including that he did not provide clear information about its
current status, are consistent with the record that was before her.  
After considering Applicant’s appeal argument as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s
material findings are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or
inferences that could be drawn from the record.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely
to change the outcome of the case.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material
findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul.
25, 2014).
The balance of Applicant’s appeal consist of challenges to the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, in an effort to show that he had established mitigation.  In doing so, Applicant cites to the
evidence that he had submitted, arguing that it shows that he is resolving his financial problems. 
Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record or to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05795 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr.
26, 2016). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as paying child
support; filing and paying and taxes; and discharging debts when due, does not demonstrate the high
1The Judge resolved these two debts in Applicant’s favor.
3
degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).  See Cafeteria & Restaurant
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886
(1961) (Security requirements include, inter alia, “a high sense of one’s obligations[.]”).  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.” 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
