 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03449 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 15, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on February 22, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on March 7, 2016. He responded with documents that I have 
marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on 
September 12, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE 1 are 
admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2010. He served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from 1989 until he retired with an honorable discharge in 2010. He married in 1995 and 
divorced in 1999; married again in 2000 and divorced in 2010; and married for the third 
time in 2010. He has three children and three stepchildren.1  
 
Applicant’s second wife had a drug problem. Applicant gave her money to pay 
the bills, but she spent the money on drugs. He resolved the resulting financial 
problems through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 2004. He gave his second wife 
another chance after the bankruptcy discharge. She was clean for a period, but then fell 
back into her old habits, which caused additional financial issues.2 
 
The SOR alleges the 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case and eight delinquent 
debts totaling $29,909. The largest debt ($25,216) is for the loan on a repossessed car. 
The debts are established by Applicant’s admissions and credit reports.3 
 
None of the debts alleged in the SOR became delinquent after 2008. The two 
most recent credit reports do not report the SOR debts or any other delinquent debts. 
Applicant paid two of the SOR debts in 2013, and he paid or settled the remaining debts 
in March 2016. Applicant’s current finances are in order.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 11.  
 
2 Items 5, 6, 11-14; AE 1.  
 
3 Items 4, 7-10; AE 1.  
 
4 Items 4, 7-10; AE 1.  
 
3 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his second wife’s drug problem 
and his willingness to give her a second chance. None of the delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR were accrued after 2008. It took him until after he received the FORM to 
resolve most of the debts, but they are all paid or settled. While the timing of his 
payments does not create a perfect case in mitigation (See ISCR Case No. 11-13949 at 
3 (App. Bd. Sep. 5, 2013)), I am satisfied that Applicant’s finances are in order. AG ¶ 
20(c) is applicable; AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) are partially applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
5 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I also considered the cause 
of Applicant’s financial problems and that the problems are resolved. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
