 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02185 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 2, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on February 3, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on February 10, 2016. As of August 4, 2016, he had not responded. 
The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2016. The Government exhibits included in 
the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2011. He served on active duty in the U.S. 
military from 1998 until he was honorably discharged in January 2011. He also served 
in the National Guard for a period. He attended college, but he did not earn a degree. 
He is married without children.1  
 
Applicant developed financial problems after he left the military. His first job did 
not pay as much as he earned in the military. His wife was attending college and not 
working. He was unable to pay all his bills, a number of debts became delinquent, and 
his home was lost to foreclosure.2  
 
The SOR alleges the foreclosure of Applicant’s home and eight delinquent debts 
totaling $19,281. Applicant admitted owing all the debts at one time, except three 
medical debts totaling $389 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h) that were paid on November 19, 
2015. His mortgage loan was guaranteed by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
There is no evidence of a deficiency owed on the loan.3 
 
Applicant reported a number of delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in August 2014. He wrote that 
he was in the process of filing bankruptcy. When he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in September 2014, he stated that he intended to resolve his financial 
issues through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. He provided his bankruptcy attorney’s 
name, address, and telephone number.4 
 
Applicant apparently never followed through with a bankruptcy case. As indicated 
above, he paid three medical debts on November 19, 2015. He paid one creditor $20 on 
November 19, 2015. He stated that he had payment plans of $50 per month for two 
debts, and $102 per month for a third debt. The plans were to commence in December 
2015. He stated that he contacted the remaining two creditors, but the payment plans 
“need auth[orization].”5 Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so it is unknown 
whether he continued with his payment plans. 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4.  
 
2 Items 3, 4, 6-8.  
 
3 Items 2-4, 6-8.  
 
4 Items 3, 4.  
 
5 Items 2, 8.  
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to not earning as much as when he 
was in the military. However, he has worked for his current employer since September 
2011, and he only started to address his finances after the SOR was issued. The 
 
5 
 
Appeal Board has held that “it is proper for a Judge to consider that an applicant, aware 
of his debts, has undertaken to address them only after having been advised that his 
clearance is in jeopardy.” See ISCR Case No. 11-13949 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 5, 2013). 
He began payment plans on several debts and stated that he intends to resolve his 
debts. The Appeal Board has further held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future 
are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) are not applicable except as they relate to the 
three paid debts and the foreclosed mortgage. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find 
that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, he has unresolved 
financial problems that he only began to address after the SOR was issued.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f-1.i:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
