 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02304 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2004 and continue to the present. He 
failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. 
Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 21, 2012, Applicant submitted a public trust position application 
(SF 85P). On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 4, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Department of Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on March 14, 2016. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on September 29, 2016. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on October 18, 2016. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(GE) 1 through 6 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through C into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 2, 2016. The record remained open until 
November 18, 2016, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit other exhibits. He did not 
submit any post-hearing exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the four allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are 
incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 48 years old and married for 21 years. He has two adult children. He 
attended trade school. His wife works. He coaches high school sports as a volunteer. 
 
In 2011 Applicant began his current position with a defense contractor as a 
security specialist. Prior to this position he was unemployed from July 2010 to October 
2011. Applicant’s supervisor is aware of this proceeding, but not the financial 
trustworthiness concerns underlying it. (Tr. 13-17; GE 2.) 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $78,000 and his wife’s salary is $100,000. He 
borrowed $10,000 in 2015 from his 401(k) for a down payment on a new house. (Tr. 17-
18.) He and his wife do not have a budget. He participated in financial counseling in 
2011. (Tr. 19.) He thinks he has about $140,000 in his 401(k). (Tr. 28.) 
 
In April 2012 a bank charged off Applicant’s home equity loan on his former 
residence in the amount of $16,975. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) The last payment on the account was 
made in September 2011. (Tr. 32: AE B.) Applicant thought this debt may have been 
forgiven when his house sold after a foreclosure, as noted below. He did not submit 
documentation confirming the status. This debt is unresolved. 
 
In March 2012 Applicant’s $137,200 mortgage account on his former residence 
went into foreclosure. He purchased the home in 2004. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) In January 2011 
he put the house on the market. His last mortgage payment was in September 2011. 
(Tr. 32.) Subsequently, he was unable to maintain the mortgage and pay other 
expenses he had because he started a new job in October 2011 in another location. (Tr. 
33-34.) He said his last contact with the bank holding the mortgage was in September 
2011. He did not receive an IRS form 1099A or 1099C regarding the debt from the bank 
and is unaware of any tax consequences. He said the house subsequently sold. (Tr. 35-
36; GE 2.) The status of this debt is unresolved. Both this debt and the home equity 
loan debt are listed in credit reports. (GE 3, 4, 5, 6.) 
 
In 2009 the Federal government filed a $5,373 tax lien against Applicant for tax 
years 2004, 2005, and 2006. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) It was satisfied and released in July 2015. 
(AE C.)  
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant said he disputed the $288 utility debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He 
asserted that he was not living in the house during the time the bill accrued. He did not 
provide any evidence that he formally disputed it. (Tr. 37.) It is unresolved. 
 
In February 2012 the Federal government filed a $7,586 tax lien for another year. 
He is uncertain of which year. The lien was released in July 2012 through a 
garnishment on his wife’s salary. He thinks the original tax debt was between $12,000 
and $15,000.1 (Tr. 22-31: GE 6.)  
 
In May 2011 Applicant started a payment plan for additional taxes owed to the 
Federal government for years 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011. He pays $550 a month. He 
does not know the balance owed. He said his tax situation has been complicated. He 
attributed the tax issues to a tax preparation company, which did not competently 
handle his tax returns. He filed his 2015 tax returns and knows he owes taxes for the 
year, but does not know the amount. The taxes are unpaid.2 (Tr. 28-27; GE 2.)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
                                            
1 This tax lien is not alleged in the SOR. Hence, it will not be considered in the analysis of disqualifying 
conditions, but may be considered in the analysis of credibility, mitigating conditions, and the whole 
person. 
2 This tax lien is not alleged in the SOR. Hence, it will not be considered in the analysis of disqualifying 
conditions, but may be considered for other purposes, as explained in the above footnote. 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.3 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations, which began in 
2004 when he did not pay Federal taxes. They continue to date because he has been 
unable or unwilling to fully satisfy all of his delinquent debts. The evidence raises both of 
the above disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s debts are ongoing; hence, the evidence does not establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(a). There is evidence that some of his financial problems are attributable 
to a long period of unemployment, which may have been a circumstance beyond his 
control. However, he did not produce evidence to demonstrate that he attempted to 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
manage his debts while they were accumulating or subsequent to obtaining 
employment, which proof is necessary to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
There is evidence that Applicant participated in financial counseling, but not since 
2011. He did not submit a budget or other documentation to demonstrate that his 
financial problems are under control. The evidence establishes minimal mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant provided evidence that he resolved the tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c, albeit through a garnishment. He established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) as 
to that debt, but he failed to establish that he made a good-faith effort to resolve 
defaulted mortgage and home equity loans associated with the foreclosed house, or 
that he is no longer responsible for them. He asserted that he does not owe the alleged 
utility bill, but he did not present evidence that he formally filed a dispute and 
substantiated the basis for it. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 48-
year-old man, who has been fully employed since October 2011. Prior to that, he had 
been unemployed for over a year. While he has taken some steps to achieve financial 
stability, he has not established a track record of responsibly managing his financial 
issues, especially tax problems. Applicant’s repeated failure to timely address those tax 
issues is a serious concern. Although he has paid some of them, it is only after tax liens 
have been filed. The SOR issued in October 2015 and the hearing was held in October 
2016, about a year later. In the interim, Applicant did not contact his former mortgage 
company to resolve the status of the two debts alleged in the SOR and appearing on his 
credit report pertinent to them, or, gather a firm understanding of his finances. At the 
hearing, he exhibited a lack of knowledge about both. Although he was given time after 
the hearing to submit pertinent information, confirming that he did not owe any monies 
on the mortgage or home equity loan, he did not submit any evidence. After weighing 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guidelines for 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
                                Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
