 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-04492 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems that began in 2006. He failed to 
rebut or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. His eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On March 6, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 23, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under DoD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On January 28, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On February 
25, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
eight Items. Applicant received the FORM on March 24, 2016, and had 30 days from its 
receipt to file objections and submit additional information. Applicant did not object to 
the Government’s evidence and Items 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted five documents, which I marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
E, and admitted into the record without objection. On November 1, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contained seven allegations related to delinquent debts. In his answer 
to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of them. (Item 2.) Those admissions are incorporated 
into these findings. 
 
 Applicant is 64 years old and divorced from his second wife since 1998. He has 
two children from that marriage, both of whom have reached their majority. From July 
1998 to November 2005, he worked for a city health agency. He was then unemployed 
until October 2007 when he obtained a position with a private company. He worked 
there until August 2008, after which he was again unemployed for eight months. He 
started his current position in March 2009. (Item 3.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from March 2014, April 2015, and 
December 2015, the SOR alleged seven delinquent debts that totaled $35,750, and 
arose between 2006 and 2014. They consisted of unpaid child support, medical bills, 
and student loans. (Items 6, 7, 8.) The status of each of the delinquent debts is as 
follows:  
 
 1. The state tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($2,876) and 1.b ($9,947) were filed 
in 2006 and 2007, for unpaid child support. In his April 2016 response to the FORM, 
Applicant stated that as of December 2015 he paid his “delinquent child support 
($32,000).” (AE A.) He submitted two judgment releases which appear to address those 
debts. (AE B, C.) In his 2014 e-QIP, he noted that at one time he owed $53,000 in 
delinquent child support. (Item 3.) These allegations are resolved. 
 
 2. The $2,287 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is unresolved. 
 
 3. The medical debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($4,812) and 1.e ($3,808) are 
unresolved.  
 
 4. The delinquent student loans listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($4,575) and 1.g ($7,455) 
are unresolved. Applicant opened them in 1997. (Item 6.) 
 
  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his history of financial problems to periods of unemployment, 
which related to medical bills that accumulated as a consequence of 2007 or 2008 
surgeries, and periods of self-employment without sufficient income. (Item 4.) He said 
that because he has paid those debts, he is now able to pay other delinquent debts. (AE 
A.) 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit or financial counseling. He 
did not provide a workable plan or budget from which his ability to resolve the remaining 
delinquencies and avoid additional debt problems can be predicted with any certainty.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
4 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy financial obligations, 
which began before 2006, several of which continue to date. The evidence raises both 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Five of Applicant’s seven delinquent debts remain unresolved. There is 
insufficient information to demonstrate that his financial problems are unlikely to 
continue or recur, calling into question his reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence 
does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
  
 Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose as a 
consequence of previous medical problems and periods of unemployment. He did not 
submit evidence that he responsibly attempted to manage the debts under those 
circumstances, or since his employment in 2009. Hence, the evidence establishes 
minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or financial 
counseling, established a budget, or developed a plan to manage the remaining debts. 
There are limited indications that his unresolved financial problems are under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) has little application. He provided evidence that he is current with his child 
support, having recently paid 2006 and 2007 tax liens. AG ¶ 20(d) has some application 
to those two debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 64-year-old man, who has 
been fully employed since 2009, but continues to have significant financial problems. He 
failed to submit sufficient information that his financial obligations are being responsibly 
managed and that similar problems are unlikely to recur. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.b: For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:                      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.e:                 Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:                       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
