 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01790 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) and it was mailed to Applicant. It was received on March 18, 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence, which is identified as Items 2 through 9. 
Applicant provided documents that are marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K.1 
The Government and Applicant’s documents are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on October 6, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.c, 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, 
1.p, and 1.q, to which he stated: “I neither admit or deny.”2 I will consider his response 
to these allegations as denials. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He served in the military from 1991 to 1997, and 
received an honorable discharge. He married in 1993 and divorced in 1997. He 
remarried in 2000 and has a 15-year-old child. He worked for a federal contractor 
between 2002 and 2013, and for his present employer since 2013.3   
   
 In his May 2014 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed he had 
delinquent debts and had filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2012. The SOR debts alleged 
are supported by his admissions, credit reports from May 20, 2014, December 2014, 
and September 2015, IRS transcripts, and court documents.4 
 
 In August 2014, as part of a background investigation, Applicant was interviewed 
by a government investigator. Applicant admitted to the investigator that for the past five 
years he had been financially irresponsible. He disclosed that his financial problems 
were due to excessive gambling by his wife and poor money management. He 
explained that during this time his wife had been gambling compulsively and 
excessively. She gambled on a daily basis. In his response to the FORM, he disputed 
that he told the investigator that she gambled $2,000 daily, but admitted that the amount 
she gambled was enough to make them fall behind on their mortgage and other bills. 
Applicant told the investigator that he also gambled between $20 and $40 a week. He 
and his wife began to borrow money to support her gambling habit. Their debts 
eventually outweighed their combined income of approximately $150,000 annually. He 
admitted that along with his wife’s gambling habit, both he and his wife were poor 
money managers.5 
 
                                                          
1 AE J is a copy of the SOR and Applicant’s answer to the SOR. AE K is a duplicate letter that was 
provided with Applicant’s answer to the SOR. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. 
 
5 Items 2, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
 After filing bankruptcy, Applicant had a tentative payment plan, and he made 
approximately 13 payments of $1,000. Later the payments increased to approximately 
$1,757, and he could not afford to pay that amount. He stopped making payments and 
the bankruptcy was dismissed in late 2013. Applicant told the investigator that in 
November 2013, he received a refund of approximately $10,000 from the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy fund. He did not use this refund to pay his delinquent creditors. He could not 
account for where the money was spent, but felt some of it likely was used by his wife to 
gamble. He does not know where the rest of the money was spent.6  
 
 In his SCA, Applicant stated: “I had some deaths in the family about 6 years ago. 
I did a lot of traveling with money I didn’t have and slowly went into debt I could not get 
out of. I switched my W-4 from zero dependents to 9 dependents to bring home more 
money and then was not able to pay the IRS at the end of the year.”7 His father died in 
December 2007, and he traveled extensively to take care of his mother and sister.8 
Applicant told the government investigator that he intentionally changed the number of 
dependents so he would have more money available for his wife to gamble. He then did 
not have the funds to pay Federal income taxes owed to the IRS for tax years 2010, 
2011, and 2012. He denied he was attempting to defraud the government. He was 
aware his conduct could adversely affect his security clearance. Applicant owes the IRS 
approximately $35,269 for delinquent income taxes. In October 2014, Applicant began a 
payment plan with the IRS. He has consistently paid $514 a month.9  
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his mortgage in about November 2012. At the time 
of the interview in August 2014, he continued to live in the residence and had not made 
the monthly payment. He did not consider this to be dishonest. He did not plan on 
moving until he was evicted. He could not account for how or where the unpaid 
mortgage money was spent. The house was sold in June 2015 through a short sale. 
Applicant acknowledged he still owes the second mortgage (SOR 1. d - $58,715). In his 
answer to the SOR and response to the FORM, he stated he was making payments on 
this debt, but he failed to provide documented proof of his payments.10  
 
 In his 2014 interview, Applicant told the investigator that his wife had recently 
reduced her gambling spending to $100 or $200 a week, and he planned on opening 
separate bank accounts. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that his wife had a bad 
gambling habit, but it was in the past. He further stated: “I have gone to meetings with 
her and she hasn’t had a problem in a long while.”11 He did not provide additional 
                                                          
6 Items 2, 4; AE A. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
9 Items 6, 7, 8, 9; AE B. 
 
10 Items 2, 4. 
 
11 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
information about her recovery or whether he continued to gamble. In his response to 
the FORM, Applicant stated: “My wife was in charge of paying the bills and with me 
working and traveling all of the time, I had no idea that we were falling behind.”12  
 
 Applicant provided proof that he settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($215).13 He 
provided a letter from the creditor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($65) that he made a 
payment to resolve this debt.14 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($130) was settled in full and 
proof was provided.15 He settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($1,647) and provided proof. All 
of these debts were resolved in January 2016. He is making payments of $365 on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($7,962) and provided proof that he has been making payments 
since January 2016.16  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he contacted the creditors for the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($580), 1.g ($368), 1.k $313), 1.l ($896), 1.m ($1,012), and 1.n 
($273), and 1.r ($3,904). He stated he was told that each one was “settled.” Applicant 
did not provide proof that he paid these debts or paid a settlement amount. He stated 
that he was making payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j (original balance $160) and the 
balance had increased to $1,203. He had two payments remaining, but he failed to 
provide proof of his payments. He stated he was investigating the validity of medical 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p ($413) and 1.q ($115). He did not provide proof of actions to 
resolve the debts.17 These debts are not resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
12 Item 4; AE A. 
 
13 AE F. 
 
14 AE H. 
 
15 AE G. 
 
16 AE C. 
 
17 Item 2, AE I. 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
6 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.18 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by . . . borrowing money 
to fund gambling or pay gambling debts . . . . 
  
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and unpaid Federal income taxes. He 
and his wife borrowed money to support her gambling habit. He changed his Federal 
income tax withholdings to pay for travel and gambling. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple. He intentionally changed his Federal 
income tax withholdings so he could use the additional money to fund his wife’s 
gambling. He began borrowing money to fund his wife’s gambling habit. In his response 
to the FORM, he claimed his wife was responsible for paying the bills, and he had no 
idea they were falling behind in paying them. His statements are not credible. 
Insufficient evidence was provided to conclude Applicant’s behavior is unlikely to recur. 
His conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s gambling habit and that 
they were poor money managers. He spent money he did not have for travel when his 
father was ill. Applicant was aware of his wife’s gambling habit and borrowed money for 
her to use it to gamble. He also was gambling during this time, but there is no indication 
his gambling was excessive. He was aware at the time that they were spending money 
they did not have. These were conditions that were within his control. It is 
understandable that he felt compelled to travel to take care of his mother and sister after 
his father passed away. This was somewhat beyond his control. For the full application 
of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude he did so, in fact the evidence indicates the contrary. 
He was aware of his wife’s problem and exacerbated it by borrowing money for her to 
gamble. After receiving a $10,000 refund from the bankruptcy fund in late 2013, he does 
not know how he spent the money, but it was not to pay his creditors. He did not begin 
to pay the IRS until after he completed his SCA in May 2014. The other debts he paid 
did not occur until 2016. Applicant has not acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) applies 
minimally.  
  
 No evidence was presented that Applicant has received financial counseling. He 
did not provide a budget or a reliable financial plan for resolving his delinquent debts. 
Although he stated he was told by certain creditors that his debts were settled, he failed 
to provide proof that he had paid the debts. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has a payment plan with the IRS that began in October 2014, and he 
has been making consistent payments. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. He paid some 
of the smaller debts in the SOR, but it did not occur until after he received the SOR and 
two years after he became aware of the security concerns raised by finances. I have 
given Applicant some credit for resolving these debts, but his conduct marginally falls 
within the concept of a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors under AG ¶ 20(d). 
He failed to explain, provide proof of payment, or provide substantiating information 
regarding debts he was told were “settled.” AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to them. 
 
 Applicant indicated he was going to research the validity of the medical debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q. He failed to provide information about his efforts to resolve the 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and a military veteran. He has worked for federal 
contractors since 2002. He was aware that his wife had a gambling problem. They 
borrowed money so she could gamble. He reduced his Federal income tax withholdings 
so he would have more money for her gambling. He stopped paying his mortgage and 
continued to live in the house, but could not account for where the extra money was 
going. He filed bankruptcy and after it was dismissed and funds were returned, he did 
not use them to pay his delinquent debts. He has a payment plan with the IRS and 
recently paid some small delinquent debts. He failed to provide sufficient evidence that 
he paid other delinquent debts. Applicant’s modest effort in paying some of his creditors 
is overwhelmingly outweighed by his lack of self-control, poor judgment, and 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. He has not established a reliable 
financial track record. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.r:  Against Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
