KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant cites to the following statement by the Judge: “I find no countervailing
mitigating condition that is applicable here.  Applicant used an illegal substance on 10 to 15
occasions after having been granted a security clearance, the last time in June 2013, less than
three years prior to his hearing.”  He argues that the Judge appeared to have already made up his
mind before considering or analyzing the mitigating evidence.  We do not read the Judge’s
analysis as reflecting an inflexible predisposition to rule against Applicant but, rather, that he
had considered the mitigating conditions and found none to be applicable based upon the record
before him.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge was
unbiased. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-03403.a1
DATE: 12/20/2016
DATE: December 20, 2016
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-03403
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 7, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On August
25, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Richard A. Cefola denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 32 year-old Ph.D.  He has held a clearance since 2004.  He used marijuana
about 10 to 15 times while holding a clearance and while knowing that such conduct was illegal. 
He used marijuana about three times a year from late 2007 to mid-2013.  He signed a statement of
intent to refrain from future use with automatic revocation of his clearance should he continue in this
misconduct.  Drug tests conducted in 2014 and 2016 were negative.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s multiple uses of marijuana while holding a clearance, the most
recent occasions having been three years before the hearing.  He concluded that none of the
mitigating conditions were applicable.  Though acknowledging the “unqualified support” that
Applicant enjoys from those who know him, the Judge stated that Applicant’s conduct left him with
doubts that must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to the following statement by the Judge: “I find no countervailing mitigating
condition that is applicable here.  Applicant used an illegal substance on 10 to 15 occasions after
having been granted a security clearance, the last time in June 2013, less than three years prior to
his hearing.”  Appeal Brief at 5, quoting Decision at 4.  He argues that the Judge appeared to have
already made up his mind before considering or analyzing the mitigating evidence.  We do not read
the Judge’s analysis as reflecting an inflexible predisposition to rule against Applicant but, rather,
that he had considered the mitigating conditions and found none to be applicable based upon the
record before him.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge was
unbiased. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-10122 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2016).   
2
Applicant cites to various pieces of record evidence that the Judge did not discuss but that
he believes should have been.  He also cites to the whole-person factors, arguing that the Judge did
not properly weigh the evidence.  
Although a  Judge is expected, and presumed, to have considered the entire record, he is not
required to discuss every piece of evidence, which would be a practical impossibility.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-02158 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2016).  Applicant’s argument is not enough to
rebut the presumption that the Judge considered the entirety of the evidence.  We note Applicant’s
argument that the written decision is less extensive than it could have been.  However, given the
record that was before him, the Judge captured the essential facts that a reasonable person would
expect him to have addressed.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02548 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 19, 2016).  
Applicant’s argument amounts to an alternative weighing of the evidence, which is not
enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05359 at 3 (App. Bd. May 4, 2016).  Use of an illegal
drug, especially while holding a security clearance, raises questions about an applicant’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 24.  See also ISCR
Case No. 14-03450 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015) concerning the security significance of illegal drug
use after having completed a security clearance application.  
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra'anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
