 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-05353 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On February 24, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 25, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on June 8, 2016.  On August 1, 2016, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for August 22, 2016. The hearing was 
rescheduled as a result of a travel delay and held August 23, 2016. During the hearing, 
the Government offered six exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 
1 – 6.  Applicant testified and offered three exhibits which were admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A – C. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 31, 2016. The record 
was held open until September 7, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents. Applicant submitted a 45-page document on November 29, 2016, which 
 
2 
 
 
was admitted as AE D. The documents were submitted late because of administrative 
oversight. On November 30, 2016, Applicant submitted a three-page document 
admitted as AE E. Department Counsel had no objection to AE D and E. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e, and denies 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. She has worked for her current employer 
since July 2003.  Applicant has held a security clearance for 13 years with no security 
incidents or violations. She is a high school graduate and has some college credits. She 
is married and supports three children, a 19-year-old son, a 15-year-old daughter, and a 
13-year-old step-daughter. (Tr. at 23-27, 62; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that she has a history of financial 
problems. The SOR alleges the following debts: a $17,892 balance on a car that was 
voluntarily repossessed. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 1 at 34; Gov at 8; Gov 4 at 7; Gov 5 at 4); a 
$13,883 charged-off time share account (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 5 at 4; Gov 6 at 6); a $924 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 5 at 4; Gov 6 at 6-7); and a $64 medical 
account placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 5 at 12; Gov 6 at 7). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleged that Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 
1996. It was dismissed in 1997. The Government did not present evidence of the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but Applicant admitted the Chapter 13 bankruptcy in her 
response to the SOR. During the hearing, Applicant testified that she decided to stop 
the bankruptcy proceedings and pay her bills instead. She was 19 at the time she filed 
bankruptcy. She was young, naïve, and had given birth to her son. After speaking with 
her parents and attorney, she decided to withdraw the bankruptcy. She resolved the 
bills on her own. I find SOR ¶ 1.e for Applicant.    
 
From age 6 to 13, Applicant’s daughter suffered from a serious medical 
condition. Her daughter’s health issues caused a lot of emotional and financial stress. 
Applicant was a single parent who received no child support. At times, she felt her job 
was at risk and she had to take unpaid time off from May 2008 to September 2009, to 
care for her daughter. Her daughter is now 15 and in good health. Her son also had a 
medical operation when he was 15. However, his operation was covered by insurance 
and Applicant did not have to take extensive time off from work. Applicant is now 
attempting to recover from her financial problems.  (Tr. 23-25, 28-29; Gov 6 at 2)   
 
Applicant divorced in 2003 and remarried in 2013. Her husband was unemployed 
when they married, but has been fully employed since April 2014. Her husband’s annual 
income is approximately $30,000. Applicant’s annual income is approximately $60,000 
 
3 
 
 
to $70,000 a year depending on overtime. After expenses they have between $200 to 
$1,000 left over each month depending on overtime. They are current on all taxes. (Tr. 
29-30, 34-36, 48-49, 60-61)  
 
The current status of the debts alleged in the SOR is: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: a $17,892 balance on a car that was repossessed: Applicant was on 
unpaid leave while caring for her daughter. She could not afford the payments, so she 
voluntarily surrendered the car. She tried to negotiate for reduced payments several 
times before surrendering the car. The car was sold at auction leaving a remaining 
balance of $13,950. A judgment was entered against Applicant in June 2013. Applicant   
agreed to pay $50 monthly towards this judgment. She provided a copy of the judgment 
at the hearing. Applicant testified that she has been making the payments since the 
date of the judgment. After the hearing, she provided documentation verifying this 
assertion. (Tr. 17-22, 58-59; AE A; AE B; AE D; AE E)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: a $13,883 charged-off time share account: Applicant purchased this 
time share in 2010, but could not afford the payments because of the expenses incurred 
as a result of her daughter’s medical condition. The time share company changed the 
fee structure. Applicant attempted to settle the debt, but was unsuccessful. She recently 
contacted the timeshare company. They sent her an e-mail indicating that they reached 
a settlement for the amount owed and that no additional amounts will be required from 
Applicant. (Tr. 31-34, 37; AE C)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: a $924 account placed for collection: Around 2006, Applicant’s car 
was stolen and set on fire. The car was a total loss. The insurance company did not pay 
the entire amount of the loss. Applicant claims she had gap insurance that should cover 
the remaining amount. She contacted the company and the company indicated there 
were no accounts under her maiden name, her married name, or under her social 
security number. They were going to send a letter that they had no record of this 
account.  Applicant did not submit a letter after the hearing. The debt is not listed on 
Applicant’s most recent credit reports. (Tr. 37-43; Gov 3; Gov 4)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: a $64 medical account placed for collection: Applicant disputes this 
account. She states that she has paid all of the medical accounts. She believes this was 
her son’s medical bill which she paid in 2013 or 2014. The credit report provides no 
information as to who to contact to resolve this account. If there was a way to verify the 
account she would pay the debt. The medical account is not listed on Applicant’s most 
recent credit reports. I find for Applicant regarding this allegation because the SOR 
allegation was insufficient. (Tr. 43-45; Gov 3; Gov 4)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. Applicant has had financial 
problems over the past several years to include a vehicle repossession and a charged-
off time share account. She has been unable to satisfy these debts over the past 
several years.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet their 
financial obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply:  
 
 AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.  Most of 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s debts were the result of her inability to pay the debts because of her 
daughter’s serious chronic illness. Applicant has been attempting to resolve her 
financial debts. She does not live above her means. Her financial situation is now stable 
and Applicant’s past financial problems do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Applicant had to take unpaid leave 
from May 2008 to September 2009 to care for her daughter. She was unable to pay 
most of her debts. She voluntarily returned her car because she was unable to make 
payments. She attempted to negotiate the terms of her automobile loan before 
voluntarily surrendering the car to the dealer. Once the debt went to judgment, she 
agreed to pay $50 a month towards the debt and has been timely paying towards the 
judgment. Applicant’s decision to purchase a timeshare in 2010 was not the best 
judgment. However, she does not live above her means. She acted responsibly under 
the circumstances.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant is making payments towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1(a). 
She contacted the timeshare company and they agreed to settle the debt. The two 
remaining debts are no longer on Applicant’s credit reports. Applicant’s financial 
situation is under control.  
   
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant agreed to pay $50 a month to a law firm 
collecting for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. she has paying on this debt since 2013. 
She settled the debt with the timeshare alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Although she has not 
formally disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, Applicant provided sufficient 
reasons for her dispute. Neither debt is listed on her most recent credit reports.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 13-year 
history with her current employer. I considered the challenges Applicant has faced over 
the past several years, both medical and financial. Her decision to file for Chapter 13 in 
1996 when she was 19, was reasonable. She decided to forgo the process and 
resolved the debts on her own. I considered her daughter’s chronic illness and the fact 
that Applicant had to take unpaid leave for sixteen months to care for her daughter. This 
occurred when Applicant was a single mother and received no child support. While 
Applicant’s decision to purchase a timeshare in 2010, did not demonstrate the best 
judgment, the timeshare settled with Applicant and states she owes no additional 
money.  Applicant disputes two additional delinquent debts. Both had small balances 
and no longer appear on her most recent credit reports. Her financial situation is stable. 
Security concerns under financial considerations are mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
