 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03650 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 24, 2013. On 
November 12, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2015, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing before an administrative judge. On August 9, 2016, he 
requested a hearing. (Hearing Exhibit I.) Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
August 26, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on September 7, 2016. On 
September 9, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for September 29, 2016. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified but did not present the testimony of any other 
witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I kept the record open until October 21, 
2016, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He did not submit anything 
further. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 11, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 2.a, and 2.b. He denied SOR ¶ 1.c-1.e and 1.g. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old sheet metal mechanic employed by a defense 
contractor. He graduated from high school in June 2001, worked as a cook and 
telemarketer, and began his current job in January 2007. He has never married. He has 
a ten-year-old daughter, for whom he pays child support of $450 per month. (Tr. 31.) He 
has never held a security clearance. 
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are reflected in credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 
August 2013 (GX 3), April 2015 (GX 4), and October 2015 (GX 5.) The status of the 
debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: automobile loan charged off for $9,858 in February 2013. This 
debt is reflected on all three CBRs. Applicant testified that he contacted the collection 
agency who bought the debt, and he intended to accept an offer to settle the debt for 
$2,600. (Tr. 33-37.) As of the date the record closed, he had not presented any 
evidence that he accepted the settlement offer or made payments on the debt.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: telecommunication bill referred for collection of $242 in July 
2012. This debt is reflected on all three CBRs. Applicant admitted that he had not taken 
any action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 38.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: medical debt for $61. This debt is reflected only in the April 2015 
CBR, with the date of last activity reflected as December 2013. Applicant testified that 
this debt was “about to be paid,” but he did not present evidence of payment. (Tr. 39.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 SOR 1.d: judgment for $742 entered in November 2011 and satisfied in July 
2012. This judgment is reflected as satisfied on all three CBRs. This debt was paid by 
garnishment of Applicant’s wages. (Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: judgment for $806 entered in May 2009. This judgment is reflected 
as unsatisfied on all three CBRs. Although Applicant denied this debt in his answer to 
the SOR, he admitted it at the hearing. It is not resolved. (Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 SOR 1.f: judgment for $1,076 entered in October 2012 and satisfied in 
November 2013 after garnishments in February 2013. This judgment is reflected on 
all three CBRs. It is reflected as satisfied on the April 2015 and October 2015 CBRs. 
Applicant admitted this debt at the hearing and testified that it was satisfied by 
garnishment of his wages. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: delinquent utility bill for $513, referred for collection in May 
2010. This debt is reflected on the August 2013 CBR but not on the April 2015 and 
October 2015 CBRs. Applicant admitted this debt at the hearing. He contacted the 
creditor to determine the amount of the debt, but he has not resolved it. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: delinquent cellphone bill for $333, referred for collection in April 
2013. This debt is reflected on the August 2013 and October 2015 CBRs. Applicant 
testified that this debt was incurred when he changed providers, the new provider 
promised to pay his last bill with the previous provider, and the new provider failed to 
keep its promise. Applicant has taken no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 45.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: delinquent utility bill for $130, referred for collection in October 
2007. This debt is reflected on the August 2013 CBR but not on the April 2015 and 
October 2015 CBRs. Applicant has taken no action to resolve it. (Tr. 46.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to all questions whether, 
during the last seven years, he had a judgment entered against him, had defaulted on 
any type of loan, had debts turned over to a collection agency, had his wages 
garnished, or had been over 120 days delinquent on any debt. He also answered “No” 
to the question whether he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. His 
August 2013 credit bureau report (CBR), obtained about three weeks after he submitted 
his SCA, reflected the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f; the charged-off debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a; and the debts referred for collection alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.g-1.i.  
 
 Applicant testified that he completed a handwritten version of his SCA, submitted 
it, and did not carefully read the printed version. He testified that, due to the passage of 
time, he could not clearly remember how he answered the financial questions in the 
handwritten version. He denied intentionally falsifying the SCA. (Tr. 46-50.) When he 
was interviewed by a security investigator in September 2013 and confronted with the 
evidence, he admitted all the debts reflected on his August 2013 CBR. The security 
 
4 
 
investigator did not ask him to explain why did not disclose his delinquent debts in his 
SCA. (GX 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is about $45,000. (Tr. 30.) He has about $8,000 in his 
401(k) retirement account. After he pays all his bills, he has a net monthly remainder of 
about $600. (Tr. 32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially 
applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, recent, were not incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur, and were not caused by conditions largely beyond his control. He has 
not received counseling. He submitted no documentary evidence of voluntary payments 
or payment agreements. The judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f were satisfied by 
garnishment, which “is not the same as, or similar to, a good-faith initiation of repayment 
by the debtor.” ISCR Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011), citing ISCR Case No. 
08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). He has not disputed any of the debts alleged in the 
SOR.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of 
education are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information 
 
7 
 
on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant has limited formal education. His July 2013 SCA was his first 
experience with the security clearance process. His testimony at the hearing reflected 
that he has been generally unconcerned about his delinquent debts. His explanations 
for not disclosing his delinquent debts in his SCA were vague due to the passage of 
time and his inattention in completing it, but they were plausible. His testimony at the 
hearing was candid and credible. He readily admitted that his answers were “false,” but 
he adamantly denied intending to hide information. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established. No other disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has refuted the allegation that his 
intentionally falsified his SCA, but he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
