 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-03451 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges four delinquent debts. Applicant 
is credited with paying or resolving all of his SOR debts. He has established a track 
record of debt payment and resolution. Financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.     
  
History of the Case 
  
On April 13, 2013, Applicant completed and signed his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
On April 13, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a hearing. 
On July 15, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 30, 2016, the 
case was assigned to me. On September 30, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for October 26, 2016. 
(HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered three exhibits; and all 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 13-16; 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5; Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-C) On November 3, 2016, 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he denied the SOR allegations. He admitted that at 
one time he owed the debts in the SOR. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 6) In 1982, he 
graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) He briefly attended college, and he did not receive a 
degree. (Tr. 6) He has not served in the military. (Tr. 7) He has been employed as a 
supervisor in shipping and receiving or in manufacturing support for 23 years. (Tr. 7) He 
has never been married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 7) There is no 
evidence of security violations. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The cause of Applicant’s delinquent debts was the decline in the fair market 
value of his residence. (Tr. 17) He borrowed funds to make repairs and upgrade his 
residence. (Tr. 18) His mortgage payments increased; there was a balloon payment; 
and his mortgage was higher than the fair market value of his residence. (Tr. 19) 
Applicant exhausted his 401(k) account in an attempt to retain his residence. (Tr. 19) 
His 401(k) account is now about $20,000. (Tr. 25) His current annual income is 
$50,000. (Tr. 25) His federal and state taxes are current. (Tr. 26-27) 
 
The status of the four SOR allegations is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a mortgage for $287,450 past due in the amount of $12,340. 
On March 15, 2016, the creditor wrote that the mortgage was loaned on September 28, 
2004. (AE A) On July 20, 2012, a short sale resolved the debt. (AE A) The creditor 
acknowledged an “operational error” caused the creditor not to correctly report the 
resolution, and the creditor promised corrective action within 30 days. (AE A) When 
Applicant’s home sold, the sale price was about $20,000 more than he owed on his 
mortgage. (Tr. 31)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent medical debt for $211. On March 4, 2016, 
Applicant paid $137 out of his health spending account to address a medical debt. (AE 
 
3 
                                         
 
B) Applicant’s May 12, 2016 Equifax credit report shows this debt has a zero balance 
owed. (GE 5 at 1)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a judgment filed in 2008 for $9,846. Applicant believed the 
debt resulted from funds borrowed to improve his residence. He paid $6,000 and settled 
the debt when his home was sold. (Tr. 20-21, 28-30; GE 3) Applicant’s May 12, 2016 
Equifax credit report, the most recent credit report of record, does not show a judgment 
against Applicant. (GE 5 at 1)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a collection account for $1,912. On October 15, 2016, the 
collection company wrote that the debt was settled. (Tr. 22-23; AE C)  
 
In sum, the evidence of record indicates all SOR debts are resolved. The only 
negative entry in Applicant’s May 12, 2016 Equifax credit report is a $37 medical 
collection debt. (GE 5) Applicant understands the security concern raised by delinquent 
debts, and he assures he will continue to maintain his financial responsibility.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
 
4 
                                         
 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
                                         
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
                                            
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
                                         
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s delinquent debts were caused 
by the decline in the real estate market and his inability to make the increased mortgage 
payments on his residence. He acted responsibly by paying several debts subsequently 
alleged in the SOR before the SOR was issued.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts. Applicant is credited with paying 
or resolving all of his SOR debts. Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to 
pay his debts and his track record of paying his debts, future new delinquent debt “is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control.” His payments of his debts showed good faith. He 
has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue making 
progress paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will conscientiously 
endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed as a supervisor in shipping and receiving or in manufacturing support for 23 
years. There is no evidence of security violations. 
 
Appellant’s delinquent debts were caused by the decline in the real estate market 
and the increase in his house payments. His two most significant debts were resolved 
when his residence was sold. All of Applicant’s SOR debts are now paid. His 401(k) 
 
7 
                                         
 
account contains about $20,000. His current annual income is $50,000 and he has 
sufficient income to pay his expenses and debts. His federal and state taxes are 
current. He assures he intends to pay his debts, and he understands the conduct 
required to retain his security clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
  
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
