 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07927 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
           On February 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD), pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865 (as amended), and DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant. It detailed the reasons 
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) why DOD 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.  
 
          Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 29, 2016, admitting all allegations. 
He also requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to 
the undersigned on June 6, 2016. A notice of hearing was issued on July 28, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for September 7, 2016. The Government offered three documents, 
referenced as Government Exhibits (Exs.) 1 and 2, as well as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, 
which were received without objection. The hearing exhibit included the Government’s 
request for administrative notice regarding certain facts related to the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (Pakistan). Applicant testified and, without objection, presented one exhibit, 
which was accepted as Applicant’s Ex. A. The record remained open until September 21, 
2016, to allow the Applicant to submit additional documentation. On September 15, 2016, 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant forwarded one additional document through Department Counsel, who 
forwarded without objection what has been accepted as Ex. B. The transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) was received on that same day and the record was closed. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about Pakistan. It consisted of the official request plus five attached source 
documents (I-V). They were offered to aid in the analysis of security clearance issues 
related to foreign influence. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of 
notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or 
from Government reports. Various facts pertaining to this nation were derived from the 
offered request, its attachments, and recent DOHA cases concerning Pakistan.1  
 
          I have considered the aforementioned information. Although Pakistan is a 
parliamentary federal republic, its human rights record remains poor. Several terrorist 
groups operate in parts of Pakistan with impunity, and the U.S. Department of State 
considers it to be a terrorist safe haven. In August 2014, the U.S. Department of State 
warned U.S. citizens to defer all nonessential travel to Pakistan, as the presence of 
several terrorist groups posed a potential danger to U.S. citizens through Pakistan. This 
warning referenced all of Pakistan, although the majority of the country’s internal strife 
occurs toward the country’s western border. (See Ex. A; Tr. 12-13) Moreover, in May 
2011, U.S. forces killed Osama bin Laden, mastermind of the September 2001 attacks 
on the United States and numerous other terrorist attacks around the world. He had been 
living in hiding in a secure residential compound within an affluent suburb of Islamabad, 
Pakistan’s capital.   
 
         Despite these problems, Pakistan continues to cooperate with the United States on 
a variety of issues including counterterrorism, weapons non-proliferation, and bilateral 
trade. Since 2009, the United States has trained at least 1,120 members of the Pakistan 
military. In addition, over the past five years, the United States has committed five billion 
dollars of foreign aid to Pakistan.  
 
                                                        FINDINGS OF FACT  
 
          Applicant is a 26-year-old man who was born and initially raised in the eastern part 
of Pakistan, toward India and a considerable distance from Afghanistan. (Tr. 17-18; Ex. 
A) In 1996, Applicant’s father, a successful professional, immigrated to the United States. 
                                                          
1 In addition, Applicant offered narrative and a map of the area including and surrounding Pakistan. (Ex. 
A; Tr. 11-14)  
 
 
 
 
3 
He did so in hopes of settling in a country which would offer his family a better life and 
superior educational opportunities for his children, despite the fact relocation would 
greatly reduce the status he had earned as a professional in his native land. (Tr. 20) In 
2001, he was joined by his wife and children, including the young Applicant.  
 
       Although the father would never again find the level of professional work he 
abandoned to relocate, he was content with lesser jobs in order to bring his family to the 
United States. He became a United States citizen in 2002, leading to Applicant’s and his 
siblings’ status as United States citizens and their receipt of United States passports.2 
(Tr. 19-20) In the process, Applicant’s father formally renounced his Pakistan citizenship. 
His mother remains a dual Pakistan and United States citizen. 
 
        Soon after his own arrival in the United States, Applicant was enrolled in the fourth 
grade. He has since matriculated through both elementary and secondary schools, 
received a high school diploma, and, in 2014, earned a bachelor’s degree in computer 
science. Just before graduation, he started an internship with his present employer. He 
began working for that defense contractor as a full-time software engineer upon college 
graduation. In early 2015, he became a software engineer associate. Applicant is single 
and has no children. Today, he lives with his parents and siblings in their own home. 
 
       Before immigrating to the United States, Applicant’s father was a white-collar 
professional working for a public entity. His mother worked for a public school. They left 
Pakistan before becoming eligible for government pensions. (Tr. 22)  
 
       In 2009, while attending high school, Applicant applied for an identification card from 
the Pakistan government. (Tr. 22) He did so to obviate the necessity of paying additional 
sums for a visa should he return to Pakistan (Tr. 22-23) It was received in the summer of 
2009, before Applicant’s 18th birthday. He used that card for a trip with his brother to 
Pakistan for a family wedding that same year. At the time, Applicant had no collegiate or 
professional ambitions. (Tr. 39) He pursued the identification card at the suggestion of 
family friends and his parents as a cost-saving measure. (Tr. 23) The last time Applicant 
was in Pakistan was in 2012, while attending college. That trip was a three-month visit 
with his family to see an ailing grandfather. While there, they stayed with one of 
Applicant’s uncles, a man noted on Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) as a 
foreign contact. (Tr. 24)  
 
       Applicant does not consider the identity card to be essential and has been willing to 
relinquish it. (Tr. 25). He does not believe he ever used it because he still had a valid visa 
to carry with his United States passport on his last trip to Pakistan. (Tr. 36) He recently 
surrendered the identity card to his security manager. (Ex. B) 
 
                                                          
2 One sibling, a pre-teen, was subsequently born in the United States. Applicant believes that he and his 
other siblings (a sister and two brothers), all of whom are single, are dual citizens based on their birth 
abroad and parentage. (Tr. 19, 29) If it is an issue, Applicant maintains that he is willing to formally renounce 
any ties to Pakistan, including citizenship, if applicable. (Tr. 30) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
       Among Applicant’s relatives who still have a nexus with Pakistan and with whom 
Applicant maintains varying degrees of contact is the afore-referenced uncle, a citizen 
and resident of that country. In his early 50s, he is an administrator at a public school. He 
has not performed military service. (Tr. 25-26) Applicant does not know if this uncle is 
eligible for a state pension. He noted that the uncle is in the process of immigrating to the 
United States with his entire family in pursuit of better lives. He has already commenced 
the appropriate processes.3 (Tr. 26) Applicant’s father is sponsoring the family in their 
immigration. The uncle and Applicant’s parents are in somewhat regular contact, although 
Applicant only has incidental contact with this uncle once a month or less by telephone. 
The uncle does not know what Applicant does for a living. (Tr. 28)  
 
       Applicant’s grandparents are citizens and residents of Pakistan, as are two more 
siblings of Applicant’s father, a sister and brother. (Tr. 29) Applicant’s grandfather is in ill 
health. Applicant also has younger cousins remaining in Pakistan, who were raised in that 
country while Applicant was living in the United States. Applicant’s parents initiated 
contact with these relations when Applicant visited Pakistan.  (Tr. 29) Applicant’s contact 
with his grandparents and relatives is infrequent. When his family calls his father’s familial 
home in Pakistan and Applicant joins in on the call ever couple of months, he may speak 
to his uncle or grandparents. (Tr. 30) None of these kin have visited the United States.  
 
       To the best of his knowledge, neither Applicant nor his family maintains any holdings 
or real estate in Pakistan. He believes the familial home there is technically owned by his 
uncle.4 He stresses his family in Pakistan lives out of harm’s way, close to India. (Tr. 43) 
Applicant has no plans to live in Pakistan. He thinks of the United States as his country. 
(Tr. 36) In addition, he stated that he and his family “embrace this country” and he thinks 
of himself as having lived a life doing what every “normal American kid would do.” (Tr. 42) 
He is active at his gymnasium, attends a house of worship, is studying for a master’s 
degree, and he focuses on his work. (Tr. 34)   
 
                                                              POLICIES  
 
          When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
3  This uncle has a wife, five daughters, and a son. (Tr. 26-27) None have a connection with the Pakistan 
government. Applicant’s cousins are younger and “mostly still” in school. (Tr. 28) 
 
4 Applicant does not believe his father has any rights to the familial home in Pakistan, noting that his father 
formally renounced his Pakistan citizenship, and that such citizenship is required for the ownership of 
property in that country. (Tr. 31) 
 
 
 
 
5 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference   
 
 AG ¶ 9 sets out the security concern relating to Foreign Preference:   
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.   
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Pakistan, until he came to this country at about 
age 10 to join his father. Here, he became a United States citizen, was raised, educated, 
and reached his majority. Before reaching his 18th birthday, however, he applied for and 
received an identity card from Pakistan to facilitate economical more passage to that 
country without paying for a visa. Years later, after he reached his majority, chose a 
 
 
 
 
6 
career, and learned that his possession of the foreign document could raise security 
issues, he relinquished the card to his security manager and expressed his willingness to 
formally renounce any remaining citizenship ties to Pakistan. His acquisition of that 
identity card, however, is sufficient to raise Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(b): action to 
acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen.  
 
       As noted, however, Applicant’s acquisition of the identity card from the Pakistan 
government occurred before he turned 18 years of age.  Such facts raise Mitigating 
Condition 11(c): exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor. 
In addition, he has surrendered the card to his security card and has shown no interest in 
using it in the future.5 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Remaining in Pakistan are Applicant’s elderly grandmother, ill grandfather, and an 
uncle with whom he maintains contact. These individuals are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan, although the uncle is preparing to immigrate to the United States with his family 
in the near future. In addition, Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of Pakistan and the 
United States. His two brothers and one sister are also dual citizens of both the United 
States and, due to their parentage and birth, Pakistan.6 At present, Applicant lives with 
his parents and siblings in their home. Given these facts, Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶¶ 
7(a), (b), and (d) apply:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
                                                          
5 Although an identity card does not have either the significance or the cache of a passport, Applicant’s 
relinquishment of this document would also meet the level of mitigation noted at Mitigating Condition 10(e): 
the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority or otherwise invalidated. 
 
6 The SOR incorrectly alleges that Applicant has two sisters who are dual nationals. As noted above, one 
sister, who was born in the United States, is only a citizen of this country. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion or 
inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government; the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States; or terrorist factions exist in the country at issue.  
The risks associated with Pakistan are such to place the burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with family members with a nexus to that 
country do not pose a security risk. At the same time, Applicant should not be placed into 
a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and 
a desire to assist relatives living in foreign countries or maintaining foreign citizenship.  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the U.S., especially in the 
economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at 15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
 Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns including: (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign 
persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; (b) there is no conflict of 
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and (c) contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents 
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate 
those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard applicable in security clearance 
decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 
2013).  
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply. There is no evidence that any of Applicant’s relatives 
with foreign citizenship are dependent on a foreign nation, serve in a foreign military, or 
are involved with terrorist interests. Applicant’s relationship with his elderly grandparents 
in Pakistan may be tender but it has been at arm’s length for his entire adult life. While 
the facts presented do not show that Applicant is particularly close to his uncle, it is 
notable that he is currently seeking to immigrate to the United State with the sponsorship 
of Applicant’s father. As for Applicant’s mother and siblings of dual nationality, it is highly 
notable that these individuals, with whom Applicant cohabitates, have been United States 
citizens for about 15 years, settled in their lives in the United States, and have not 
demonstrated any interests in emigrating from this country. Given their family’s reasons 
for pursuing a new life in this country, their acclimation to the United States, and their 
physical presence in this country, as opposed to Applicant’s aged grandparents and 
immigrating uncle, Applicant has provided notable information to mitigate security 
concerns.   
 
 In contrast, AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in an AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s 
relationship with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of 
interest created by his relationships with family living in foreign countries or maintaining 
foreign citizenship. Applicant has spent the majority of his life as a United States citizen. 
He was educated in this country, started his professional career in the United States, and 
considers this to be his home. He enjoys life in this country cohabitating with his entire 
immediate, nuclear family. He does not proactively sustain relations with his relations 
abroad. Applicant has no plan to return to Pakistan and he is willing to relinquish his dual 
citizenship, just as willingly as he has remitted his Pakistan identity card to the appropriate 
officials. He has no financial or professional tethers abroad. Applicant’s life, family, and 
profession are United States-based.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
 
 
 
 
9 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the 
guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under the above guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
          Applicant is a young man who came to this country at age 10, following his father 
from Pakistan to the United States in search of a better life. He was educated in this 
country and built a life with his nuclear family in the United States. His aspirations for the 
future are based solely here. Both his Pakistan identity card and his status as a dual 
national are related to his birth abroad and actions he took during his minority He has 
relinquished the identity card and is willing to take whatever steps are necessary to 
relinquish his status as a Pakistan citizen. His dual citizen status is the result of his birth; 
otherwise, he considers himself as a “normal American” who grew up in this country. Like 
his father, he enjoys the opportunities offered by this nation and the life he has made for 
himself. The tethers he maintains with his aged grandparents are warm, but long-
distance. His distant relationship with his uncle may soon grow deeper after that relation 
immigrated to the United States. Otherwise, Applicant is devoted to his life and family 
here. 
 
          When disqualifying conditions are raised, the burden is placed on an Applicant to 
proffer facts and evidence in mitigation of the security concerns raised. Here, Applicant 
presented sufficient information about himself, his family, and his actions to mitigate 
foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is granted  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
