 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-03166 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems that began before 2006, and 
includes unpaid Federal and state taxes and delinquent mortgages. She failed to rebut 
or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Her eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On January 3, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 18, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under DoD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On January 19, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On March 1, 
2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items. Applicant received the FORM on March 8, 2016, and had 30 days from its receipt 
to file objections and submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any 
additional information or file objections to the Government’s evidence; hence, Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence. On November 1, 2016, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contained 15 allegations related to delinquent debts. In her answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted all of them. (Item 1.) Those admissions are incorporated 
into these findings. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and unmarried. She is a high school graduate. She 
worked for a state government from 1982 to 2006. She then worked in private positions 
for a couple years. She was unemployed from January 2009 to July 2010. In August 
2010 she started her current position with a defense contractor. (Item 2.) 
  
 Applicant attributed her history of financial problems to medical issues; loss of a 
job and subsequent unemployment; reduction in wages at some jobs; gambling; and her 
failure to recognize tax consequences from taking a lump-sum payment from a 
retirement account. (Items 1, 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from January 2013 and March 2015, the 
SOR alleged 15 delinquent debts that totaled more than $80,000, and arose between 
2006 and 2012. They consisted of unpaid Federal and state taxes, medical bills, 
mortgages, and other miscellaneous bills. (Items 4, 5.) Although Applicant stated that 
she had a payment plan for the unpaid taxes, she did not submit proof of said payments 
or of the resolution of any of the other alleged debts. The 15 alleged delinquent debts 
are unresolved. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit or financial counseling. She 
did not provide a workable plan or budget from which her ability to resolve the 
delinquencies and avoid additional debt problems can be predicted with any certainty.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
 
3 
 
 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy financial obligations, 
which began in 2006 and continues to date. The evidence raises both disqualifying 
conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence to establish any of the above mitigating conditions. 
Applicant failed to demonstrate that her financial problems are unlikely to continue or 
recur, or that her reliability and trustworthiness is not in question. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
  
 Applicant provided some evidence that her financial problems arose as a 
consequence of medical problems and a period of unemployment. However, she also 
acknowledged that gambling and ignorance of tax liability contributed to her delinquent 
debts, which were circumstances within her control. She did not submit evidence that 
she responsibly attempted to manage the debts under all circumstances. Hence, the 
evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she participated in credit or financial 
counseling, established a budget, or developed a plan to manage the debts. There are 
no indications that the unresolved financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does 
not apply. She did not submit evidence that she made a good-faith effort to resolve any 
of the debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 52-year-old woman, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since 2010.  Her history of financial problems 
began prior to 2006. In March 2016 DoD placed her on notice that her answer to the 
SOR failed to include evidence that her financial obligations were resolved or being 
responsibly managed, and, that similar problems were unlikely to recur. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs   1.a through 1.o:              Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
