1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-04983
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Upon considering the surrounding circumstances of Applicant’s criminal charges
and the comprehensive presence of rehabilitation, I conclude that Applicant has
mitigated the criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guidelines J, criminal conduct, and E, personal conduct. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).
2
Applicant answered the SOR on January 5, 2016, denying all of the allegations
except subparagraph 1.c, and requesting a hearing. On August 11, 2016, the case was
assigned to me. On September 8, 2016, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the
case for September 26, 2016. At the hearing, I received three Government exhibits
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Also, I considered Applicant’s
testimony, and took administrative notice of a discovery letter that Department Counsel
mailed to Applicant (HE I).  The transcript (Tr. ) was received on October 4, 2016. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old married man with two children, ages 12 and 7. He has
been separated from his wife since 2011, and he has physical custody of the children.
He is a high school graduate who repairs copiers for a living. He has performed this
type of work for 17 years and he has been with his current employer for the past three
years.
In February 2014, Applicant was charged with harassment stemming from an
incident with a neighbor, as alleged in subparagraph 1.a. The incident began when the
neighbor discovered that Applicant had reported her daughter to the school principal for
bullying his daughter. (Tr. 22) After harsh words were exchanged on Applicant’s front
lawn, the neighbor filed the charges. The charges were later dropped. (Tr. 22)
Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e related to domestic conflicts between Applicant
and his wife. Their relationship is estranged because of her alcoholism. When she is
intoxicated she becomes belligerent, hitting Applicant and “throwing things” at him. (Tr.
25) On one occasion, she hit him so hard in the face that his eye was swollen shut. (Tr.
25) And on another occasion, his wife was so angry, that Applicant locked his children
in the car, fearing for their safety. (Tr. 26)
The November 2009 episode, as alleged in subparagraph 1.b, occurred after
Applicant’s intoxicated wife told him that she was going to go out to pick up their kids.
Applicant refused to let her drive the car. When she did not relent, he pushed her to the
bed and locked her in the bedroom, whereupon she called the police.  (Tr. 23) Applicant
was arrested and charged with assault on a family member. It is unclear from the record
whether the charges were later dropped or Applicant received probation.
In August 2008, Applicant was arrested, as alleged in subparagraph 1.c, after a
dispute with his wife. The episode was precipitated by her intoxication. The court later
dismissed the charge. (Tr. 25) The arrests of May 2007 and February 2003, as alleged
in subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e, respectively, occurred under similar circumstances as
those alleged in subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c. The outcome of the charges is unknown
from the record.
In 1988, when Applicant was a teenager, he was arrested and charged with
carrying a concealed weapon and brandishing a firearm. (Tr. 27) Applicant contested
the charge contending that the weapon was a BB gun, and that his friend was the one
3
who “pulled [it] out on somebody.” (Tr. 27) The charges were dropped after his friend
came to court and admitted to the crimes. (Tr. 27)
Currently, Applicant’s wife’s whereabouts are unknown. Her last fixed address
was a homeless shelter. (Tr. 33) Periodically, he will see her in the street with other
homeless people. The last time he saw her, a few weeks before the hearing, she was in
a supermarket parking lot, intoxicated. Applicant took her to his home, fed her, and
showered her. (Tr. 34) She left after a few days.
Applicant’s wife has a son, age 22, from a previous relationship. He splits time
between Applicant and his father, living with Applicant for two days per week. Applicant
is entirely responsible for his stepson’s financial needs, including his schooling. (Tr. 30)
Applicant has taken an anger-management class as part of the court-ordered
requirements related to one of his arrests. He is not sure which episode prompted the
court to impose the anger-management order. (Tr. 32) Applicant has enrolled his
children in therapy. (Tr. 40)                   
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness. Moreover, by its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” (AG ¶ 30)
Applicant’s history of arrests triggers the application of AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious
crime, or multiple lesser offenses.”
The 1988 charge was dismissed, as another person admitted committing the
crime. AG ¶ 32(c), “evidence that a person did not commit the offense,” applies. I
resolve subparagraph 1.f in Applicant’s favor.
4
As for the domestic-conflict charges, Applicant testified that he was either the
victim or the conscientious intervenor trying to shield his wife and children from her self-
destructive behavior. Applicant’s wife, whose whereabouts are unknown, did not testify,
and there is no other corroborating evidence. Consequently, an evaluation of the
surrounding circumstances is completely reliant on Applicant’s testimony.
The multiple number of domestic-violence episodes is troubling. Moreover, the
most recent arrest in November 2014 stemmed from a dispute with a neighbor, not  a
marital issue. This suggests that Applicant may have an anger-management problem,
and undercuts his credibility. Conversely, Applicant has maintained a paternal
relationship with his wife’s son, a young adult, providing financial support and allowing
him to live at his home two days per week, despite his marital separation from his
stepson’s mother. Sensitive to his wife’s current plight, he responds with compassion
rather than vindictiveness when he periodically encounters her in the streets, taking her
home to shelter her. Also, he has completed an anger-management course, and he has
enrolled his children in therapy to address the issues of their mother’s abandonment.
Under these circumstances, I conclude Applicant’s testimony is credible. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individuals reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns for the same
reasons set forth above.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered the whole-person factors in my credibility determination of Applicant
in the criminal conduct section of the Decision.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
