 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02740 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that his financial problems are under control. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 20, 2009. 
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 18, 2015, and requested a 
decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 2, 
2016, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated February 3, 2016. Applicant 
received the FORM on February 10, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the 
concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any additional evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. 
 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included 
his unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background 
investigator from January 28, 2013. Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, and he raised no objections. I 
admitted the document and considered it.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted the SOR factual allegations consisting of 14 
delinquent accounts totaling over $44,000. Applicant’s SOR admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After completing high 
school, he attended a vocational school and earned a certification as an aviation 
maintenance technician in 2008. He married in 2001, separated in 2007, and his divorce 
became final in 2010. Applicant has an 11-year-old daughter. Since 2010, Applicant’s 
wages have been garnished to pay for child support. 
 
Applicant worked for private companies between 1999 and 2008. He indicated no 
periods of unemployment or underemployment. He has worked for his current employer, 
a federal contractor since 2008. This is his first SCA. 
 
In response to Section 28 (Financial Delinquencies) of Applicant’s 2009 SCA, 
Applicant disclosed that he had financial problems and revealed only one delinquent 
medical debt that he claimed was paid in 2012. The subsequent investigation uncovered 
additional delinquent debts. During an interview with a government investigator in January 
2013, Applicant acknowledged his financial problems. He attributed his financial problems 
to his divorce, loss of his ex-wife’s income, child support payments, medical bills, and not 
having sufficient income to pay his living expenses and debts. Applicant told the 
investigator that he was receiving medical care for depression, which was controlled with 
medications. He acknowledged that he was delinquent on all of his numerous student 
loans and other service accounts.  
 
Applicant indicated that he had not participated in any financial counseling. He 
believed that he was living within his financial means. He described his financial situation 
as frustrating. He indicated his earnings are sufficient to pay rent, utilities, and food, but 
he has no other income to pay any other debts. 
 
During his January 2013 interview, Applicant stated that his gross monthly income 
was $3,749. After paying some of his debts and living expenses, Applicant had less than 
 
3 
                                         
 
$1 in monthly discretionary funds. Applicant told the investigator that he plans to pay his 
delinquent debts as soon as he obtains additional funds. He claimed he did not disclose 
his delinquent accounts because “at the time he completed his SCA he did not have the 
information.” He averred that he lives within his financial means. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the 14 delinquent accounts alleged 
in the SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, his January 2013 summary 
of interview, and the record credit reports establish the 14 debts alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show that he has been in contact with 
his creditors, or that he attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. 
He provided no information about his current financial position. He did not provide any 
information about his current income, monthly expenses, and whether his income is 
sufficient to pay his living expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether 
he has participated in financial counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
 
4 
                                         
 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, SOR 
response, and 2013 summary of interview. The evidence establishes the 14 delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $44,000. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
5 
                                         
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show that his 
financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. Applicant presented no evidence of efforts taken to 
remain in contact with his creditors, or of efforts he has taken to pay or resolve his 
delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant submitted his SCA in 2009 disclosing only one delinquent debt. He 
claimed he did not have the information about his other delinquent debts at the time he 
completed his SCA. In 2013, he participated in a government interview where he was 
asked about his financial problems. At that time, he acknowledged his financial problems 
and promised to address his delinquent debts and work toward resolving them “as soon 
as he obtains additional funds.”  
 
 Applicant was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations security 
concerns during his 2013 interview. He was allowed a period of 30 days after receipt of 
the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and mitigation. He failed to provide any 
documentary evidence to show he has been in contact with his creditors, or that he 
attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts since he acquired 
them. Applicant also failed to establish that he has sufficient income to keep his debts in 
current status and to continue making progress paying his delinquent debts.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s medical condition and expenses, as well as his divorce, 
both of which could be considered circumstances beyond his control that contributed to 
or aggravated his financial problems. However, for mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) to 
 
6 
                                         
 
apply, Applicant must establish that he was financially responsible under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show his financial 
responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant submitted no evidence of payments to the SOR creditors or of efforts to 
resolve his debts. There is insufficient evidence of progress addressing his financial 
problems. The available information is insufficient to establish clear indications that he 
does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial problems are being 
resolved, or are under control. Applicant failed to establish that he has a track record of 
financial responsibility. 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n:    Against Applicant  
 
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
