1 
 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 15-06193 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 20, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), dated December 21, 2015, detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 6, 2016, admitting all 15 financial 
allegations. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 13, 2016, and the 
case was assigned to me on September 7, 2016. DOD issued a notice of hearing on 
September 29, 2016, scheduling a hearing for October 26, 2016. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. The Government offered five exhibits that I marked and admitted 
into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5. Applicant 
testified and submitted eight exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through H. I kept the record open for Applicant to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted one additional document 
consisting of six pages that I marked and admitted into the record as AX I 1 to I 5. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the admission of the documents. (GX 6, e-
mail, dated November 2, 2016) I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
November 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is a 33-year-old high school graduate who has been employed by a 
defense contractor as a production analyst since May 2014. She had previously worked 
in a nursing home, as a financial clerk, and as a production analyst for other defense 
contractors. She had periods of unemployment when her employer lost contracts or 
when she was pregnant. She never married and has one child. Her present net monthly 
income is approximately $3,200, with net monthly expenses of approximately $2,800, 
leaving a net monthly discretionary income of $400. (Tr. 38-41; GX 1, e-QIP, dated 
February 20, 2015 ) 
 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports and court documents (GX 4, credit report, 
dated July 11, 2015; GX 5, credit report, dated October 21, 2016; and GX 2, bankruptcy 
documents, filed June 24, 2015) confirm that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy on 
June 24, 2015. The SOR also alleges and the Government exhibits confirm the 
following delinquent debts for Applicant: a mortgage account past due for $1,688 on a 
balance of $103,543 (SOR 1.b); a delinquent credit card debt charged off for $2,802 
(SOR 1.c);a medical debt in collection for $2,689 (SOR 1.d); a credit card charged off 
for $1,072 (SOR 1.e); two delinquent medical debts for $369 (SOR 1.f), and $258 (SOR 
1.g); a telephone account in collection for $139 (SOR 1.h; a television service account 
in collection for $121 (SOR 1.i); an eyeglass account charged off for $116 (SOR 1.j); 
judgments filed on three delinquent homeowner accounts for $537 (SOR 1.k), $1,030 
(SOR 1.l), and $1,305 (SOR 1.m); a judgement on a delinquent credit card account for 
$2,802 (SOR 1.n); and a judgment on a store account for $819 (SOR 1.o). The credit 
card debts at SOR 1.c and 1.n are duplicate accounts. The total for the debts is 
approximately $12,945. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues began in 2011 when her boyfriend used her credit 
cards without her knowledge. At the time, Applicant was a single mother supporting 
3 
 
herself and her child. She used her grandparent’s address as her mailing address. Her 
relatives living near her grandparents would look through her mail and start credit card 
accounts in her name. Applicant was not aware of the debts incurred by her boyfriend or 
her relatives. She paid them as best she could when she learned about the debts. In 
2012, her company lost the contract she was working on. Applicant was shifted to a new 
contract but her salary was about $300 less per month. (Tr. 11-13) 
 
Applicant was pregnant in January 2013 and about ready to give birth when her 
company again lost a contract. She could not be moved to another contract because of 
the pending birth of her child. She was forced to exhaust her sick leave and annual 
leave to keep employed. Her company continued to provide child care but she did not 
receive any compensation from her company for herself. She received unemployment 
compensation from the state. She had very limited support from her family and no 
assistance from her daughter’s father. He was supposed to pay her $350 monthly but 
he very rarely makes the payment. She paid her bills as best she could in spite of her 
financial problems. (Tr. 36-38) 
 
Applicant was rehired by her company shortly after giving birth in early 2013. She 
was laid off again in February 2014, and received unemployment compensation. She 
was called back to work by her employer in May 2014 but at a lower salary and lesser 
position. She used her retirement 401K account to pay some of her debts in 2014 and 
2015. She paid all of the taxes associated with the withdraw of the funds from her 401K 
account. She prioritized her debts and tried to stay current with her mortgage, 
homeowner’s association fees, and her daughter’s medical bills. She wanted to stay 
current with the medical bills so her daughter could continue to receive treatment. She 
was not always successful, but she was able to keep the past due amount of debt on 
the mortgage small. She missed payments on some homeowner’s fees. Applicant also 
tried to pay some amount on her student loans. The student loan servicing company 
worked with Applicant and she paid them what and when she could. She was able to 
pay enough so the loans were placed in a deferred status until 2018. (Tr. 13-16, 37-30) 
Applicant kept her employer informed of the status of her finances. (GX 3, 
Incident Reports, June and July 2014) In July 2014, Applicant tried to arrange with a 
credit servicing company for a consolidation of her debts so she could have only one 
payment plan. Her attempt was unsuccessful. (AX H, Letter, dated July 29. 2014) In 
December 2014, Applicant was laid off when her company completed the contract she 
was working. She was almost immediately rehired to work on another contract but at 
less pay. She contacted all of her creditors to inform them of her change in income and 
to negotiate new payment plans. She cashed out her retirement account. Not all of her 
creditors co-operated with her. She kept the same priority of paying her daughter’s 
medical bills and her mortgage first. (Tr. 16-17)  
 
In June 2015, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (SOR 1.a) She had 
assistance from a friend who provided her the funds she needed to pay the required 
fees to initiate the bankruptcy. About the same time as the filing of the bankruptcy, 
Applicant started working her present job which provided her with a better salary and 
the ability to pay more on her debts. Applicant’s mortgage at SOR 1.b is now current. 
4 
 
(AX I 2 and I 3, dated October 28. 2016)  The debts at SOR 1.c to 1.j, and 1.o are being 
paid under the bankruptcy. (Tr. 45-49; GX 2, Bankruptcy Document, dated October 24, 
2016) Applicant is current with the bankruptcy payments. (AX F and AX G, Receipts 
dated October and November 2016) The judgments for the homeowner’s fees at SOR 
1.k, 1.l, and 1.m have been paid. (AX I 4, dated June 14, 2016) 
 
Applicant provided a number of letters of recommendation. A chief warrant officer 
4 was Applicant’s Government supervisor on a contract from June 2014 until June 
2015. She praised Applicant for having good character, being trustworthy, mission 
oriented, and an outstanding worker. She labeled Applicant as articulate, highly 
motivated, always seeking self-improvement, and a valuable asset. She recommends 
that Applicant be granted a security clearance. (AX A, letter, dated April 22, 2016)  
 
A chief warrant officer 5 supervised Applicant in 2008 and 2009. She 
characterized Applicant as a team player who learned her job fast and performed much 
better than the expected standard. Applicant worked well as a team member and was 
always team oriented. She recommends that she be granted access to classified 
information. (AX B, Letter, undated)  
 
Another former supervisor, who is retired from the Army, also praised Applicant 
for being a team player, goal oriented, and self-motivated. She recommends that 
Applicant be granted access to classified information. (AX C, Letter, undated; and AX E, 
Message, dated May 23, 2013) An Army colonel commanding a logistic support activity 
praised Applicant for a tireless work effort and efficiency under great pressure. Applicant 
was professional, dedicated, and hard working. (AX D, Letter, dated May 6, 2013) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
5 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. However, the security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Security clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is at risk of acting inconsistently 
with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is 
required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial obligations. 
Unless there are extreme circumstances, failure to pay voluntarily incurred delinquent 
debts raises questions about a person’s judgment and trustworthiness. One who does 
6 
 
not pay financial obligations in a timely and responsible fashion, may also show lack of 
responsibility in the proper handling of classified information. The person who is 
trustworthy in very small matters is also trustworthy in great matters. And the person 
who is dishonest in very small mattes is dishonest in great ones.  
 
Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant had financial difficulties starting in 
2011 when her boyfriend used her credit cards without permission, and she was laid off 
or placed in lower paying jobs by her employer. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is 
documented in her credit reports, incident reports from her employer, and her testimony 
at the hearing. Applicant’s delinquent debts are a security concern. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations). The evidence indicates an inability and not 
an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
These mitigating conditions apply. Applicant incurred delinquent debt as a result 
of her boyfriend’s unauthorized use of her credit card, being laid off from some jobs at 
the end of contracts, and being rehired at a reduced salary. Applicant kept her employer 
informed of her financial situation, established a priority for paying her bills and debts, 
and paid bills when she had the resources to devote to the debts. She filed a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving debt. She 
established that she is current with the required payments to the bankruptcy trustee. 
She also established that she paid in full three judgments for homeowner dues, and is 
current with her mortgage. She also became current with her student loans which are 
now in deferment. 
7 
 
Applicant acted reasonably under the circumstance. Applicant established her 
good-faith initiative to pay her debts. For a good-faith effort, there must be an ability to 
repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. Good 
faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts is needed. 
Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A meaningful track 
record of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual debt payments or 
reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish that she has a reasonable plan 
to resolve financial problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Applicant established a meaningful track record of debt payment. She presented 
supporting information that she paid three judgments, that her other debts are being 
paid under the bankruptcy she filed, and that she is current with the bankruptcy 
payments. By paying and being current with her debts, Applicant has shown that she 
acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and 
obligation towards her finances. 
 
Applicant has shown that she is managing her personal financial obligations 
reasonably and responsibly, and her financial problems are behind her. There is ample 
evidence of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliability. Based on all of the 
financial information, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns based 
on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the recommendations 
8 
 
of Applicant’s former supervisors and superiors that she is honest, reliable, and 
trustworthy, and should be granted eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt due to conditions beyond her control. She prioritized 
her debts and paid off the highest priority debts. She presented evidence that she had 
paid some of her debts and is current with payments in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy for her 
remaining delinquent debts. This information shows Applicant’s responsible 
management of her finances, that she acted reasonably and responsibly towards her 
finances, and that she will continue to responsibly manage her financial obligations. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
