 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00624 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that she has a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that her financial problems are under control. She failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 4, 2012. On 
July 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 12, 2015, and January 14, 2016, and 
requested a decision based on the written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 8, 
2016, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated February 9, 2016. Applicant 
received the FORM on February 15, 2016. She was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the 
concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any additional evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on October 19, 2016. 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant the FORM included her 
unauthenticated summary of interviews from July 11 and 20 of 2012. Applicant was 
informed she could object to the documents and they would not be admitted, or that 
she could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make 
them accurate. Applicant was informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or 
raise any objections could be construed as a waiver, and the evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM and raised no objections. 
I considered all the FORM evidence.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, she admitted the SOR factual allegations consisting of 
nine delinquent accounts totaling about $22,000. Applicant’s SOR admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She attended a 
community college and earned an associate’s degree in 2011. She married in 2000 and 
divorced in 2002. As of her 2012 SCA, she indicated she was living with a cohabitant. 
Applicant has two children, ages 16 and 10. 
 
Applicant worked for private companies between 1999 and 2003. She worked for 
a federal contractor from 2003 to 2006. She was unemployed while attending college 
from 2006 to 2011. She has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor, since 
April 2011. This is her first SCA. 
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2012 SCA, she 
disclosed financial problems in the past seven years, mostly concerning credit loans, 
credit cards, and routine accounts. Applicant explained in her 2012 SCA that she had 
been unemployed and had a hard time paying her debts. She also stated that as of June 
2012, she had taken no action to satisfy her debts because “(she) was trying to get (her) 
finances together to take care of this problem.” 
 
During a background interview with a government investigator in 2012, Applicant 
acknowledged her financial problems. She attributed them to her period of unemployment 
and not having sufficient income to pay her debts and living expenses. She stated she 
was trying to get her finances together and take care of her delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant indicated that her financial problems started in 2005 because she was 
irresponsible and not paying her bills on time. She used credit to pay for living expenses, 
gifts, and shopping. Applicant explained that her cohabitant was laid off at least twice 
between 2005 and 2012, and her ex-husband did not pay his child support obligation. 
After her ex-husband died in 2005, she started to receive about $2,000 a month in Social 
Security benefits. According to her 2012 statement, Applicant’s annual gross salary was 
 
3 
                                         
 
$37,000, with a net monthly income of $2,100, plus the $2,000 from the Social Security 
benefit. 
 
In April 2012, Applicant realized she needed to be more financially responsible. 
She told the investigator that she had matured and now understood the importance of 
financial responsibility and paying her bills on time. As of her interview, she had not sought 
financial counseling. During a second interview in July 2012, Applicant told the 
investigator she had contacted her creditors and requested final bills to establish what 
she owed and establish a payment plan. Applicant also claimed she had made some 
payments, settled some accounts, and paid other debts. She presented no documentary 
evidence to support her claims.  
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation confirmed the nine 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, 
her June 2012 statement, and the record credit reports establish the nine debts alleged 
in the SOR, totaling about $22,000.  
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show that she has been in 
contact with her creditors, or that she attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve her 
delinquent debts. I note, however, that the FORM credit reports (submitted by the 
Government) show that Applicant had numerous other accounts, all of which were in good 
standing (paid or “as agreed”).  
 
Applicant provided no information about her current financial position. She did not 
provide any information about her current income, monthly expenses, and whether her 
income is sufficient to pay her living expenses and debts. There is no information to 
indicate whether she recently participated in financial counseling or whether she follows 
a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in her credit reports, SOR 
response, and 2012 statements. The evidence establishes the delinquent accounts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling over $22,000. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. She presented no evidence to show that her 
financial problems are under control, and that her debts were incurred under 
circumstances unlikely to recur. Applicant presented no evidence of efforts taken to 
remain in contact with her creditors, or of efforts she has taken to pay or resolve her 
delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant submitted her SCA in 2012, and disclosed her financial problems. In 
2012, she participated in a government interview where she was asked about her financial 
problems. At that time, she acknowledged her financial irresponsibility and promised to 
 
6 
                                         
 
address her delinquent debts and work toward resolving her debts. She clearly was aware 
of the Government’s financial considerations security concerns. Applicant was allowed a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to produce evidence in extenuation and 
mitigation. She failed to provide any documentary evidence to show she has been in 
contact with her creditors, or that she attempted to settle, pay, or otherwise resolve her 
delinquent debts since she acquired them. 
 
Applicant also failed to establish that she has sufficient income to keep her debts 
in current status and to continue making progress paying her delinquent debts. In sum, 
Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant submitted no evidence of payments to the SOR creditors or of efforts to 
resolve her debts. There is insufficient evidence of progress addressing her financial 
problems. The available information is insufficient to establish clear indications that she 
does not have a current financial problem, or that her financial problems are being 
resolved, or are under control. Applicant failed to establish that she has a track record of 
financial responsibility. 
 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant or 
reinstatement of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. The 
financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant  
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
