 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01627 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on November 18, 2015, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 16, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 13, 2016, setting the 
hearing for June 16, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified and offered exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
He did not submit additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 23, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d through 1.i. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c. I incorporate these admissions into my findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings, transcript, and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and has worked for his current employer since August 
2012. He has a high school diploma and has taken some college courses. He is married 
(second marriage) and has two children. He served in the Marine Corps for two years 
before he was honorably discharged in 1993.1  
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts in the total amount of $31,218. All the 
debts were listed in a credit report from February 2015. Some of the debts (¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
1.f and 1.g) were listed in a credit report from September 2015, and one was listed in a 
credit report from November 2012 (¶ 1.b).2  
 
 Applicant explained that he experienced several financial setbacks that led to his 
debt status. He divorced his first wife in 2009. The court awarded his ex-wife 
possession of the residence and responsibility to pay the two mortgages. In 2011, 
Applicant was laid off from his job. Shortly thereafter he suffered a significant injury and 
incurred medical expenses that were not covered by insurance. In approximately 2012, 
he lost most of his personal possessions because of a massive flood in his area. He 
was unable to recover from his insurer because the flood was deemed an act of God 
and not covered by the policy. The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (mortgage $18,886): 
 
 This is a past-due amount on a second mortgage for Applicant’s former 
residence that was awarded to his ex-wife in their divorce. She purchased the property 
in her name and incurred both mortgages. She was ordered to pay both mortgages, but 
failed to do so and the house went through foreclosure. Applicant documented that the 
account was closed and no longer appears on his credit report. This debt is resolved.4  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 18; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 20, 35-37; Answer. 
 
4 Tr. at 20-22; AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (credit card $5,145): 
 
 Applicant disputed this account because it was a corporate account that he paid, 
but it remained open and the creditor continued to charge fees. He contacted the 
creditor and the account was removed from his credit report. This debt is resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (medical debt $2,516): 
 
 Applicant paid this medical debt with supporting documentation showing that the 
debt was no longer listed on his credit report. This debt is resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g-1.i (medical debts $1,875; $416; $286; $101): 
 
 Applicant paid these medical debts with supporting documentation showing that 
the debts were no longer listed on his credit report. This debt is resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (telecommunication account $1,169): 
 
 Applicant paid this debt with supporting documentation showing that the debt 
was no longer listed on his credit report. This debt is resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (credit card $824): 
 
 Applicant is attempting to work out a settlement with this creditor. He has 
contacted the creditor every six weeks, with the last contact being three weeks before 
the hearing. This debt is being resolved.9 
 
Current Finances: 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report shows he is in good standing. His annual 
income is approximately $92,500. He has approximately $26,000 in retirement 
accounts. There is no evidence of financial counseling.10 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 40; Answer; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 41; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 41, 44, 45; AE A.  
 
8 Tr. at 41; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. at 43-44; Answer. 
 
10 Tr. at 46-47; AE A.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had nine debts that he failed to pay over an extended period of time. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant established that he was no longer responsible for the mortgage debt. 
He paid the medical debts and other debts, except for one credit card debt. He has 
contacted this remaining creditor in an effort to resolve this final debt. Since he has 
made efforts to repair his financial position, it is reasonable to conclude that these types 
of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(e) partially apply.  
 
The circumstances that led to Applicant’s financial problems, his divorce, job 
loss, and medical condition, were conditions beyond his control. He acted responsibly 
by resolving his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant did not receive financial counselling. He made good-faith efforts to pay 
his debts with the resources he had at the time. He continues to resolve his remaining 
debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies and ¶ 20(d) fully applies.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and the personal circumstances that 
contributed to his financial problems. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about 
the circumstances that led to his debts. He took reasonable actions to resolve them. I 
find it unlikely that Applicant will be in a similar future situation.  
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
