 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04120 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 4, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
10, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 21, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted documents that were marked AE H through M and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 
30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2014. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 
2001 until he was honorably discharged in 2007. He later served in the reserves. He 
has a bachelor’s degree. He is single with a six-year-old child.1 
 
Applicant had recurring periods of unemployment and underemployment before 
he obtained his current job, particularly while he was attending college. He struggled to 
pay his child support and his other bills. In about 2002, he almost died in military training 
to become part of a special operations team. He has not been diagnosed with post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from the incident, but he believes he is suffering from 
it. He also suffered from depression. He incurred medical expenses in about 2012 when 
he was involuntarily hospitalized, without medical insurance, after the mother of his child 
reported his suicidal thoughts and gestures (he made superficial cuts on the forearms) 
to the police.2 
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling about $23,800. Applicant denied 
owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($328), 1.i ($137), 1.j ($100), 1.l ($458), 1.m 
($207), and 1.o ($80). Applicant’s denials of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.l, and 1.o 
are accepted for reasons other than that the debts were paid. He stated that the $328 
debt to a telecommunications company (SOR ¶ 1.f) was for a month of service after his 
contract ended. There is no evidence that Applicant disputed the debt with the creditor 
or the credit reporting agencies. The debt appears on the three most recent credit 
reports in evidence. He stated that he paid the $137 utility debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i in 
2015, but he did not substantiate the statement with documentation, and the debt is 
listed on the June 2016 credit report. The $207 Internet-services debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.m is listed by Experian on the May 2014 combined credit report, and Applicant 
admitted owing the debt when he was interviewed for his background investigation. He 
admitted owing the remaining debts.3 
 
Applicant reported a number of delinquent debts on his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in April 2014. He stated that he 
would attempt to “eliminate all [his] past debts as soon as possible.” He discussed his 
finances when he was interviewed for his background investigation in June 2014. He 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-18, 22-23, 46-47, 50; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-22, 25-26, 28-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
stated that he would contact his creditors after he started working, and he was looking 
into retaining a credit-counseling service.4 
 
Applicant’s wages were garnished to pay his child support and arrearages. The 
amount being collected made it difficult for him to pay his other debts. By May 2015, the 
arrearages were eliminated.5  
 
Applicant retained a law firm in about 2014 to help him with his credit. He 
stopped using the firm in 2015. In November 2015, he settled the $2,559 judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k with a payment of $1,145. In March 2016, he paid the $168 utility 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. In November 2016, he entered into an agreement to pay the 
$7,295 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b over the course of 64 months. He has not paid any of 
the other debts alleged in the SOR, but he has been in contact with many of the 
creditors, and he stated that he intends to pay them.6  
 
Applicant’s annual salary is about $70,000. He travels to visit his child about 
once a month. He has a long commute. He stated that he did not make a good financial 
decision about where he lives and the distance to work. He has about $100 left over 
after expenses at the end of the month. He has about $28,900 in student loans that 
were scheduled to be in deferment until May 2018. He made a $239 payment in 
November 2016.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 32-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C. 
 
6 Tr. at 36-40, 47; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, B, D-K, M. 
 
7 Tr. at 40-43, 51-52; GE 3-5; AE L. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment were beyond his control. His 
medical expenses for his involuntarily hospitalization were not beyond his control. 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since July 2014. His child support 
arrearages were eliminated in May 2015. In November 2015, he settled the $2,559 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k with a payment of $1,145. In March 2016, he paid the 
$168 utility debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Those debts are mitigated. He has a new 
payment plan in place for one debt, but he has not paid any other debts. Despite his 
tight finances, he stated that he intends to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has held 
that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of 
debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 
2009)).  
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable except as they relate to the two 
paid debts. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) (financial counseling) is applicable; the second 
part (clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) is not 
 
6 
 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.i, and 1.m. It is applicable to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 
1.l, and 1.o. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I also considered the factors 
that led to Applicant’s financial difficulties and the limited steps he has taken to rectify 
them. Applicant has not convinced me that he has a viable plan to address his finances. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
