1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00751
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Kel McClanahan, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
 Because Applicant did not know his son’s whereabouts for several years, he did
not know that the student loans, of which he was jointly liable as cosigner, were
delinquent. Upon discovering the delinquencies, he contacted the creditors and began
resolving them. Currently, neither debt is in delinquent status. Applicant mitigated the
financial considerations security concern. Given the infrequency and surrounding
circumstances of Applicant’s one-time marijuana use, I conclude that he has mitigated
the drug involvement security concern. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 19, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline H, drug
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
2
 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On September 30, 2015,
Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations except subparagraph 1.c.
He requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on August 11, 2016.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 24, 2016, scheduling the hearing for
October 5, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, I considered
Applicant’s testimony, and I received four Government exhibits (Government Exhibit
(GE) 1 - GE 4), and 11 Applicant exhibits (Applicant Exhibit (AE) A - K). At the close of
the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s counsel’s request, to allow Applicant
the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted two
exhibits (AE L, AE M) that I incorporated into the record without objection. DOHA
received the transcript (Tr.) on October 12, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 61-year-old married man with three children, two of whom are
adults. He is a veteran of the United States Army, serving honorably from 1973 through
his retirement in 1997. He held a security clearance for his entire Army career. He has
earned two years of college credits. For the past seven years, he has worked for a
contractor as a systems analyst. (Tr. 16) He has maintained his current clearance since
2008. (Tr. 16)
In the late 2000s, Applicant cosigned two student loans to help finance his son’s
college education (SOR subparagraph 1.a, as duplicated in subparagraph 1.c; and
subparagraph 1.b). (Tr. 17) His son was a “high-caliber student” who entered college as
an engineering major and ultimately graduated with an economics degree. (Tr. 18)
While in college, Applicant suffered a mental breakdown, experiencing unusual changes
in his behavior and his mood. (Tr. 39) Although he managed to earn his degree by
2013, his mental stability continued to deteriorate after graduation, and “he sort of
started drifting away,” moving from state to state, and later, country to country. (Tr. 40)
Unbeknownst to Applicant, his son was not paying his student loans. (Answer at
2) Although lenders mailed notices to Applicant, he did not receive them because he
moved at or about the time that loan payments became due. (Answer at 2; Tr. 43-44)
Applicant discovered that the student loans were delinquent in November 2015. On
November 30, 2015, Applicant sought help from a non-profit company that provides
financial assistance to veterans. (AE J; Tr. 32) They audited his finances, helped him
identify the current student loan holders, and helped him develop payment plans. (AE J
at 2)
The student loan alleged in subparagraph 1.a, and duplicated in subparagraph
1.c, totalled approximately $51,000 as of August 2015, the month of the SOR’s
issuance.  (Answer at 1) Applicant made an $11,339 payment in February 2016, and
then a second payment, in October 2016, of $2,500. (AE E at 9; AE G) Later that
month, he  negotiated a rehabilitation agreement under which he was to pay $5 per
month for nine months. (AE F)
3
 
As of October 2015, the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.b totalled approximately
$62,000. (AE C) At or about that time, Applicant reached an agreement with the creditor
alleged in subparagraph 1.b to make nine monthly $5 payments to rehabilitate the loan.
(AE C at 2) Applicant complied with the agreement, paying $69 in excess of what was
required each month. By September 2016, Applicant had rehabilitated the debt, and it
was transferred to another lender. (Tr. 28) That month, Applicant made a $1,500
payment, and he successfully applied for a forbearance on the remainder of the amount
due on the loan. (AE I; AE M) The current unpaid principal balance is $43,050, and
monthly payments will resume in October 2017. (AE M) Applicant obtained the
forbearance hoping that his son, who is now gainfully employed and in the process of
recovering from his mental breakdown, will be able to handle the loan payments by next
year. (Tr. 25)
The financial advisors who helped Applicant arrange payment plans for his son’s
student loans also helped him develop a budget. Per his budget, he earns
approximately $125,000 annually, and he has approximately $4,250 in monthly
discretionary income. (AE J at 2) 
For several years, Applicant has suffered from severe back pain, stemming from
injuries that occurred when he was in the Army. (AE D) Periodically, Applicant is in
extreme pain that prevents him from sleeping or working. Over the years, he has taken
Percocet, as prescribed by his physician, but he does not like the side effects or the
negative information that he has read about it over the years. (Tr. 35) During a flare-up
in 2013, Applicant decided to experiment with marijuana to relieve the pain.
Consequently, he used it once,  obtaining it from his sister, a chronically ill person with a
legal marijuana prescription. (Tr. 36) It did not relieve his pain. He had never used it
previously, and has not used it since then. He self-reported this marijuana use on his
security clearance application. (GE 1 at 27) 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
4
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Applicant’s delinquent debt triggers the application of  AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debt.
Applicant’s debts are two student loans that he cosigned with his son that
became his responsibility after his son did not pay them. By the time Applicant
discovered that his son had not been paying them, they were already delinquent.
Applicant consulted a financial counselor who helped him develop payment plans for
both loans. Since then, Applicant has made approximately $15,000 of loan payments.
Currently, he is complying with a rehabilitation agreement for the debt alleged in
subparagraph 1.a, and he has successfully applied for a forbearance of the debt alleged
in SOR subparagraph 1.b, after successfully rehabilitating it. Under these
circumstances, I conclude that all of the mitigating conditions set forth above are
applicable. Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment, and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
5
 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s use of marijuana in
2013 while in possession of a security clearance triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 24(a),
“any drug abuse,” 24(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;” and
24(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
Applicant’s marijuana use was a one-time occurrence precipitated by a search
for a palliative for the excruciating pain stemming from a degenerative back problem
causally related to his military career. It did not work, and he did not use it again.  AG ¶
26(a), “the behavior . . .  was so infrequent . . . that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,”
applies. Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement security concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Considering the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s student loan debt, the
steps that he has taken to remedy it, and his financial stability, I conclude that he has
mitigated the financial considerations security concern. The infrequency of the drug use
together with the surrounding circumstances lead me to conclude that Applicant has
mitigated the drug involvement security concern. In mitigating both security concerns, I
considered the length of Applicant’s service in the Army, and the collective length of
time that he has held a security clearance throughout his career.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
6
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
