 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00330 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 15, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Applicant used marijuana twice in August 2015. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on June 20, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 17, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 23, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on September 19, 
2016. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant offered two exhibits (AE), marked A and B. Department Counsel 
had no objections to AE A and AE B, and they were admitted. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under the guideline for Drug Involvement, SOR ¶ 1.a alleged security concerns 
related to Applicant’s purchase and use of marijuana twice in August 2015, as well as 
his decision to provide marijuana to two friends. SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that the same 
conduct raised security concerns under the guideline for Personal Conduct. In his 
Answer and during his testimony, Applicant admitted to “trying marijuana” but denied 
that he provided it to two friends. (Tr. 8-9.) 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
for his present employer for more than nine years. He is not married and has no 
children. (Tr. 22-24, 33.) 
 
 Applicant reported on his October 5, 2015 e-QIP that he used marijuana 
recreationally twice, in August 2015. (GE 1.) Applicant testified he first used marijuana 
when he was “a young kid growing up.” (Tr. 24.) He did not like it then. He most recently 
tried marijuana twice over a two-day period while he was backpacking in August 2015 to 
help with muscle soreness. He testified he usually brings wine with him to help him relax 
while out backpacking, but decided to try a “vape pen” on that trip instead, because it 
was lighter than carrying wine. He purchased the marijuana at a medical dispensary 
after obtaining a “prescription.” He testified that he was aware marijuana use was 
prohibited by his employer’s workplace policies and illegal under Federal law, despite 
state laws permitting its use for medical treatment. He did not know at that time that he 
was about to apply for a security clearance. (Tr. 20-29, 33.) 
 
 Two other individuals, friends from his neighborhood, were backpacking with 
Applicant. He explained that they used marijuana together, but that they had their own 
marijuana. He did not supply them with the marijuana. The investigator who interviewed 
Applicant misunderstood that fact during the interview. (Tr. 30-31.) They no longer live 
in Applicant’s neighborhood and he no longer associates with them. (Tr. 31.) 
 
 Applicant’s “prescription” for medical marijuana is expired. (Tr. 33.) He no longer 
associates with any marijuana users. (Tr. 31.) He has not participated in any type of 
drug treatment or counseling. He testified that he will not use drugs again because they 
are illegal and are bad for his body. He does not like marijuana and prefers to drink 
wine. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant presented two performance reviews that cover the time period from 
April 2014 to April 2016. They reflect Applicant “highly meets” all of his objectives and is 
a valued employee. (AE A; AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under SOR ¶ 1.a. regarding Applicant’s marijuana use in August 2015. As 
he did not supply marijuana to anyone else, no other disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Only one year has passed since Applicant’s use of an illegal substance. He was 
a mature adult and knowingly violated his company’s drug policies and Federal law. I 
cannot find that future use is unlikely to occur. In this instance, an appropriate period of 
abstinence has not been demonstrated. The evidence does not support the application 
of AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) provides little mitigation. Applicant stated that he does not intend to 
use marijuana in the future. His answer contains a signed statement of intent not to use 
illegal substances again. However, despite his assurances to not use drugs in the 
future, based on his past conduct and his age when he made those decisions, I am not 
confident he will comply without the passage of more time demonstrating abstinence. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof to overcome 
the concerns raised by his poor judgment in using marijuana. 
 
5 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to knowingly violate his company’s drug use policy and 
Federal law by using marijuana creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. His drug use, if known, could affect his professional standing. The Government 
established sufficient evidence to raise security concerns under DC 16(e), and shift the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 While Applicant deserves credit for abstaining from marijuana since August 2015 
and for his honest disclosure of his August 2015 marijuana use on his e-QIP, that 
 
6 
 
incident was recent and counter to both Federal law and his employer’s policies. He has 
presented insufficient evidence to persuasively demonstrate that future drug use is 
unlikely. None of the mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 17 are fully supported by the 
record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant stated that he has 
not used marijuana since August 2015. He divulged information about his drug use on 
his e-QIP. He testified that he will not use illegal substances in the future. However, 
Applicant was a mature adult when he knowingly violated Federal laws and his 
employer’s policies regarding marijuana use. Not enough time has passed since 
Applicant’s drug use in 2015 to support a finding that drug abuse is unlikely to recur. 
Although Applicant’s honest disclosure of his drug abuse makes this is a close case, the 
adjudicative guidelines require that any doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
