 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09246 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate security concerns raised by his adverse financial 
history. Over the past 11 years, he has twice discharged his delinquent debts through 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His most recent Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge occurred in 
February 2015. It is too soon to safely conclude that his financial situation is under 
control and financial issues will not recur. He did mitigate security concerns raised by 
his familial connections to the Philippines, but not the concerns raised by his close 
familial connections and contacts in Nigeria. Clearance is denied.  
  
History of the Case 
 
On June 12, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations and 
foreign influence guidelines.1 On June 29, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for access to classified information 
(Answer). 
 
 On September 15, 2015, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed. On January 11, 2016, I was assigned the case. The hearing was 
initially scheduled for February 9, 2016, but due to inclement weather was rescheduled 
for March 10, 2016.2 The hearing was convened on the later date.  
 
 At hearing, Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 8 were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 6 and Ax. A – L were admitted, 
without objection, in evidence.3 At Applicant’s request, I kept the record open to March 
31, 2016, to provide him the opportunity to supplement the record.4 He did not submit 
any additional evidence. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on March 21, 2016. 
 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (Nigeria) 
 
Administrative notice may be taken of uncontroverted, easily verifiable facts 
regarding a foreign country set forth in reliable and relevant U.S. Government reports. 
Additionally, the official position of relevant federal agencies or the pertinent statements 
of key U.S. Government officials may be appropriate for administrative notice. 
Generally, the party requesting administrative notice of a particular matter must provide 
the source document, either the full document or the relevant portion of the source 
document, to allow an administrative judge to assess the reliability, accuracy, and 
relevancy of any matter requested for administrative notice.5  
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain matters 
regarding Nigeria. In advance of the hearing, Department Counsel forwarded to 
Applicant the Government’s request for administrative notice and the relevant portions 
of the source documents cited in the notice. (Gx. 8) Applicant confirmed that he 
received the notice and the relevant documents, and had an opportunity to review a full 
copy of the source documents. He did not object to the matters requested for 
administrative notice. (Tr. 28 - 35)  
 
After reviewing Department Counsel’s notice and the cited source documents, 
the following pertinent facts regarding Nigeria are noted:  
 
                                                          
2 Prehearing scheduling correspondence, the notice of hearing, and case management order are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 Ax. 1 – 6 were originally attached to the Answer.  
 
4 Tr. 110-113, 123-129.  
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007). See also, Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.19 ( the Federal Rules of Evidence (F.R.E.) shall serve as 
a guide in DOHA proceedings and technical rules of evidence may be relaxed to permit the development 
of a full and complete record); F.R.E. 201; F.R.E. 1006. 
 
3 
 
 
Nigeria is a federal republic and gained its independence from Britain in 1960. 
Since gaining its independence, Nigeria has faced many challenges, including terrorist 
activity, sectarian conflicts, entrenched corruption, and widespread mistrust of the 
government. Nigerian security forces, particularly the police, have been accused of 
serious human rights abuses.  
 
Boko Haram, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization, has grown 
increasingly active and deadly in its attacks against state and civilian targets, primarily 
northern Nigerian states. In 2014, the group’s abduction of almost 300 schoolgirls drew 
international attention. The United States has established a strategic dialogue with 
Nigeria to address issues of mutual concern. 
 
In general, the security situation in Nigeria remains fluid and unpredictable. The 
U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to avoid travel to a number of Nigerian 
states because of the risk of kidnapping, robberies, and other armed attacks. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his early forties. He was born in Nigeria, immigrated to the United 
States in 1997, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
accounting and finance from a U.S. college in 2001, and then embarked on a 
professional career. He was gainfully employed from 2002 to 2009. He was unemployed 
or underemployed from about 2009 to 2012. Applicant regained full-time employment in 
April 2012 and, as of the hearing, had been with his current employer for about nine 
months. He was previously granted a position of trust and has a pending job offer 
contingent on attaining a security clearance. (Tr. 37-45; Gx. 1 - 2; Ax. B) 
 
 Applicant has filed for bankruptcy twice in the past 11 years. In 2005, he filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy to resolve debts that he accumulated after graduating from 
college. He states that his finances were negatively impacted after his child was born 
and he incurred a sizeable child support obligation. He also admits that he mismanaged 
his financial affairs, all of which lead him to file for bankruptcy. He subsequently 
received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. (Tr. 48-49)6 
 
 In March 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). He 
listed a number of delinquent debts, including past-due child support, a civil judgment 
from 2011, and collection accounts for consumer-related debt. He indicated that his plan 
was to contact his overdue creditors with the assistance of a non-profit agency, 
consolidate his debts, and pay them through a 60-month installment agreement. (Gx. 1)  
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in May 2012. His Chapter 13 
bankruptcy plan was confirmed in January 2013. He was required to pay $100 a month 
for 60 months to the bankruptcy trustee. (Gx. 5; Ax. F; Ax. G) 
 
                                                          
6 No documents were presented regarding the 2005 bankruptcy. Applicant denies recalling the particulars 
of the bankruptcy, including the amount of total debt discharged. (Tr. 53-54) 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was subsequently advised that he was eligible to convert to Chapter 7, 
did so, and, in May 2015, his debts were discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
(Gx. 5; Ax. 4) Applicant claims that the 18 delinquent consumer-related debts listed on 
the SOR for credit cards, overdraft fees, payday loans, etc., were listed on his 
bankruptcy petition and discharged in bankruptcy. (Tr. 87-90) He did not provide a copy 
of the bankruptcy petition or list of consumer-related debts that were discharged.  
 
As Applicant noted on his 2012 SCA, his court-ordered child support also 
became delinquent. The SCA reflects a past-due amount totaling approximately $4,000. 
(Gx. 1 at 61) Applicant submitted documentation from the child support enforcement 
agency, which reflects that, as of May 2015, Applicant’s child support arrears totaled 
over $12,500. (Ax. 2) He submitted documentation at hearing which reflects that, as of 
December 2015, the balance had been reduced to $6,300. His pay was being garnished 
pursuant to an income withholding order to satisfy his child support. (Ax. K at 44; Ax. L)7 
 
 Applicant earns an annual salary of approximately $93,000. He took the 
bankruptcy court-mandated online credit counseling. He claims that he and his wife use 
a written budget to manage their finances, and after paying recurring expenses and 
debts, have approximately $2,000 a month in disposable income. (Tr. 80-84; Ax. 3) 
When asked by Department Counsel if he had a savings account, Applicant responded 
that he did and noted the account had a balance of approximately $10. (Tr. 85) 
Currently, Applicant has over $100,000 in student loan debt that is in deferment status. 
As of the hearing, the deferment was scheduled to end in June or July 2016. (Tr. 90-92; 
Gx. 2 at 11)8 Applicant testified that nine of the listed SOR debts were related to credit 
card accounts that had gone delinquent and were subsequently discharged through 
bankruptcy. (Tr. 65-80; Gx 2 at 9-14) He now has six credit cards. When asked by 
Department Counsel why he had so many open credit card accounts, Applicant 
responded that he was offered the credit cards and accepted the offers. (Tr. 70) 
 
Applicant’s parents and four living siblings are citizens and residents of Nigeria. 
They live in the southern part of the country. Applicant has only visited Nigeria twice 
since immigrating to the United States.9 He provides about $1,000 a month in financial 
support to his parents. He also provides sporadic financial support to one of his siblings. 
(Tr. 93-94, 106) None of his family in Nigeria is connected to the government. 
 
                                                          
7 Applicant’s December 24, 2015 and February 5, 2016 pay stubs from his current employer do not reflect 
that his child support is being properly deducted from his pay. (Ax. L at 46-47) It is generally well 
recognized that an individual, such as Applicant, must voluntarily submit the required payments until the 
income withholding order is transferred to their new employer. Applicant did not submit documentation 
post-December 2015 reflecting the balance on his child support account or that he was making the 
required payments to avoid once again falling behind on his court-ordered child support.  
 
8 Applicant’s December 2015 credit report reflects an outstanding balance of over $295,000 for a student 
loan account. (Gx. 5, trade line 5) 
 
9 One of the trips Applicant took to Nigeria was for his half-brother’s funeral. Applicant’s half-brother, who 
is referenced in SOR 2.c, passed away nearly a year before the SOR was issued.  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant is married. His wife is originally from the Philippines. She is a 
permanent U.S. resident. Applicant’s mother-in-law recently passed away. Applicant 
and his wife relied on their credit cards to pay for the travel and funeral-related 
expenses. Applicant’s wife and her siblings, who are resident-citizens of the Philippines, 
are estranged from their father. None of his wife’s family in the Philippines is connected 
to the national government or other foreign entity that would raise a security concern.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an individual with financial problems might be tempted to compromise 
classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses 
the extent to which an individual’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-
control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.10 
 
Applicant’s history of financial issues, which has twice has led him to file for 
bankruptcy, implicates the financial considerations security concern. The record 
evidence also raises the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
 The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the security concern. The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised 
by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s most recent financial problems were attributable to long-term 
unemployment and underemployment. He took responsible action after regaining full-
time employment in 2012, to resolve his delinquent debts by filing for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. He paid his debts through a confirmed Chapter 13 plan for a number of 
years, and after becoming eligible to convert to Chapter 7, resolved his dischargeable 
debts through Chapter 7. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply.  
 
 Although Applicant has a finance degree and has received financial counseling, 
the record evidence and his testimony reflect a lack of true financial reform. For 
instance, after recently receiving a second Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant 
opened six separate credit card accounts. Notwithstanding full-time employment since 
2012, purported $2,000 a month in disposable income, and a sizeable amount of 
student loan debt due to be repaid in the near future, Applicant reported just $10 in 
savings. In light of Applicant’s adverse financial history, including failure to timely pay 
his court-ordered child support, I cannot find that financial problems are unlikely to recur 
nor that his financial situation is under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply.   
 
 After considering all the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, including the 
whole-person factors further discussed herein, Applicant failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion in mitigating the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.11 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with his family in Nigeria and to a lesser extent his 
connection to his wife’s family in the Philippines raise the foreign influence security 
concern. An individual is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
an individual’s vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must take into 
                                                          
11 See also, ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in 
Egan, a clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances 
unrelated to conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added).  
 
8 
 
 
account the foreign government involved, the intelligence-gathering history of that 
government, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.12  
 
 An individual with family members and other connections in a foreign country 
faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”13 However, what 
factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant 
with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.14 
 
The relationship between the United States and the foreign countries at issue are 
generally recognized to be friendly. However, foreign influence security concerns are 
not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The Appeal Board has cautioned 
against the overreliance on “simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ 
nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B,” because such “ignores the 
historical reality that (i) relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly; (ii) even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters that they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security; and (iii) not all cases of espionage against the United States have involved 
nations that were hostile to the United States.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s relationship with his parents and siblings, coupled with 
the facts administratively noticed regarding Nigeria, raise a heightened risk of foreign 
influence. Applicant’s foreign familial ties raise the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 Guideline B also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the foreign 
influence security concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions in assessing 
the security concerns in the present case, including the following: 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge 
must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
13 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his connections and contacts 
to his wife’s family in the Philippines. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply to these foreign 
familial connections.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his 
close familial connections and contacts in Nigeria. Applicant’s relationship with his 
foreign relatives in Nigeria is not so minimal that, in light of the matters administratively 
noticed, such relationship could not pose a potential conflict of interest with his 
obligation to safeguard classified information. Of note, notwithstanding his own dire 
financial problems, Applicant financially supports his relatives in Nigeria. Although such 
financial support raises favorable inferences regarding Applicant’s character, it also 
highlights his particular vulnerability to foreign influence.  
 
 After considering all the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, including the 
whole-person factors further discussed herein, Applicant failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion in mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. This adverse finding, 
however, is not a comment on Applicant’s patriotism or loyalty, but merely an 
acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices 
that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-
10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate the preceding analysis under the 
guidelines at issue and highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant was honest and cooperative throughout the security clearance process. 
He was previously granted eligibility for access to sensitive U.S. Government 
information and has apparently handled such information without issue. Notwithstanding 
this and other favorable record evidence, Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden of 
persuasion for access to classified information. His financial situation and foreign 
familial connections remain a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with doubts about his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f – 1.u:       For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.f:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
