 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )       ISCR Case: 12-11587   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young 
 
 
July 15, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 16 debts (three of which were 
duplicates) in the total amount of $58,259. She resolved only three of those delinquent 
debts and remains indebted to ten creditors. She failed to meet her burden to establish 
mitigation. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 1, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 9, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through S, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on May 19, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. 
Applicant presented additional exhibits on May 17, 2016, marked AE T through AE CC. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE T through AE CC, and they were 
admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. She has worked for a government contractor since 
December 2009 and has held a security clearance in connection with her position since 
that time. (GE 1; AE S; Tr. 25.) She served in the Marine Corps for eight years. (AE D; 
AE E; AE P; AE S; Tr. 26, 81) She has never had a security violation. (Tr. 25-26.)  
 
 Applicant married in 2002 and separated from her first husband in 2004. Their 
divorce was finalized in 2006. (AE K; Tr. 27-28.) She is remarried. (Tr. 30.) Applicant 
has a 12-year-old daughter with her first husband. (Tr. 37, 79.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent in repaying 16 debts in the total 
amount of $58,259. In her Answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.m, and 1.p. 
She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, and 1.o. Her debts 
are documented in the record credit reports dated May 22, 2012; August 10, 2015; 
February 8, 2016; and May 8, 2016 (GEs 3 through 6.) After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection company in the amount of 
$4,882, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant claims this debt is the same as the debt 
identified in SOR ¶ 1.f, below. Applicant’s February 2016 credit report indicates this 
collection account originated with the same creditor identified in 1.f. As a result, I find 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f are the same debt. This debt was for a credit card she opened with 
this creditor after her marriage ended. It became delinquent in 2009. She was only 
earning $9 per hour at that time, and used the credit card to make ends meet. She 
testified she contacted the original creditor three or four years ago to investigate the 
alleged delinquency. The original creditor referred her to the collection agent. She failed 
to take further action on this debt until April of 2016, when she sent letters to the credit 
reporting agencies to contest this debt. (AE A.) Until April 2016, she “put it on the back 
burner.” (Tr. 38.) She testified that she is waiting to hear back from the credit reporting 
agency to hear who legally owns this debt so that she can make payment arrangements 
or resolve the debt in full. This debt is unresolved. (GE 5; Tr. 33-39, 50, 68.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to a collection company in the amount of $3,556, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant claimed this debt is the same as that identified in SOR ¶ 
 
 
3 
 
 
1.j. Applicant’s February 2016 credit report indicates this collection account originated 
with the same creditor identified in ¶ 1.j. As a result, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.j are the 
same debt. It has been delinquent since 2012. Applicant testified she is contesting both 
of these entries on her credit report because she does not know which debt collection 
agency legally holds this debt or how the debt was originally incurred. In April 2016, she 
sent a dispute letter to the credit reporting agencies, formally contesting this debt. She 
has not contacted either of the listed creditors directly. She failed to address this debt 
prior to April 2016 because she “didn’t need her own credit right now, so [she] kept just 
prioritizing [her] regular family li[fe] and [her] house.” (Tr. 41.) When she learns who 
owns this legitimate debt, she is willing to resolve it. This debt is unresolved. (GE 5; AE 
B; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a retail store credit account in the 
amount of $428, in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt is the same account as the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.l. Applicant testified she never had an account with this store. However, during 
an interview with an agent from the Office of Personnel Management (SI), she 
disclosed, “She has a [store name] account (Number unknown) she opened sometime 
in 2006 and that she used [it] to purchase clothing.” (GE 2.) Applicant filed a written 
dispute with the credit reporting agencies. She claimed she attempted to investigate this 
debt with the creditor in March 2013, but the creditor could find no account in 
Applicant’s name. She presented no documentation from the creditor to substantiate her 
claim. This debt is unresolved. (GE 3; AE C; Tr. 42-44, 57-59.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the amount 
of $282, in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant testified that she called the hospital in April 2016 and 
requested documentation to substantiate this debt, because she did not live in the state 
where the hospital is located at the time of the charge. She had not received that 
documentation at the time of the hearing. In AE F, she presented a bill from a medical 
creditor requesting payment of $85.54, which she claimed related to this debt. However, 
the account numbers do not appear to match. She failed to present anything in writing 
to document her dispute. This debt is unresolved. (AE F; Tr. 44-47.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent medical debt in the amount 
of $223, in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant testified that she did not know what this debt was for, 
but that she had not yet formally disputed this account. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit union account in the 
amount of $14,678, in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant contends that this is the same account as 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, which is delinquent in the amount of $15,000, but failed to 
introduce evidence to substantiate this claim. Applicant admitted to having one credit 
card with this creditor during the course of her first marriage, but claimed that she was 
only an authorized user on this account. Further, she claimed that her ex-husband was 
assigned this debt in their marital separation agreement. (AE K.) She presented a letter 
from him stating that he was responsible for this debt. (AE G.) At the time of the 
 
 
4 
 
 
hearing, she had not contacted the creditor to verify the origin of this debt or to arrange 
repayment. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 47-50, 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a delinquent credit union account in the 
amount of $10,500, in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant testified it was for a vehicle loan. A credit 
report dated May 2012 reflects that this debt was paid as agreed. It is resolved. (GE 3; 
GE 4; Tr. 51-53.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a loan account from a credit union in the 
amount of $15,000, in SOR ¶ 1.i. Her post hearing documents show she acquired this 
loan in 2006. This debt was assigned to Applicant as her separate debt in her divorce 
decree. The loan number, documented on AE U, does not match the auto loan account 
number discussed above in SOR ¶ 1.h, and as such it appears to be a separate debt. It 
is unresolved. (GE 3; AE T; AE U; Tr. 47-50, 53-54.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a delinquent collection account in the amount of $135, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. This debt was for a cable bill that was placed for collection. 
Applicant inquired about the debt with the original creditor and was told that the 
company was unable to verify this account belonged to Applicant. Subsequently, 
Applicant produced a letter from the original creditor dated May 4, 2016, that stated, “we 
have made the decision to discontinue our collection efforts,” and indicated the account 
would be deleted from her credit reports. This debt is resolved. (AE V; Tr. 55-57.) 
  
 Applicant was indebted on a delinquent, charged-off account in the amount of 
$281, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. Applicant testified that she believes this debt is the 
same as the medical debt identified in SOR ¶ 1.d, but the account numbers for these 
debts did not appear to match. She has contested this debt with the credit reporting 
agencies. She has not tried to contact the alleged creditor because the entry on her 
credit report does not specifically identify the name of the collection agent. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 2; Tr. 59-61.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a delinquent collection account in the amount of $569, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant testified she did not recognize this debt. She had not 
formally contested this debt with the credit bureaus at the time of the hearing because 
she was busy addressing her other debts and it does not appear in her most recent 
credit report. Applicant disclosed in her SI that she believed this debt related to a utility 
bill and that she would research this debt. It remains unresolved. (GE 2; Tr. 61-62.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a delinquent collection account in the amount of $260, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o. This debt was for a telecommunications bill. She currently uses 
this service provider and her account is current. She contacted this creditor and the 
representative was unable to find a delinquent account in her name. She subsequently 
filed a formal dispute with the credit reporting agencies. This debt is resolved. (AE H; 
AE O; AE W; AW X; Tr. 63-65.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a delinquent collection account in the amount of $73, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. This debt was for a water bill. She has not contacted the 
original creditor about this debt. She contacted a collection agent handling this debt but 
was unable to establish if this debt belonged to her. She intends to further research this 
debt. This debt is unresolved. (Tr 65-67.) 
 
 Applicant presented a certificate of achievement, dated April 7, 2016, for her 
participation in a budgeting class. (AE L.) Applicant has a monthly net remainder of 
“$1,622 -1325”. (AE X.) Her bank account statements reflect that as of March 31, 2016, 
she has a $13,247.21 balance in one account at $00.06 in another. (AE M; AE N.) She 
has an additional $13,227 in a retirement account. (AE CC.) In her SI, dated July 31, 
2012, Applicant described her financial situation as “settling down” and indicated she 
would research and address her delinquencies. (GE 2.) Despite having some 
disposable income, she has not documented any payments on her legitimate 
delinquencies. 
 
 Applicant was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal; the 
Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal; the Global war on Terrorism Service Medal; the 
Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal (Iraq); the National Defense Service 
Medal; and the Presidential Unit Citation-Navy. (AE P; AE S.) She has earned a number 
of certificates for completion of training and for outstanding performance in other areas 
including track and field. (AE R.) Her on-site supervisor, a professor, colleagues, and 
fellow Marines recommend Applicant for a security clearance because they believe she 
is honest, trustworthy, and loyal. (AE O.) Her performance appraisals reflect she has a 
good work ethic and is a valued employee. (AE Q.) Additionally, Applicant presented an 
email praising her for her solid performance. (AE BB.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 16 debts in the total amount of 
$58,259. Of those debts, she established that three debts were duplicated entries (SOR 
¶ 1.a is the same as ¶ 1.f; SOR ¶ 1.b is the same as ¶ 1.j; and SOR ¶ 1.c is the same 
as ¶ 1.l).1 Of her remaining 13 debts, she resolved only three of them (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.k, 
and 1.o). Her remaining ten delinquencies establish both an extended history of 
delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy her financial obligations. She 
has known these debts were of concern to the Government since at least 2012, but has 
taken little action to resolve them. The evidence raises security concerns under the 
above conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                                 
1 While the underlying debts are not resolved, SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.f, 1.j, and 1.l are held in Applicant’s 
favor, below, only to avoid double counting them.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are recent. She has resolved the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.k, and 1.o, but has documented few actions on her remaining debt. Her 
testimony shows that she has not prioritized repaying her delinquent debt, and she has 
not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant blamed her financial problems on underemployment, and prioritizing 
her immediate needs and desires over repaying her past delinquencies. She failed to 
document that her debts were largely caused by circumstances beyond her control. She 
took responsibility for her irresponsible habits, but failed to demonstrate responsible 
behavior under the circumstances and did not address her debts in a timely manner. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been fully established. 
 
 Applicant provided a certificate of achievement for her participation in a 
budgeting class as evidence of financial counseling. However, there are no clear 
indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Further, 
her documentation failed to support her claim that she is making a good faith effort to 
resolve her debts. The evidence shows only a recent flutter of activity to contest debts 
or contact some, but not all, of her remaining creditors. Her recent actions do little to 
establish she is acting in good faith to address her debts, instead of ineffectively 
reacting to the SOR. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) have not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided any evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. While she contested 
several of her debts with the credit bureaus, she largely admitted owing the underlying 
debts. Simply filing a dispute with a credit reporting agency does not provide evidence 
of mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) on those debts where Applicant admits to the underlying 
financial obligation, without a more concrete reason for a dispute. Other debts like those 
identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.p, have not been formally disputed. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) has not been fully established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
been a dedicated employee since 2009. She served honorably in the Marine Corps for 
eight years. She has a reputation for outstanding work. However, she is a mature adult 
and responsible for her choices and financial obligations. Her financial decisions reflect 
that she lacks the responsibility, judgment, and trustworthiness required to hold a 
security clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
