KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal has failed to identify any harmful error.  The Judge examined the
relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-10810.a1
DATE: 07/12/2016
DATE:  July 12, 2016
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-10810
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
2, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On April 27, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He is married and has three
adult children.  He served in the U.S. military from 1987 to 2008. 
The SOR alleged a dismissed bankruptcy in 2010 and overdue debts totaling approximately
$550,000.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on the bankruptcy allegation and three of the
alleged debts, including a mortgage deficiency of about $528,000.  He found against Applicant on
the six remaining debts.  Regarding those six debts, the Judge noted Applicant presented no evidence
to show that, since the SOR was issued, he contacted any of the creditors, made any payment plans,
or resolved or reduced any of those overdue debts. The Judge concluded none of the mitigating
conditions applied to those six debts. 
Discussion
In the appeal brief, Applicant states that he did not receive Items 4 and 5 that were referenced
in the decision.  Items 4 and 5 were credit reports attached to Department Counsel’s File of Relevant
Material (FORM).  We note that it is common practice for Department Counsel to identify
documents attached to a FORM as “Items.”  Likewise, Judges in their decisions often refer to those
attachments as “Items.”  In this case, however, Department Counsel in the narrative portion of the
FORM did not refer to the attached documents as “Items,” but instead referred to them as
“Evidence.”1  On the other hand, the Judge in his decision referred to those attachments as “Items.” 
This difference in terminology for identifying the FORM attachments may have confused Applicant,
and he may not have been aware of what the Judge was referring to when he used the term “Items.”
Even if Applicant did not receive Items 4 and 5, we find no harmful error.  On September
15, 2015, a copy of the FORM was mailed to Applicant.  He received it on September 29, 2015.  He
was informed that the FORM contained relevant information that will be submitted to an
administrative judge to make a determination in his case.  He was given 30 days from receipt of the
FORM to review the file, submit any objections, and provide additional information that he wished
to be considered.  He submitted a response to the FORM on October 21, 2015.  In that response, he
did not indicate any of the documents listed in the FORM were missing.  His response included a
copy of the narrative portion of the FORM, which included a list of the attached documents.2  If he
did not receive documents attached to the FORM, he was provided an opportunity to request those
documents and correct that error.  By failing to take such action, he cannot now complain that he
was harmed.  Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to
take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
1 In the record, the documents attached to the FORM were stamped as “Item # ” and appropriately numbered.
2 In his response to the FORM, Applicant did not submit the documents that were attached to the FORM. 
12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014).  Applicant has not established that he was denied his rights
under the Directive.  
In his response to the FORM, Applicant referred to a credit report dated October 21, 2015,
to support his claims about various debts.  In his appeal brief, he noted that he mistakenly did not
attach that credit report to his response to the FORM.  His failure to submit that credit report does
not constitute harmful error by the Judge and warrants no relief on appeal.  See, Directive ¶ E3.1.32. 
In his appeal brief, he provided a new credit report in support of his claims.  This credit report
constitutes new evidence that the Board can neither receive nor consider.  See Id. ¶ E3.1.29. 
Applicant’s appeal has failed to identify any harmful error.  The Judge examined the relevant
evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on
the record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The case is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
