 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-07029 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on November 12 and November 20, 
2015, and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 30, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 3, 2016, setting the hearing for February 24, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. I marked Department Counsel’s exhibit list as hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through K, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant 
to submit additional evidence. He submitted AE L through O, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 3, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all the SOR allegations (with explanations) except for ¶ 1.g, 
which he admitted. His admission is incorporated as findings of fact. I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old and has worked for government contractors, on and off, 
since 2001. He has a high school diploma. He is married and has two adult children. He 
served in the Army from 1972 to 1992 and retired honorably in the pay grade of E-7. As 
a civilian contractor he deployed to Iraq twice and Afghanistan twice during times of 
conflict. He has held a security clearance for 31 years and has never had a security 
incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has nine delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$159,201 (the largest debt is from a past-due mortgage account for $131,922).2  The 
debts were listed on credit reports from March 2014, December 2014, and February 
2016.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties came about in 2011 when he was laid-off from his 
full-time federal contractor position. He was either unemployed or underemployed 
performing part-time work from 2011 until September 2015, when he gained full-time 
employment. He lived off his savings and received financial counseling. He hired a debt 
relief company (DRC) in September 2012 to assist him with paying the overdue credit 
card debt he accumulated during this time. He pays the DRC $515 monthly and it 
accumulates enough money in an escrow account to negotiate settlements with the 
various creditors. He has continuously paid the DRC since 2012. The status of the 
debts is as follows:4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a past-due mortgage account ($131,922): 
 
 The property that secured this mortgage debt was foreclosed in May 2015. 
Applicant stated he turned the keys over to a realty company and has never had any 
                                                           
1
 Tr. at 5-6, 16, 64, 80-81; GE 1. 
 
2
 Without objection, SOR ¶ 1.b was amended by deleting the word “mortgage” and substituting 
therefore the word “debt.” Tr. at 55. 
 
3
 GE 2-4. 
 
4
 Tr. at 16-19, 36-37, 50; AE A-K. 
 
 
3 
 
further issues with this debt or the property. The latest credit report shows that this debt 
has a zero balance. This debt is otherwise resolved.5  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.i credit card collection accounts ($7,267; $5,159; 
$4,336; $2,923; $2,512; $2,344; $1,970; $768): 
 
 Applicant produced documentation showing that through his contract with the 
DRC he has settled several SOR debts and non-SOR debts. He is also in the process 
of negotiating settlements with the remaining SOR creditors. Through January 2016, he 
has paid approximately $9,000 to settle six debts. These debts are resolved or being 
resolved.6 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is much improved. He is current on all his 
federal and state taxes. He rents a home and is current on his payments. He no longer 
uses credit cards. He has about $2,000 monthly discretionary income. He believes he 
will have the remainder of his past-due debts paid within two years.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                           
5
 Tr. at 51-52; GE 4.  
 
6
 Tr. at 49-51; AE L. 
 
7
 Tr. at 65-66. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts that he failed to pay over an extended 
period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifying conditions stated in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 
5 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are somewhat remote, but several 
remain unpaid. The foreclosure eliminated Applicant’s mortgage debt. He sought 
assistance from a DRC long before the SOR was issued in this case and has settled 
several debts through its use. He continues to use the DRC to negotiate settlements 
with the remaining creditors. Because he has made efforts to repair his financial 
position, it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
partially applies.  
 
The circumstances that led to Applicant’s financial problems, periods of 
unemployment and underemployment between 2011 and 2015, were beyond his control 
and he acted responsibly by seeking the assistance of a DRC in 2012. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. Applicant received credit counseling. He also made a good-faith effort to settle 
his credit card debts by using a DRC to negotiate settlements with the creditors. AG ¶ 
20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military and federal contractor service, including his 
multiple deployments during times of hostilities. I found Applicant to be honest and 
candid about the circumstances that led to his debts. He took action to resolve them. I 
find it unlikely that Applicant will be in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
