 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06747 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.  
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. He spent his early years there and then 
attended school in the Soviet Union. He came to the United States in 2001 and became 
a citizen in 2008. He has served as a linguist for the U.S. Army since 2009. Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On July 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued to him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
  Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 21, 2015 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 22, 2015, the case was assigned 
to another administrative judge. It was re-assigned to me on March 1, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on March 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
10, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 6, 2016. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. GE 1, GE 2, GE 4, GE 5, and GE 6 were admitted 
without an objection. Appellant objected to the admissibility of GE 3; I overruled the 
objection, and GE 3 was admitted. (Tr. 10.)  
Applicant offered 15 exhibits (AE) into evidence. AE A through AE G were 
attached to his Answer. At the hearing AE A though AE O were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant also offered AE P and AE Q. AE P is addressed in the 
paragraph below. (Tr. 14.) AE Q is a copy of Applicant’s March 2014 SCA with 
highlighted changes or corrections made on it. Both documents were identified, but not 
admitted into evidence because Department Counsel had not received them prior to the 
hearing. She was given until April 28, 2016, to review said exhibits and file objections. 
Appellant was given until May 6, 2016, to reply to any objections. (Tr. 14-15, 100.) On 
April 27, 2016, Department Counsel stated via email that she had no objection to AE Q, 
and it was admitted into the record. I marked her email as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2016. 
   
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to Afghanistan (HE 1). She provided six supporting exhibits to show detail and 
context for those facts (I-VI). Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and 
Department Counsel’s request was granted. (Tr. 11.) Applicant’s AE P is his request 
that I take administrative notice of additional facts relating to Afghanistan. Attached to it 
were seven exhibits (I-VII). Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s request 
and AE P is admitted into the record. (HE 2.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c with 
explanations. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1973 and is 43 years old. In October 1984 
the Russian government, which had invaded Afghanistan, sent Applicant to the Soviet 
Union for his education. He was 10 years old. He remained there until January 1995, 
and then moved to Pakistan where he studied engineering at a university. Some of his 
family members lived in Pakistan at that time, including a sister with whom he stayed.  
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Afghanistan and became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in May 1996. In November 1996 his wife visited him in Pakistan and they married. In 
December 1999 Applicant traveled to the United Kingdom (UK) because he said his life 
was in danger in Pakistan. His wife later visited him in the UK. She was apparently living 
in the United States at that time. In September 2001 he came to the United States. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2008. He and his wife have three 
children, all of whom are natural-born U.S. citizens. (Tr. 23, 43, 53, 76; GE 1, GE 3.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Afghanistan. His father is deceased since 2006. 
He was an officer in the Afghanistan army before the Soviet Union invaded the country. 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
He subsequently retired. (Tr. 43-44.) Applicant’s mother was a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. She is deceased. Applicant has three brothers and six sisters, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Two brothers work in real estate and another 
brother is a medical doctor. All of his sisters are housewives. His brothers-in-law, 
sisters-in-law, nieces and nephews, are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. None of 
them work for the government. His wife’s parents were born in Afghanistan and are 
deceased. (Tr. 68-69; Answer; GE 2.) He thinks his wife has two siblings living in 
Afghanistan. Most of her relatives reside in the United States. (Tr. 74.)   
 
Applicant said he does not communicate with his family. In 2006 he visited his ill 
father, who was in Pakistan seeking treatment. In 2010 he visited five siblings in 
Afghanistan while working for the U.S. Army. He received the Army’s authorization and 
direction to do so for purposes of an Army mission. The last time he visited his family 
residing in Afghanistan was in 2012. He traveled there to attend one brother’s wedding. 
He was not working for a federal contractor at the time and reported the trip to his 
previous employer. He stayed in a hotel for five days. Since then, he has spoken to one 
brother and one sister once by telephone in 2013. He stated that he does not have a 
close relationship with his siblings because he is the youngest of ten children and did 
not live in Afghanistan after leaving in 1984. He does not have contact with members of 
his extended family. (Tr.33-35, 66-67, 87.) He does not send money to family members 
living in Afghanistan, and does not own any real property or have financial interests 
there. He has not sponsored any family member for U.S. citizenship. He said he is loyal 
to the United States. (Tr. 37.) 
 
An issue raised during this hearing involved Applicant’s credibility. According to a 
March 2014 Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaires and 
Interview (CI Interview), Applicant told an investigator that in 1999 he paid a smuggler 
$5,000 to provide him with illegal travel documents and transportation from Pakistan 
into the United Kingdom to gain refugee status. (GE 3.) During his testimony, he 
strongly denied that he told the investigator that he was “illegally smuggled” into the 
United Kingdom, but said that he paid money to a source to expedite his legal request 
for refugee status through the United Nations. (Tr. 45-47, 77.) He said he applied for a 
U.S. visa before leaving Pakistan in 1999. It was approved in 2001. He said this 
interview with the investigator was contentious. (Tr. 77-78.) 
 
After arriving in the United States, Applicant worked for a hospital for five years. 
In March 2009 he obtained a linguist position with the U.S. Army and worked in 
Afghanistan until September 2012. He received a secret clearance in July 2010 through 
another government department. He was subsequently unemployed for three months 
before beginning another linguist position in January 2013. After working in Afghanistan 
for six months, he returned to the United States in June 2013, and was unemployed for 
four months, before beginning another linguist position in October 2013 in Afghanistan 
for three months. After completing that work, he was subsequently unemployed again, 
before starting employment with another defense contractor in September 2014 at an 
Army base in the United States. (GE 1, GE 3; AE G.) In October 2015 he left that 
position because his wife was ill. (Tr. 89.) As a linguist, he has worked with the Coalition 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forces including an ally’s defense force. (Tr. 20.) He completed another SF-86 in 
January 2016 for an employer. (AE G.)   
Applicant submitted certificates of appreciation for his competent service to the 
Armed Forces while serving in the Middle East. (AE A, AE B, AE C, AE D, and AE E.) 
His team supervisor from September 2011 through December 2011 stated that 
Applicant performed “exceptionally well” during that period. (AE F.) A commander of a 
special operations task force for whom Applicant worked from March 2009 to March 
2011, stated that Applicant’s work increased the success of the Coalition Forces’ 
missions. He “highly recommended” Applicant for future positions. (AE F.) He 
emphasized that Applicant worked in stressful and threatening situations. (AE F.) The 
major who supervised Applicant from January to September 2012 wrote that Applicant’s 
work was exceptional. (AE F.) A commander for a U.S. military force, who supervised 
Applicant’s work during April and May 2014, said Applicant “was a consummate 
professional who consistently delivered quality work.” (AE F.) 
 
Afghanistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning Afghanistan, which are incorporated herein by reference. (HE I 
and AE P.) Of particular significance are Afghanistan’s history of political unrest, and the 
presence of the Taliban and al-Qaeda, terrorist organizations, which continue to assert 
power and intimidation within the country and the bordering countries, including 
Pakistan. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations 
target United States interests in Afghanistan by suicide operations, bombings, 
assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this time, the risk of 
terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains 
poor and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of 
State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other 
Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. Few sections of Afghanistan are safe 
or immune from violence, and the government has difficulty enforcing the rule of law. 
However, Afghanistan experienced its first democratic election in June 2014, and the 
country continues to work on developing a partnership with the United States.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline B, Foreign Influence  
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The SOR allegations and evidence in this case raised potential security 
concerns under two foreign influence disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant has three brothers, six sisters, and extended family, including in-laws, 
nieces, and nephews, who are resident citizens of Afghanistan. Afghanistan is a country 
known to have significant terrorism problems, engages in human right abuses, and 
therefore presents a heightened risk. Accordingly, the presence of these individuals in 
Afghanistan theoretically creates a heightened risk of pressure or coercion, and a 
potential conflict of interest that could arise from a desire to help them.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this case 
are:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s relationships with his brothers, sisters, and members of his extended 
family have been sufficiently minimal, such that he clearly established mitigation under 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) with respect to those relationships. His immediate family members, 
wife and three children, are all U.S. citizens residing here. Additionally, Applicant came 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to the United States in 2001, and has been a U.S. citizen since 2008. He has 
successfully served with the U.S. Armed Forces in the Middle East since 2009, as 
documented in letters and awards from his commands. These circumstances 
demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by terrorists or 
a foreign government to coerce him. Hence, AG ¶¶ 8(b) provides further mitigation of 
any potential security concerns raised under AG ¶¶ 7(a) or (b).  
 
Applicant stated that he has not had communication with any sibling since 2013, 
at which time he spoke to two siblings. He has no contact with other family members. 
He previously visited his family in 2012 for a family wedding and stayed in a hotel for 
five days. When he saw several family members in 2010, he had received authorization 
from his command to do so. His contacts have been sufficiently minimal since 2009 
when he began work as a linguist. AG ¶ 8(c) provides additional mitigation. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my 
whole-person analysis. 
   
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s history of 
connections to Afghanistan that weigh against granting him a security clearance. 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan and spent his first 10 years there. His three brothers, 
six sisters, and other family members are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His wife 
has family members who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. In 2012 he traveled 
there to attend his brother’s wedding. He has had some contact with certain siblings. 
Those factors demonstrate an attachment to Afghanistan. His current work with the U.S. 
Army creates a greater risk of potential coercion, should terrorists learn of his work and 
family members residing in Afghanistan.  
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In addition to the above adverse factors, Applicant’s testimony regarding the 
method by which he traveled to and entered the United Kingdom to seek refugee status 
raised a credibility issue as it was inconsistent with statements recorded in his March 
2014 CI Interview. Based on his testimony regarding those facts and the absence of 
testimony from the investigator who performed the interview, coupled with numerous 
letters of formal recognition for his service with the U.S. Army Forces under sometimes 
dangerous conditions, questions about his credibility are found in his favor.1   
 
There are other factors that weigh in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He established strong connections to the United States, including U.S. 
citizenship since 2008. He has worked at various jobs in the United States prior to 
gaining a linguist position in 2009. His wife and children are resident citizens of the 
United States, as are some of his wife’s relatives. Overall, the record evidence creates 
no question or doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:               FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
1 See Error! Main Document Only. ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006). 
 
