 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06853 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations), G (alcohol consumption), and J (criminal conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 17, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on January 4, 2016, and reassigned to me on May 4, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 20, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for June 21, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2012. He served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from 2003 until he was honorably discharged in 2010. He is applying for a security 
clearance. He is a high school graduate with several certifications. He married in 2004 
and divorced in 2010. He has two minor children.1 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related criminal offenses. He was arrested and 
charged with public intoxication in January 2011, twice in October 2011, and in October 
2012. He admitted that he was heavily intoxicated (12 to 18 beers plus several shots) 
on each occasion. He also had been driving before at least two of the arrests. He 
pleaded guilty and paid fines for each charge.2 
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) in June 
2011 and November 2013. He drank about 12 to 18 beers plus several shots before the 
first arrest and a lesser amount before the second arrest. When he was interviewed for 
his background investigation in January 2014, Applicant stated that he did not intend to 
ever drive again after drinking alcohol. He was arrested for DWI in June 2015.3 He 
pleaded guilty to each of his DWIs. He received fines for all three DWI convictions, and 
he was sentenced to 160 hours of community service, three weekends in jail, and 
probation for ten years for the last conviction. He is not permitted to drink alcohol while 
on probation.4 
 
Applicant deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan while in the military. He stated that he 
did not drink while in the military. He has not been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), but he does not rule it out as a possibility. He stated that he has not 
had an alcoholic drink in more than a year and that he will comply with his probation and 
not drink alcohol. He attended a 24-week substance-abuse program after his first DWI. 
He received additional alcohol counseling through the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA).5  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19, 27-28, 37-38; GE 1, 7. 
 
2 Tr. at 30-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 7. 
3 The 2015 DWI was not alleged in the SOR. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used 
for disqualification purposes. It may be considered in assessing mitigation and in the whole-person 
analysis. 
4 Tr. at 16-17, 30-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 7. 
 
5 Tr. at 18-22, 31-37; GE 1, 7. 
 
3 
 
Applicant has financial problems, which he attributed to his divorce and legal 
proceedings. He has paid tens of thousands of dollars in attorneys’ fees and fines. The 
SOR alleges $11,234 in back child support (SOR ¶ 1.b) and eight additional delinquent 
debts totaling about $40,000. Applicant paid his child support arrearages. He admitted 
owing the additional debts, with the exception of the $406 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, 
which he denied owing. That debt is listed on a January 2014 credit report, but not the 
two more recent credit reports in evidence. He has not made any payments on the 
remaining seven debts. He stated that he plans to pay his debts. He owes the IRS 
about $500 for his 2015 taxes. He has not received financial counseling.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 21-29, 38-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4-7. 
 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his divorce and legal problems. His 
legal problems were not beyond his control. His child support arrearages are paid, and 
he successfully disputed owing the $406 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. Those two debts are 
mitigated. There are no mitigating conditions applicable to his remaining delinquent 
debts.  
 
Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
The security concerns for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct are set out 
in AG ¶¶ 21 and 30:       
 
21. The Concern. Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the 
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
30. The Concern. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22 and 31 describe conditions that could raise alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct security concerns and may be disqualifying: 
 
22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
 
6 
 
31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s multiple alcohol-related criminal offenses are sufficient to establish 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶¶ 23 and 32 describe conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; 
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant is on probation for ten years. He stopped drinking more than a year 
ago. However, before his third DWI, he told the background investigator that he did not 
intend to ever drive again after drinking alcohol. There are no mitigating conditions 
sufficiently applicable to mitigate the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, G, and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, particularly his two 
deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan. He is lucky that his out-of-control drinking did not 
result in his death or the death of an innocent person. Hopefully, he has pulled himself 
together, but he is a poor candidate for a security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
