KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: While the Judge’s characterization of Applicant as a “foolish victim” may not be short
of the mark, it does nothing to ameliorate concerns that Applicant’s poor judgment is an ongoing
feature of his life, one not checked by lessons painfully learned at the hands of swindlers. 
Viewing the evidence as a whole, the Judge’s decision fails to consider important aspects of the
case and runs contrary to the weight of the record evidence.  Favorable decision reversed. 
CASE NO: 14-05803.a1
DATE: 07/07/2016
DATE:  July 7, 2016
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05803
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 7, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 25, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran granted Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse the
decision.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is an employee of a Defense contractor.  In about 2007, Applicant decided to
invest in real estate.  He bought a rental property in another state.  However, renters caused
substantial damage to it, which Applicant could not afford to fix.  This property went into
foreclosure, and there is no evidence of a deficiency judgment.
In addition, Applicant entered into an agreement with a company whereby the company
would use Applicant’s credit to buy houses and pay him a percentage of the transaction.  Twenty
to thirty credit cards were opened in Applicant’s name, and the company charged about $200,000
on them.  Although they made payments for a while, the company “disappeared” in 2008.  Decision
at 2.  The Judge found that Applicant and the credit card companies were swindled. 
Applicant retained a debt settlement company long before he completed or submitted his
security clearance application.  A number of his creditors obtained judgments against him and
garnished his wages.  A credit report shows that multiple accounts have been paid or settled.  The
Judge also found that several of Applicant’s debts had been successfully disputed and were removed
from his credit reports or fell off due to age.  Applicant pays his current expenses and is able to pay
his older debts.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant had mitigated the concerns arising from his delinquent
debts.  He stated that Applicant’s “enthusiasm for real estate investing led him to poor choices” and
that “Applicant is a victim, a foolish victim under the circumstances, but a victim nonetheless.”  Id.
at 6.  The Judge also noted that Applicant is continuing his efforts at debt resolution, although there
are accounts that have yet to be paid.  The Judge concluded that Applicant has established a plan to
resolve his debts and has taken significant action to implement the plan.  He stated that Applicant
has acted responsibly under the circumstances and that there are clear circumstances that Applicant’s
problems are unlikely to recur.  The Judge also took note of Applicant’s stable work history.
Discussion
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Guideline F provides that 
[f]ailure or inability to . . . satisfy debts and meet financial obligations may indicate
. . . a lack of judgment . . . which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  Directive, Enclosure
2 ¶ 18.  
The concern is not simply that an applicant might be tempted to compromise classified information
in order to pay his debts.  A Judge should also consider the extent to which an applicant’s
circumstances cast doubt upon his judgment, self control, and other characteristics essential to
protecting national security information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 6,
2016).  Even if an applicant has actually paid his debts, underlying circumstances may impugn his
judgment.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).
We note the Judge’s findings that several of Applicant’s debts have been resolved by
garnishment, which diminishes the weight to which this evidence is entitled.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 09-05700 at 4  (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011).  In a similar vein, that some debts have dropped off
his credit report is not meaningful evidence of debt resolution.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03612
at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015).  
We also find persuasive Department Counsel’s argument that Applicant’s claim to have been
a victim of fraud is buttressed by little, if any, corroboration.  The record contains a document to the
effect that Applicant is included in a Department of Justice Victim Notification System for an
ongoing investigation.  However, “there is no obvious correlation between this investigation and the
real estate scheme.”  Appeal Brief at 3.  Department Counsel also states, correctly, that the record
contains no evidence that any real estate was actually purchased with Applicant’s cards, nor does
it provide details of the scheme which, “on its face, appears illogical and incomprehensible.”  Id. 
In a DOHA proceeding, it is the applicant’s task to provide evidence to “rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate” the concerns raised by the SOR.  Directive ¶ E3. 1.15.  Applicant’s failure fully to
explain the cause of his poor financial health undermines the Judge’s conclusion that he has met his
burden of persuasion under the Egan standard.   
Department Counsel’s comment about the absurdity of Applicant’s venture broaches the
most problematic aspect of this case, which is the extent to which Applicant’s explanation for his
debts, on its face, raises serious concerns about his judgment.  He told his clearance interviewer that
he first learned of this plan by means of a web site, through which he purchased a package of
information.  Later a spokesman for a company explained to him about “creative financing” and
induced him to let the company open 20 to 30 credit cards in his name and make charges on them. 
Moreover, Applicant advised that all of his communications with this company were over the
telephone.  Interview Summary at p. 3, included in Item 6, Answers to Interrogatories.  There is
nothing in the record to suggest why any reasonable person, even one unschooled in real estate
transactions, would agree to such a proposal.  That Applicant claims to have done so should prompt
caution in deciding whether to confide national secrets to him.  As we stated in an earlier case that
Department Counsel cites in his brief, an applicant who was defrauded by means of a facially
preposterous real estate scheme cannot fairly claim that her debts arose from circumstances outside
her control or that she otherwise had exhibited sound judgment in the handling of her finances.  See
ISCR Case No. 08-08435 at 4-5  (App. Bd. Jul. 16, 2009).
Moreover, the record contains other evidence that weakens Applicant’s case for mitigation. 
He advised the clearance interviewer that he was about $1,000 in arrears in taxes arising from the
rental property that was the subject of foreclosure.  Applicant told the interviewer that he did not
believe that he should have to pay tax on property that he does not own.  The nature of this tax
obligation is not developed in the record, but Applicant’s statement further impugns his judgment,
to the extent that he seems to believe that a person can avoid tax lawfully assessed on real estate
merely by selling the property.1  Interview Summary at p. 3.  While the Judge’s characterization of
Applicant as a “foolish victim” may not be short of the mark, it does nothing to ameliorate concerns
that Applicant’s poor judgment is an ongoing feature of his life, one not checked by lessons
painfully learned at the hands of swindlers.  Viewing the evidence as a whole, the Judge’s decision
fails to consider important aspects of the case and runs contrary to the weight of the record evidence. 
See ISCR Case No. 14-02563, supra.
1Applicant also told the interviewer that he was not able to pay the mortgage on this property unless it was
rented.  This has some bearing upon his financial judgment, insofar as the availability of renters is never guaranteed. 
Applicant stated, for example, that on one occasion the house was vacant for six months.  We also note the following,
drawn from the interview summary: “[Applicant] thought he had listed all or most of the credit cards and judgments on
his application, although he inserted phony loan/account numbers because he did not know the appropriate loan/account
numbers.”  Interview Summary at 5.   
Order
The Decision is REVERSED. 
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
