 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-05858 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On February 26, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
February 2, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on February 11, 2016. Applicant had 
30 days to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit a response to the FORM. 
On April 4, 2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me 
on May 23, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.f, and 
1.g and admits the remaining allegations in the SOR, ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, and 1.h. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant  is a 46-year-old employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his 
security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since July 2013. He holds a   
secret security clearance. He has a high school diploma and some college. He served 
on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1989 to 2005.  He divorced in 2003. Based 
on the child support entries on his credit reports, it appears he has a child or children. 
He did not list his children on his security clearance questionnaire. (Item 2)   
 
On February 4, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Financial Record – 
Taxes, Applicant listed that he did not file his tax returns for 2012 and 2013 because “I 
don’t get much back.” In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving Routine 
Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts to include a $900 delinquent 
credit card account, a $1,000 delinquent credit card account, a $1,300 delinquent credit 
card; a $2,000 delinquent credit card; and a $6,555 delinquent automobile loan. 
Applicant indicated he resigned from a high paying job in May 2007, and he was unable 
to pay his debts. (Item 3, section 26)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts which are alleged in the SOR: a $166 delinquent cell phone account placed 
for collection in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 3 at 3; Item 4 at 2); a $1,235 judgment filed 
against Applicant  in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 3 at 3; Item 4 at 3; Item 5 at 1); an $898 
judgment for a delinquent credit card account filed against Applicant in 2008 (SOR ¶ 
1.c: Item 3 at 3; Item 4 at 3); an $141 cable television bill that was placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 3 at 4); a $795 telephone account placed for collection in January 
2014 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 3 at 5); a $1,305 delinquent account placed for collection in 
November 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 3 at 6, 8); and a $2,506 delinquent credit card account 
placed for collection in March 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 3 at 8). The SOR also alleges that 
Applicant failed to file his Virginia state tax returns for 2011 and 2012. (SOR ¶ 1.h) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant provided the following information 
regarding the debts: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  $161 telephone collection account: Applicant claims the account was 
paid in full in April 2015. He did not provide proof verifying the debt was paid. Such 
proof could have included receipts, cancelled checks, or a statement from the creditor 
that the debt was paid in full.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $1,235 judgment filed against Applicant in 2009:  Applicant states this 
debt was paid in April 2015. He provided copies of two checks to the creditor as well as 
a settlement offer to show that this debt was paid. The debt no longer appears on a 
credit report dated June 3, 2015. (Item 1 at 7, 8; Item 5) 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $898 judgment entered against Applicant in 2008 for a delinquent 
credit card account: Applicant claims the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g is a duplicate of this debt. 
He claims he will make payments of $184 a month beginning in April 2015. He did not 
provide documentation providing proof that he is making the monthly payments. (Item 1 
at 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $141 cable television account: Applicant provided proof that he paid 
this debt in April 2010. The debt is resolved. (Item 1 at 7, 9)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $795 delinquent telephone account placed for collection in 2014: 
Applicant claimed this debt would be settled in the amount of $318.03 in April 2015. He 
did not provide proof of payment. (Item 1 at 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  $1,305 collection account. Applicant denies this debt. He is trying to 
identify the debt. (Item 1 at 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g:  $2,506 account placed for collection. Applicant claims this account is 
the same as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  He intends to make payments of $184 a 
month towards this debt. He did not provide proof that he was making payments. (Item 
1 at 7) The account number for this debt is different from the account number of the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. These debts are not duplicates. (Item 3 at 3, 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h:  Applicant did not file his state income tax returns for tax years 2011 
and 2012. In his response to the SOR, he provided proof that he hired an accountant 
and filed his federal and state tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012 on April 29, 2014. 
(Item 1 at  7,10)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG &19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations); and AG &19(g) (failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns and the fraudulent filing of the same) apply to 
Applicant’s case. Applicant encountered financial problems since 2007. The SOR 
 
5 
 
 
alleges seven delinquent accounts, an approximate total of $7,046. Applicant did not file 
his state income tax returns for 2011 and 2012.   AG &19(a), AG &19(c), and AG &19(g)  
apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raised 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 
6 
 
 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) cannot be applied because Applicant did not provide a sufficient 
explanation for the cause of his financial problems. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant indicated he was taking action to resolve his debts, but did not provide 
sufficient proof that he actually resolved the debts. While several of the debts were not 
listed on the June 2015 credit report, it does not mean that the debts were resolved. 
Debts that are more than seven years old are removed from an individual’s credit report 
in accordance with the law. Applicant had several old debts that could have been 
removed because the seven-year period had passed. Applicant provided no information 
about the current status of his financial situation.  For these reasons, Applicant’s past 
financial problems continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. 
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies, because Applicant’s financial problems were likely  
aggravated by his 2003 divorce even though the divorce occurred over 13 years ago.  
Applicant also mentioned on his security clearance questionnaire that he left a well-
paying job in 2007. It is unclear whether he left the job involuntarily or of his own accord.  
It is also noted that this occurred over nine years ago. While circumstances beyond his 
control may have aggravated Applicant’s financial situation, I cannot conclude that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant did not have a good justification 
for his failure to file his federal and state income returns in 2011 and 2012. Filing his tax 
returns was well within his control. He made a deliberate decision not to file because he 
did not think he would receive a large refund after filing. He filed his tax returns in 2014 
after he submitted his security clearance application. Applicant appears to have begun 
to repay his debts in reaction to the security clearance process. Most of the debts 
alleged in the SOR were neglected for years. I cannot conclude Applicant behaved 
responsibly under the circumstances. For this reason, AG &20(b) is given less weight.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. There is no record Applicant received financial 
counseling. While Applicant states he planned to resolve his accounts, he did not follow 
up with documents proving that he has paid or is making payments towards his debts 
such as receipts, paid-in-full statements from the creditors, copies of cancelled checks 
or money orders.  Information about Applicant’s current financial situation is unknown.  
 
AG & 20(d) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.b, 1.d, and 1.h.  
Applicant provided sufficient proof that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.b and 1.d were 
resolved.  He also filed his 2011 and 2012 state income tax returns and does not owe 
any taxes. He did not provide proof that the other debts alleged in the SOR were 
resolved.  
 
AG & 20(e) potentially applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Applicant denied this debt because he does not recognize it. He did not indicate 
whether he took steps to formally dispute this debt and the outcome of any dispute 
made. For this reason, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s service in the United States Marines and his three years 
of employment with a DOD contractor. While Applicant provided some evidence that he 
intended to resolve the debts alleged in the SOR, he did not follow through by providing 
evidence that he either paid is regularly paying on his delinquent accounts. 
  
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances and 
facts that would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. It is unknown 
whether Applicant has sufficient income to meet his current financial obligations. 
Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.e – 1.g:  Against  Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, and 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
