 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06663 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 20, 2014.  
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant or 
deny Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On November 13, 2015, DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations, and Guideline C, foreign preference.1 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 2, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 25, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for May 25, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 2016. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted AE C 
through E, which were admitted without objection. On motion by Department Counsel 
and without objection from Applicant, the SOR was amended to change the judgment 
date in ¶ 1.c from 20XX to 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2012. He is applying to obtain his first security clearance. He 
is a high school graduate with some college. He married in 2009, has one child from this 
marriage, and three children from a previous relationship for which he pays child-
support. His spouse is on active duty in the U.S. military. Applicant was born in 
Jamaica, and naturalized as a United States citizen in 2011. He held a Jamaican 
passport, issued in 2007. He relinquished his foreign passport to his facility security 
officer (FSO) and it was destroyed in May 2016. 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts, including five judgments. Applicant 
incurred his debts after a sudden workplace illness in 2005. He was hospitalized and 
was advised by his union to apply for Medicaid benefits because his medical expenses 
were not fully paid. He testified that Medicaid authorities told him he was qualified, and 
the hospital collected the information and he signed forms to submit to Medicaid. Six 
months after the procedure, Applicant received a bill for the treatment from the hospital. 
He contacted the hospital and they instructed him to ignore the bills because Medicaid 
should pay them. Applicant continued to receive bills and discussed them with the 
hospital finance department until the hospital filed bankruptcy, went out of business, and 
phone numbers were disconnected. One of the doctors unaffiliated with the hospital 
pursued Applicant and Applicant agreed to pay with automatic deductions from his 
paycheck. 
 
Applicant hired a debt repair company in 2011, but the company stopped making 
progress toward resolutions despite his payments. In 2013, Applicant hired a second 
company to review his credit bureau report (CBR) and make corrections or pay debts as 
necessary. Applicant’s actions to resolve the SOR debts are noted below: 
 
SOR DEBT ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Bank judgment for $657 Paid collection in 2007 or 
2008 per testimony and 
confirmed in CBR 
Paid 
 
3 
 
1.b Medical judgment for 
$1,904 
Paid through voluntary 
garnishment in 2011 and 
confirmed in CBR 
Paid 
1.c State judgment for 
$3,948 
Paid per testimony and 
confirmed in CBR 
Paid 
1.d Hospital judgment for 
$49,391 
Creditor filed bankruptcy 
and is no longer in business 
Unpayable 
1.e Duplicate of 1.d Duplicate Duplicate 
1.f Collection for $2,468 Account is no longer in 
collection and has been 
removed from the CBR 
Resolved 
1.g Collection for $1,006 Appears to be a duplicate of 
1.a. This collection is no 
longer on CBR 
Duplicate 
 
Applicant has taken responsibility for his financial situation and has worked 
closely with a credit repair agency to ensure his credit report remains clean. His current 
CBR shows no new delinquencies, and he is able to meet his current debts and 
expenses. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a history of delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to 
pay. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  There is sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial problems 
have been satisfactorily resolved. He suffered a financial impact from a sudden illness 
requiring hospitalization. He had reason to believe that Medicaid would cover his 
hospitalization costs but inexplicably, it did not. He pursued the matter with the hospital 
until it declared bankruptcy and closed. Most of the remaining debts were satisfied 
several years ago. I find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances once he 
became aware of the debts, and hired professional assistance to resolve his debts and 
repair his credit report. His current CBR shows no new delinquencies. I am confident 
Applicant will continue to use his financial resources wisely to stay current on debts and 
expenses. He has a steady work history and his income is sufficient to meet his family’s 
needs. 
 
 Applicant demonstrated that he has gained control of his financial situation, and 
his overall efforts show a clear intent to resolve his debts. His financial issues no longer 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
(b), (c), (d), and (e) apply. Overall, Applicant’s financial problems have been resolved or 
are under control. I find that the financial considerations concerns have been sufficiently 
mitigated. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9 below: 
 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant possessed a Jamaican passport, issued in 2007. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2011. His possession of a foreign passport created security 
concerns under AG ¶ 10 (a)(1), as stated below: 
 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; and 
 
(e)  the  passport  has  been  destroyed,  surrendered  to  the  cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant obtained his Jamaican passport before he became a U.S. citizen. 
Once he understood the security concerns raised by holding a valid foreign passport, 
he surrendered it to his FSO and it was destroyed. There is no evidence that he used 
his Jamaican passport, in preference to his U.S. passport, to travel after he became a 
U.S. citizen. AG ¶¶ 11(a) and (e) are applicable. He mitigated the security concerns 
alleged under Guideline C. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
 
7 
 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and C in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
    Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
GREGG A. CERVI 
Administrative Judge 
