 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06996 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana between 1999 and 2012. He falsified his 2005, 
2011, and 2014 security clearance applications (SCA) and made four false statements 
to investigators to cover his history of marijuana-related criminal conduct. His marijuana 
use and deliberate false statements continue to raise questions about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and ability to comply with the law and protect 
classified information. He failed to mitigate the Guidelines H and E security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA on February 18, 2014. After reviewing it 
and the information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a clearance. On July 30, 2015, the DOD issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2014 (through 
                                            
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
counsel), and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2015. The DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on January 29, 2016, scheduling a hearing for February 17, 2016. At the 
hearing, the Government offered nine exhibits (GE 1 through 9). Applicant testified and 
submitted seven exhibits (AE A through G). All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 25, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the hearing, the Government moved to amend the SOR to correct 
typographical mistakes. Applicant did not object, and I granted the motion. (Tr. 8 - 9) 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.g were amended to read “November 2012,” instead of “November 
2011.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted he used marijuana three times 
between 2000 and 2012 (partial denial of SOR ¶ 1.a). He admitted the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c, with explanations. He denied the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 2.a, and 2.d through 2.g. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He received his 
bachelor’s degree in electrical and computer engineering in 2004. He married in 2012, 
and he has two sons, ages two and three months.  
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana once in 1999-2000, while a freshman in 
college. He testified: “Yes. While a freshman, on occasion, my freshman year in college, 
I used marijuana for - - at a party, my freshman year in college.” (Tr. 24) He started 
working for a large federal contractor in 2005, and submitted his first SCA in July 5, 
2005, requesting a clearance required for his employment. Section 24 of the 2005 SCA 
asked Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years he had used any illegal 
drugs, including marijuana. Applicant answered “no” and failed to disclose his use of 
marijuana while in college. Shortly thereafter, Applicant was granted a secret clearance. 
He possessed a secret clearance until 2011, when his clearance was revoked by 
another government agency (Agency). 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose he illegally used marijuana in 1999-
2000 in his 2005 SCA. He claimed that he did not have the intent to falsify his 2005 
SCA or to mislead the government. He was 23 years old when he submitted his 2005 
SCA.  
 
Applicant was unemployed during a period in 2011, and he illegally used 
marijuana in June 2011. (Tr. 25) At the time he illegally smoked marijuana in 2011, 
Applicant possessed a security clearance. (Tr. 42) One month later, Applicant submitted 
his July 2011 SCA requesting a top secret clearance from the Agency. Section 23 of the 
2011 SCA asked Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years he had used any 
illegal drugs, including marijuana. Applicant answered “no” and failed to disclose his 
June 2011 use of marijuana. 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in August 2011. During 
the interview, Applicant disclosed his college use of marijuana. He deliberately failed to 
disclose his use of marijuana in June 2011. 
 
When asked why he falsified his 2011 SCA and why he made a false statement 
in August 2011 to a government investigator, Applicant responded that he was 
unemployed and in between jobs. He was concerned that if he disclosed his illegal use 
of marijuana he would not get the job offer. He knew that making a false statement was 
the wrong thing to do, but he was concerned about not getting the job offer. (Tr. 26) 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in August and September 2011. 
During both interviews, Applicant failed to disclose his prior illegal marijuana use to the 
investigator and continued to make false statements. He made the false statements 
because he was concerned that if he told the truth, he would not get the job. (Tr. 26-28) 
 
Applicant claimed he did not use any illegal drugs between 2000 and 2011. In 
July 2011, Applicant submitted an SCA to the Agency requesting an upgrade of his 
clearance to a top secret. He failed to disclose his June 2011 use of marijuana in his 
July 2011 SCA. After undergoing a polygraph assisted interview, Applicant disclosed his 
June 2011 use of marijuana and his clearance eligibility was revoked. Applicant 
appealed the revocation of his clearance to the Agency in March 2012.  
 
While the appeal was pending, Applicant married (November 2012), and he and 
his wife went to Jamaica for their honeymoon. While in Jamaica, he purchased some 
souvenirs and claimed that, unbeknown to him, the vendor put a bag of marijuana in 
with his souvenirs. Applicant and his wife smoked one marijuana cigarette in November 
2012. He claimed he threw away the remaining marijuana. 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in February 2014. Section 23 of the 
2014 SCA asked Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years he had used any 
illegal drugs, including marijuana. Applicant answered “yes” and disclosed his use of 
marijuana in June 2011. Applicant stated in his 2014 SCA that the Agency denied him a 
top secret clearance as a result of the concerns raised by his June 2011 illegal use of 
marijuana. In March 2012, he appealed the clearance revocation and submitted a 
 
4 
 
 
statement of intent to never use illegal drugs again. He stated in his 2014 SCA: “I have 
not used any illegal drug or controlled substance since June 2011.” Applicant falsified 
his February 2014 SCA and failed to disclose his November 2012 use of marijuana with 
his wife during their honeymoon in Jamaica. (GE 1) Applicant admitted his statements in 
his February 2014 SCA were not true, but claimed he did not intend to falsify his 2014 
SCA. (Tr. 29-30, 49) 
 
In May 2014, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. During the 
interview, he deliberately made three false statements. He told the investigator that he 
never had used any marijuana prior to June 2011, when in fact he had used marijuana 
in at least 1999-2000 while a freshman in college. He also told the investigator that he 
admitted his use of marijuana in June 2011 prior to his polygraph-assisted interview, 
when in fact he failed to disclose his June 2011 use of marijuana until after he was 
administered a polygraph. Additionally, he told the investigator that he had never used 
marijuana after June 2011, when in fact, he used marijuana in at least November 2012 
with his wife during their honeymoon.  
 
Applicant claimed that he has never been a consistent marijuana user. He 
considered his marijuana use as three isolated incidents. At his hearing, Applicant 
admitted that he deliberately falsified his SCAs and made false statements to 
investigators because he wanted to be hired or to keep his job. He feared that if he 
disclosed his prior illegal drug use, he would not be hired or allowed to retain his job.  
 
Applicant admitted his mistakes. He understands that his falsifications of the 
SCAs and his false statements were wrong and showed poor judgment. He believes he 
has changed his behavior and his past marijuana-using behavior is no longer indicative 
of his character. Applicant believes that he has worked hard to finish college, start a 
career, and provide for his family. 
 
Applicant was evaluated by a board certified psychiatrist in September 2015. 
Based on Applicant’s statement about his illegal use of marijuana (taking two puffs in 
1999; two puffs in 2011, and sharing a marijuana cigarette with his wife in 2012), the 
psychiatrist concluded that Applicant’s marijuana use has been minimal and infrequent. 
He concluded that Applicant appears to be at minimal risk for any future substance 
abuse. (AE C) Applicant promised that he would never use illegal drugs again. He 
claimed he no longer associates with his marijuana-using friends.  
 
Applicant does not believe he is a threat to national security. He believes he just 
made mistakes and bad decisions. Applicant also believes that he has matured and his 
main concern now is providing support for his family - to do the right things as a father, 
husband, and as a valued employee.  
 
Applicant submitted two reference statements lauding his reliability, 
trustworthiness, professional qualifications, expertise, and work ethic. His references 
believe Applicant deserves a second chance – that he has learned from his past 
mistakes and is ready to move forward. They do not believe Applicant is a threat to 
 
5 
 
 
national security or would be involved in any illegal drug activity in the future. 
Additionally, Applicant submitted documents showing he is considered to be a valuable, 
productive employee. (AE G)  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana on at least three occasions between 1999 and 
2012.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution . . . ; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant claimed that he only used marijuana on three occasions, and that his 
last marijuana use occurred in November 2012. It has been close to four years since 
Applicant’s most recent use of marijuana. There is no evidence of any further drug 
 
7 
 
 
abuse. Applicant has been a productive member of society and has not been involved in 
any issues of concern since November 2012. 
 
Applicant promised to never use any illegal drugs again. His assurance is 
grounded on his desire to care and provide for his family. I have given this statement 
less weight and reviewed Applicant’s evidence cautiously, in light of his history of illegal 
marijuana possession and use. Applicant knew his marijuana-related criminal behavior 
would raise the Government’s concerns because he falsified his 2005, 2011, and 2014 
SCAs, and made false statements to investigators to cover his criminal behavior. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant continued his marijuana-related criminal conduct after he 
submitted his 2005 SCA, after he was granted a security clearance in 2005, and after 
his clearance was revoked by the Agency in 2011.  
 
Applicant’s drug involvement and numerous falsifications continue to cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Considering the evidence as a whole, I 
find that his testimony about his changed lifestyle, marijuana abstinence, and promises 
to never use illegal drugs in the future, are not credible. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified his 2005, 2011, and 2014 SCAs and made three 
false statements to Government investigators to cover his history of marijuana-related 
criminal conduct between 1999 and 2012. His deliberate falsifications trigger the 
applicability of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
8 
 
 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists five conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. 
Applicant has a history of repeated falsifications to cover his drug-related criminal 
misconduct. Applicant deliberately falsified his 2005 SCA to cover his criminal conduct. 
Notwithstanding, he continued his marijuana-related criminal conduct after he submitted 
his 2005 SCA, after he was granted a security clearance in 2005, and after his 
clearance was revoked in 2011 for falsifying his 2011 SCA. In 2012, Applicant again 
used marijuana and he later falsified his 2014 SCA and made false statements to 
Government investigators.  
 
 Applicant disclosed his marijuana-related criminal behavior in 1999-2000, 2011, 
and his 2005 and 2011 SCA falsifications after undergoing a polygraph-assisted 
interview in 2011. Notwithstanding, he again falsified his 2014 SCA and made false 
statements to investigators in 2014. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant has 
not reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. Applicant has 
continued to display a lack of judgment and a propensity to lie.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. He never made 
any attempts to correct his falsifications until confronted. For the above reasons, and 
those discussed under Guideline H, incorporated herein, I find that none of the personal 
conduct mitigation conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my 
whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that 
guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His references 
lauded his reliability, trustworthiness, professional qualifications, expertise, and his work 
ethic.  
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana between 1999 and 2012. He falsified his 2005, 
2011, and 2014 SCAs and made three false statements to investigators to cover his 
history of marijuana-related criminal conduct. His propensity to make false statements 
make it difficult to believe his testimony in extenuation, mitigation, and rehabilitation.  
 
Applicant continued his marijuana-related criminal conduct after he was granted a 
security clearance in 2005, and after his clearance was revoked in 2011. Applicant 
violated the trust placed in him by the Government. He never corrected his falsifications 
or disclosed his criminal behavior until he was confronted. His actions underline his 
possible inability or unwillingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations.  
 
On balance, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by his use and possession of marijuana while possessing a security clearance, 
and his numerous deliberate false statements. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
