1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 14-04576 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant surrendered his foreign passport and has established his strong ties to 
the United States. The Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and C (Foreign Preference) 
allegations are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 21, 2014. 
On November 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines B and C. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR and answered it on December 22, 2014, requesting 
a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on January 13, 2016, and a complete copy of the file of 
2 
 
relevant material (FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 11, was 
sent to Applicant on January 15, 2016. He was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on February 7, 2016, and filed a Response, which included a 
statement with several attachments. Department Counsel made no objections to 
Applicant’s Response. I have admitted the Response as Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) 1. The 
case was assigned to me on February 23, 2016.  
Administrative Notice 
 In the body of the FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of relevant facts about Afghanistan. This request was included in 
the body of the FORM, and excerpts of the supporting documents were attached to it. I 
take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Afghanistan:  
Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919, and it was a monarchy 
until a military coup in 1973. Following a second military coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded and occupied 
Afghanistan, but they were resisted by the Afghan mujahedeen. The Soviet Union 
withdrew in February 1989 pursuant to an agreement signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, 
the United States, and the Soviet Union. The mujahedeen were not a party to the 
agreement and refused to abide by it. The result was a civil war among several factions, 
including the Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan, 
committed atrocities against minority populations, and provided sanctuary to terrorist 
organizations. U.S. military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced 
the Taliban out of power by November 2001.1  
 
Afghanistan has made noted progress since the Taliban was disposed in 2001, 
but continues to face challenges, which include, fighting insurgency, preventing the 
return of terrorist organizations, rebuilding its decimated infrastructure, and recovering 
from more than three decades of war. The United States has made a long-term 
commitment to help Afghanistan build a secure state with a democratic government that 
respects human rights, and with the assistance and support of the United States, a new 
democratic government took office in 2004. The United States continues its mission in 
partnership with Afghan security forces to combat violence and terrorism against the 
people and the government.  
 
Internal problems following the years of war and ongoing insurgent and extremist 
groups continue to threaten the country’s governmental and overall stability. Insurgent 
groups continue to attempt to inspire Afghan security personnel to commit insider 
attacks against international coalition members. The United States has delayed its 
reduction of U.S. forces in an effort to help Afghanistan stabilize. 
                                                            
1  I have sua sponte taken administrative notice of facts from documents not included in Department 
Counsel’s administrative notice submission. These facts are from: Central Intelligence Agency, The World 
Factbook: Afghanistan, updated July 12, 2016, and U.S. Department of State, U.S. Relations With 
Afghanistan, October 29, 2015. I have appended these documents to the record as Administrative 
Exhibits 1 and 2. 
3 
 
Afghanistan continues to have a poor human rights record. There are reports of 
widespread torture, rape, and other abuses by officials, security forces, detention center 
authorities, and police, as well as indiscriminate attacks on civilians, insurgents killing 
people associated with the Afghan government, targeted violence against women and 
girls, and human trafficking. These offenses are not effectively investigated by local 
authorities. Additionally, the judicial system suffers from corruption. 
A U.S. Department of State travel warning for Afghanistan remains in effect. The 
security situation is extremely unstable, and the possibility of violence against U.S. and 
other foreign nationals remains high. Extremist groups are active throughout the 
country, and the Afghanistan-Pakistan border remains a safe haven for them. There is 
an ongoing risk of kidnaping and hostage-taking. 
Additionally, I sua sponte take administrative notice of the following relevant 
facts: In 2008, a Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) could be issued to Afghan nationals who:  
were employed in Afghanistan for a period of at least 12 months serving the U.S. Armed 
Forces, or under the authority of the Chief of Mission; obtained a written 
recommendation from the Chief of Mission or a general or flag officer in the chain of 
command of the U.S. military unit supported by the translator or interpreter; and, cleared 
the requisite background check and screening. Persons entering the United States on 
such SIVs are admitted as permanent residents.2 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline C, and Applicant denies, that he possesses a 
valid Afghanistan passport. Under Guideline B, the SOR alleges, and Applicant denies, 
that his wife is a citizen of Afghanistan. The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s parents, 
in-laws, brother, and two sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan; that his father 
worked for the Afghan ministry of commerce since 1975 as a trade attaché; and, that 
Applicant’s father-in-law worked as a maintenance officer for the Afghan presidential 
palace. In his Answer, Applicant admitted each of these allegations, and offered 
information about his family members and his contact with them.  His admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old linguist and cultural advisor. He is employed by a 
defense contractor, and has been working in Afghanistan with the U.S. military and 
coalition forces since November 2012. He worked for another defense contractor as a 
translator from May 2011 until November 2012, and for the U.S. Army as a medical 
interpreter in Afghanistan from July 2007 until August 2008. (GX 4.) 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. He graduated from high school in 1995, and 
attended medical school in Afghanistan from 1996 until 2003, when he graduated with a 
medical degree. From 2006 to 2007, he worked for the Afghanistan government’s public 
health ministry in the medical field. (GX 4; GX 8.) 
                                                            
2 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, Expanded Special Immigrant Status for Afghan and Iraqi 
Translators and Interpreters, July 2, 2007. I have appended this document to the record as Administrative 
Exhibit 3. 
4 
 
Applicant’s wife worked as an interpreter for the U.S. Embassy, in Kabul, 
Afghanistan, for approximately two years. Applicant and his wife’s work with U.S. 
government entities entitled them to apply for special immigrant visas, which were 
granted. He and his wife were admitted to the United States in August 2008 as 
permanent residents. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2014, and his 
wife was granted citizenship in September 2013. They have two children who are U.S. 
citizens by birth. Applicant’s wife worked as an interpreter for the U.S. Army after 
immigrating to the United States. Neither Applicant nor his wife has any property or 
financial interests in Afghanistan. (GX 4; GX 8; Answer.) 
Applicant has two brothers and one sister who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His brother is deputy director of a private university. His older sister is 
married and does not work outside the home. His younger sister is a student. He has 
weekly contact with his brother and younger sister, and monthly contact with his older 
sister, wherein their “conversations are general in nature and about family matters.” (GX 
4; Answer; GX 11.) 
Applicant sponsored his parents, and Applicant’s wife sponsored her parents, to 
immigrate to the United States. They received their visas in February 2016, and moved 
permanently to the United States in March 2016, with the intention of becoming citizens. 
Applicant’s father retired from the Afghan ministry of commerce in 2012. His father-in-
law also retired. (AX 1; GX 4.)  
Applicant applied for a linguist position in 2009. He was interviewed for the 
position and a counterintelligence (CI) screening questionnaire was completed from his 
interview answers on January 15, 2009. The screeners’ assessment was, “No evidence 
is present that indicates this candidate is a security risk.” (GX 8.) Applicant underwent 
another CI screening in May 2011, where the screeners reached the same conclusion. 
(GX 9.) He underwent a third CI screening in November 2012, where his screeners 
concluded that, due to his contacts with his father and father-in-law, who were then 
employed by the Afghanistan government, “This candidate has the potential to present 
a security risk.” (GX 10.) 
Applicant applied for his current linguist job prior to becoming a U.S. citizen. At 
the advice of his employment recruiter, he attempted to extend the date of validity of his 
Afghanistan passport by sending it to the consulate in Los Angeles, CA. Apparently, this 
was not the proper procedure, and his original passport was not returned to him. 
Applicant was ultimately advised by the consulate to apply for a new Afghanistan 
passport. The new passport was issued in September 2012. Applicant surrendered this 
passport to his facility security officer on February 23, 2014, and signed an affidavit 
agreeing to its destruction. On that same day, he sent a memorandum to the consulate 
renouncing his Afghanistan citizenship. The facility security officer signed an affidavit on 
March 13, 2014, wherein she stated that the employer would destroy the passport, and 
would report any requests by Applicant for return of the passport. (Answer; AX 1.) 
 
5 
 
Applicant provided two letters of reference with his Response. According to the 
linguist manager where Applicant is currently assigned, Applicant’s work in Afghanistan 
has played a vital role in the mission, he is respected by his peers, and he 
demonstrates a high degree of integrity and responsibility. Applicant’s security manager 
states that Applicant’s contributions have been exemplary, and that Applicant “has 
shown numerous times that his loyalty lies with the United States of America.” Applicant 
also provided a copy of a certificate of appreciation he received for his contributions to 
Operation Enduring Freedom between November 2012 and January 2013. Applicant 
states, “On the day that I became a naturalized citizen of the United States, I raised my 
hand to support, honor, and serve America…I know where my loyalties lie and that is 
with the United States.” (AX 1.)   
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
6 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Specifically, Applicant’s possession of a foreign passport raises this 
concern and establishes the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship,” to include “possession of a current foreign 
passport.”  
 
 The foreign influence concern sets forth a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
  
AG ¶ 11(b): the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
AG ¶ 11(c): exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; 
 
AG ¶ 11(e): the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
  
 Applicant obtained his foreign passport in 2012 before becoming a U.S. citizen. 
He surrendered it to his facility security officer to be destroyed one month after 
7 
 
becoming a citizen, and on the same day he renounced his Afghanistan citizenship. 
Applicant has mitigated the Guideline C concern.   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are 
relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information.  
 
When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country, as well as each individual family tie, must be considered. ISCR Case 
No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that 
contacts with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR 
Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
   
The instability of the Afghan government, the pervasive threats from insurgent 
and extremist groups, and the government’s poor human rights record are sufficient to 
establish the heightened risk required by AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest 
in AG ¶ 7(b). These two disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
8 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).   
 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶ 7(a). AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. Applicant’s contacts with his siblings are 
frequent and, by their nature, not casual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has demonstrated his undivided loyalty and 
his ties to the United States, and would resolve any potential conflict of interest that 
could arise from his relationships with his siblings in Afghanistan, in favor of U.S. 
interests. Specifically, Applicant and his wife came to the United States in 2008 on 
special immigrant visas, which gave them permanent resident status. They qualified for 
these visas because of their work in support of the U.S. military, favorable 
recommendations from either the Chief of Mission or the general or flag officer in the 
9 
 
chain of command of the units they supported, and, clear background checks and 
screenings. Applicant’s wife became a U.S. citizen in September 2013. Applicant 
became a citizen in January 2014, and in February 2014, he surrendered his passport 
and renounced his Afghanistan citizenship. Their two children were born in the United 
States. The concern raised in the 2012 CI screening was due to Applicant’s contacts 
with his father and father-in-law, who were Afghanistan government employees. 
However, his parents and in-laws are now U.S. residents, and the concern is moot.  
 
Applicant began working in support of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan in 2007. 
He continues to work in support of this mission, despite the potentially increased danger 
to him as a U.S. citizen in Afghanistan. In his current position, he is respected by his 
superiors and peers, who consider him to be loyal to the United States, and a 
responsible person with a high degree of integrity. His contributions are considered vital 
to the mission. Applicant’s ties to his family in the United States, including his parents 
and in-laws, and his ongoing commitment to supporting the U.S. mission in Afghanistan 
outweigh his ties to his family in Afghanistan. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant’s ongoing efforts and dedication in support of the U.S. mission in 
Afghanistan are commendable. Applicant’s parents and in-laws are now U.S. residents, 
and aspire to become citizens.  Applicant renounced his Afghanistan citizenship. These 
actions demonstrate his loyalty and ties to the United States.   
  
10 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines C and 
B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his previous possession of a 
valid foreign passport, and by his family ties to Afghanistan. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.f    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
