 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02195 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 22, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 4) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on February 13, 2013. 
(Item 6, Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the OPM 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. On September 17, 2015, DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
2 
 
 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on October 6, 2015. He answered the SOR on 
October 22, 2015, admitting the three financial allegations with explanation. He elected 
to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 3) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on December 15, 2015. Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 6, 2016, and was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not file a reply to the FORM. I was assigned the 
case on May 5, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI with an OPM 
agent (Item 6) was not authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He 
was further advised that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the 
summary to make it clear and accurate. He could object to the admission of the 
summary as not authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised 
that if no objection was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could 
determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the PSI summary. I will consider information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old quality specialist for a defense contractor. He is a high 
school graduate who has continuously worked for the defense contractor for over 27 
years. This is his first request to be granted eligibility for access to classified information 
since he left active military service with an honorable discharge in 1983. He has been 
married since October 1983 and has two adult children and one minor child. (Item 4, e-
QIP, dated January 22, 2013; Item 6, PSI, dated February 13, 2013)  
 
The SOR lists and a credit report (Item 5, dated January 29, 2013) confirms the 
following delinquent debts for Applicant: a credit card charged off for $28,670 (SOR 
1.a); medical debt in collection for $89 (SOR 1.b); and a store credit card in collection 
for $18,586 (SOR 1.c). The amount of delinquent debt is $47,345. The debts were 
reported in the credit report at Item 5. The SOR 1.a credit card debt is listed as charged 
off with last activity in July 2007. The SOR 1.b medical debt is listed in collection with 
date of last activity in August 2008. The SOR 1.c credit card debt is reported in Item 5 in 
collection with date of last activity in January 2013, the date of the credit report. None of 
the debts appear on the latest 2015 credit reports. (Item 7, dated February 23, 2015; 
and Item 8, dated August 31,2015)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant reported that his financial problems started in 2008 when his wife lost a 
job paying over $60,000 annual in the mortgage industry. She was unemployed until 
2012 when she secured employments paying only minimum wage. He also had two 
children in college and was paying tuition and expenses. His son had taken one of the 
credit cards and charged a large amount on the card. The two large debts were from 
credit cards he and his wife used for household purchases. He told the security 
investigator that the accounts were closed and he does not plan to make payments on 
the accounts. The medical debt was for his son and has not been paid. He told the 
security investigator he intends to look into the medical debt and resolve it as soon as 
possible. He reported the credit card debts in response to financial questions on his e-
QIP. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated January 22, 2013; Item 6, PSI, dated February 13, 2013) 
 
Applicant noted on his e-QIP that his house was foreclosed in October 2012 
because of his wife’s loss of employment. Later in the PSI, Applicant told the security 
investigator that he and his family moved into a trailer on his mother-in-law’s property. 
He is now meeting his financial obligations and is living within his means. While he has 
not paid his SOR financial obligations, he is willing to do so when money becomes 
available. (Item 6, PSI, dated February 13, 2013, at 3) 
 
Applicant has not presented any documentation or information to show he paid 
any of the debts. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated he assumed that all of 
the debts had been removed because he has not received correspondence from his 
creditors in years. He had been paying his debts until his wife lost her job in the 
mortgage industry. He and his wife are hardworking people that hit upon bad financial 
times and did the best they could. They are now on track financially. (Item 3, Response 
to SOR, dated October 22, 2015)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is 
documented in a credit report. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
 
5 
 
 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition under AG 
¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a 
continuous course of conduct and thus current, even though the debts are no longer 
listed on his latest credit reports. The debts were incurred in the normal course of 
everyday living, but were caused by conditions beyond Applicant’s control when his wife 
lost her good paying employment in the mortgage industry. However, Applicant has not 
established that he has acted reasonably and responsibly under his financial 
circumstances. Applicant has not presented any documentation to show that he has 
taken any steps to repay any of the SOR debts. Applicant also did not indicate that he 
received financial counseling.  
 
Applicant has not established a good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-
faith effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence 
of a good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation.  
 
 
6 
 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s personal debts. It is a proceeding aimed at evaluating and applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. The facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy debt in a timely manner must be 
considered. Applicant has not established a plan to pay the debts and has not shown a 
meaningful track record of debt payment. He has not presented documentation to show 
any contact with the creditors or any payments he made on the debts. Applicant’s debts 
seem to have come off his credit reports merely by the passage of time. To show good 
faith, Applicant must do more than simply wait for his debts to come off his credit 
reports. The security significance of Applicant’s financial history does not turn on 
whether Applicant’s debts could or could not legally be listed on credit reports after the 
passage of a set number of years  
 
 There are security concerns about Applicant lack of action about his delinquent 
debts. Applicant’s debts have not been paid, and Applicant has not presented a 
reasonable plan to resolve his financial problems. Applicant has not shown that he 
acted with reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and 
obligation towards his financial obligations. With evidence of delinquent debt and no 
documentation to support responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control, that Applicant is not managing his 
personal financial obligations reasonably and responsibly, and that his financial 
problems are not behind him.  
 
 Applicant's lack of documented action is significant and disqualifying. There is 
ample evidence of irresponsible behavior, lack of good judgment, and unreliability 
because Applicant failed to document payment of any of his delinquent debts. Based on 
the identified debts and the failure to make arrangements to pay his debts, it is clear 
that Applicant has not been reasonable and responsible in regard to his finances. His 
failure to act reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an indication that he 
may not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant has not presented 
sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. Based 
on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated security 
concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not provided sufficient 
credible documentary information to show reasonable and responsible action to address 
delinquent debts and resolve financial problems. Applicant has not demonstrated 
responsible management of his finances or a consistent record of actions to resolve 
financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation and 
his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
