                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-02093
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
July 21, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIPs) June 19, 2012.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On October 26, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DOD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2015, and he requested a
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge.  This case was assigned to this administrative judge on February 1, 2016.  A
notice of hearing was issued February 17, 2016, and the hearing was scheduled for
March 4, 2016.  At the hearing the Government presented seven exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 7.  The Applicant presented five exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Exhibits A through E.  He also testified on his own behalf.  Applicant
requested that the record remain open in order to submit additional documentation.  The
2
record remained open until close of business on March 14, 2016.  Applicant submitted
one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was
admitted without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on March 14, 2016.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 57 years old and is divorced with three adult children.  He has a
Master’s degree in Computer Science.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a
Principal Software Engineer and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection
with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
There are seven delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Applicant admitted each
of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline. Credit reports of the
Applicant dated July 14, 2007; June 21, 2012; September 25, 2015; and January 27,
2016; which include all three credit reporting agencies, reflect that he was indebted to
each of the creditors set forth in the SOR in an amount totaling in excess of $100,000.
(Government Exhibits 3, 4, 5 and 6.)       
Applicant has been working for his current employer in the defense industry since
September 2004.  He is also employed as an adjunct professor at a state university
teaching engineering since September 2007.  He has held a security clearance since
1983.  He has never violated company or security policies.  Applicant was married form
1983 to 2011. He and his wife separated in 2004.  Applicant moved into an apartment.
To keep his wife in the house with the children and provide her with the things she
needed because she was in college, they frequently used credit cards to live on.  At one
time they had at least 20 credit cards open.  As his wife would “max out” an older credit
card, they would open a new one, and on and again with unending credit.  (Tr. p. 34.)
Applicant states that he was also paying alimony and child support in the amount of
$3,500 monthly.  (Tr. p. 63.)  As time passed, they incurred a massive amount of debt.
Applicant stated that he tried to pay the credit cards as best he could.  He started
working overtime, and got a second job as an adjunct professor to help pay the bills.
When they divorced in 2011, Applicant’s wife wanted the keep the house and get the
children through college.  In order to qualify to buy the house on her own, Applicant took
on all of the debt from the marriage, which was mostly consumer credit card debt.  (Tr.
3
p. 23.)  Applicant then decided he would contact a debt management company to help
him pay it off.     
Upon hiring the debt management company, Applicant paid $3,000 to start the
process and $1,000 monthly.  He soon realized that they were not doing anything to
help him, and his debt went into collection.  Creditors were calling, and by that point,
most of his debt was starting to go into charge-off status, and his credit rating was going
down.  (Tr. p. 24.)  The following debts, mostly consisting of credit card debt, became
delinquent and owing:
1.a.  A delinquent credit card debt owe to a bank that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $49,639.  This debt is the same debt as that listed in allegation
1.f.  Applicant claims that he had set up an arrangement to have the creditor paid by
taking $400 dollars automatically out of his checking account each month.  At some
point, this stopped.  Applicant recently restarted the payments that are now due on the
15  of each month and will continue until the debt is paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-th
Hearing Exhibit A.)  He believes that he currently owes the creditor about $24,300.  (Tr.
p. 43)     
1.b.  A delinquent credit card debt owed to a bank that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $5,503.  Applicant claims that he made monthly payments of
$205 dollars monthly until the debt was paid in full.  (Tr. p. 45.)  Applicant is currently
waiting for a letter from the creditor to show that the debt has been paid in full.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)
  
1.c.   A delinquent credit card debt owed to a creditor that was charged off in the
approximate amount of $21,086.  Applicant has paid the debt in full.  (Tr. p. 47.)
Applicant claims that he made payments of $400 monthly until the debt was paid in full.
(Tr. p. 49.)
1.d.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor that was placed for collection in
theapproximate amount of $4,302.  Applicant made payments of $200 monthly until the
debt was paid in full.  (Tr. p. 49.)
1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $9,268.  Applicant settled the debt for $3,500 and the debt been paid off.
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
1.f.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $55,000.  This is the same debt as that listed in allegation 1.a.
1.g.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor that was placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $7,500.  Applicant claims that his wife paid this debt off when
she sold the house.  (Tr. p. 54.)  Applicant has provided a copy of the Acknowledgment
of Satisfaction of Judgement dated May 6, 2011, showing that the debt was paid in full.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)
4
There was another delinquent credit card account the Applicant has been paying
on and has completely resolved in the amount of $13,000.  (Tr. pp. 55-56 and
Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
Applicant presented a copy of his most recent credit report which shows a FICO
score of 667, indicating to him that it has recently improved by 45 points.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit E.)  Applicant testified the he currently has three credit cards with zero debt on
them.  (Tr. p. 64.)  He is also currently paying alimony in the amount of $2,700 monthly.
At the end of the month he has about $300 left in discretionary funds.  He has a 401(K)
that contains about $75,000.  (Tr. p. 66.)  Applicant recognizes his mistakes in the past
and has no intention of engaging in these wild financial practices in the future.
Work performance appraisals of the Applicant for the years 2013, 2014 and 2015
indicate ratings that show that he either “achieved excellence” or “exceeded
expectations” in every category.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
5
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
6
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred by reckless
spending.  His divorce obviously contributed to some of his financial indebtedness,
however, the way he chose to handle the situation aggravated his financial problems
even more.  Applicant made a series of poor decisions that have negatively effected his
finances.  He and his ex-wife used credit cards to maintain the lifestyle they were
accustomed to, even after they separated, and while they were trying to maintain the
expense of two households.  To keep his wife and children in the house they grew up in
and to allow his wife to go to college instead of work, Applicant took on lots of credit
card debt. When they maxed out one credit card, they would open another.  Applicant
did not live within his means, as he could not afford to pay these debts.  He even
worked overtime and took on a teaching job at a university.  Recently he has been
focused on resolving his debts.   This history of reckless spending shows
irresponsibility.  At this point, he remains excessively indebted to at least one of the
creditors for about $24,000, and just set up a payment plan to restart payments to
resolve the debt.      
Applicant’s history of excessive indebtedness, without sufficient mitigation,
demonstrates a pattern of unreliability and poor judgment.  Applicant provided some
proof of payment, and some documentation to demonstrate that he resolved some of
his delinquent debts.  However, the point here is that the Applicant has not shown that
he is reasonable, responsible or uses good judgment.  There is nothing in the record to
show that Applicant can live within his means.  Without more, the Applicant has failed to
establish that he is financially responsible.  Furthermore, there is no evidence that he
7
has received credit counseling to help him set a budget and learn to live within it, or that
his finances are under control.
Under the particular circumstances of this case, Applicant has not met his burden
of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.  He does not have a concrete
understanding of his financial responsibilities and has not sufficiently addressed his
delinquent debts in the SOR.  His reckless spending, followed by recent efforts to clean
up his credit, does not demonstrate that he can properly handle his financial affairs or
that he is fiscally responsible.  His delinquent debts remain significant.  Assuming that
he demonstrates a history and pattern of fiscal responsibility, including the fact he has
not acquired any new debt that he is unable to pay, he may be eligible for a security
clearance sometime in the future.  However, he is not eligible now.  Considering all of
the evidence,  Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  It can be argued that Mitigation Condition 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies,
because of his divorce.  However, this mitigation condition is not controlling.  Applicant
has not acted responsibly under the circumstances.  He continued to spend money he
did not have, and abused the credit card system in the process.  Applicant could benefit
from intense financial counseling. In this case, none of the mitigating conditions are
applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
8
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against the Applicant.
        
Subpara.  1.a.      Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.b      For the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.c.          For the Applicant.
                 Subpara.  1.d.      For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.e For the Applicant.
                     Subpara.  1.f.          Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.g.         For the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
