 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03601 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline H (drug 
involvement). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On November 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On November 24, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On February 29, 
2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 9, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 1, 
2016, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for April 19, 2016. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant called eight witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through AE N, which were received into evidence without objection. 
On June 5, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations with explanations. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old lead software architect employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2014. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, which 
is a requirement of his continued employment. Applicant was initially granted a 
clearance in 2009 and has successfully held an active clearance since then except for 
the time period from 2012 to 2014 when he did not work for a defense contractor. (GE 
1; Tr. 14-15)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2004. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in engineering in May 2009, and was awarded a master of science 
degree in software engineering in August 2011. (GE1; AE H, AE K; Tr. 16-21) He has 
never married and has no dependents. Applicant has not served in the U.S. armed 
forces. (GE 1, Tr. 17-18) 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The underlying basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from his 
self-disclosure. His past drug use consists of having used marijuana with varying 
frequency from about March 2006 through May 2008 and on one occasion on January 
1, 2013. Although he was granted a security clearance in August 2009 with a previous 
employer, that clearance was not active in January 2013, as inferred in the SOR.  
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b; SOR answer; Tr. 28-30)  
 
Applicant initially reported his past marijuana use when completing his October 
2014 SF-86, and discussed in detail the circumstances of such use during his 
November 3, 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM 
PSI). He further discussed his past marijuana use in detail during his hearing. He 
 
3 
 
 
estimates that his total use of marijuana occurred “seven to 10 times . . . usually at 
party settings.” His former roommate introduced him to marijuana, a roommate with 
whom he no longer communicates. He used marijuana “six to nine times” before 
graduating from college and one time on January 1, 2013. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 21-24, 26-
28) 
 
Applicant’s one-time post-college marijuana use on January 1, 2013, occurred 
at a New Year’s Eve party when a friend “took a joint out and passed it around. I took 
one hit and then I stopped immediately after that.” (Tr. 29)  Applicant has never used 
marijuana since that date. (Tr. 30, 32-34)  
  
Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent dated April 7, 2016, with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any drug violation. (AE A; Tr. 30-31) He stated, 
“I know I made a mistake and I know it was stupid. And we all learn from mistakes and 
I hope this doesn’t affect my life. And I will be true to what I say, so . . . I do 
understand that it was a mistake and it was really dumb.” (Tr. 31)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Eight witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. Those eight witnesses were 
work-related and included the director of software programs, his software engineering 
manager, computer engineers, and software engineers. The majority of those who 
testified have security clearances. They know Applicant well and work with him or 
have worked with him on a daily basis. All of the witnesses are aware that Applicant 
self-reported his marijuana use and have no reservations about recommending him for 
a security clearance. Applicant is clearly a trusted, well-liked, and productive 
employee. (Tr. 35-67)  
 
Applicant’s 2009 through 2015 work performance evaluations document above 
average performance and that he is an employee who is making a significant 
contribution to his company and the national defense. (AE C – AE F) Applicant also 
submitted a 2015 certificate of appreciation from a computer society for a presentation 
he made on a work-related topic, a 2010 certificate of completion for server essentials, 
and a 2009 order of the engineer certificate. (AE G, AE I, AE L) Applicant’s 
undergraduate and graduate transcripts document superior academic achievement. 
(AE M) Applicant also developed a software metric-related utility patent while he was 
working on his master’s degree. (Tr. 23-26’ AE N) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
 
4 
 
 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H for SOR ¶ 1.a, that 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from about March 2006 to January 
2013, through his admissions. However, the evidence did not support its case under 
Guideline H for SOR ¶ 1.b, that Applicant used marijuana after being granted a 
security clearance in August 2009. The evidence conforms to Applicant’s assertion 
that he did not have an active security clearance during his last marijuana use in 
January 2013. Applicant fully and candidly discussed his marijuana use at his hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 and AG 
¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation form drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
                                                          
1
 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
6 
 
 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was a one-time use at a New 
Year’s Eve party in January 2013, about 39 months before his hearing. His illegal drug 
use ended at that time and is unlikely to be repeated. This process clearly has had an 
impact on Applicant as demonstrated by his remorse and candid testimony. The 
absence of evidence of more recent or extensive drug use, and his promise not to use 
illegal drugs in the future eliminates doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. With maturity, he has broken or reduced the prevalence of 
his patterns of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with respect to illegal drug 
use. He has abstained from drug abuse for about 39 months and has had no problem 
in doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
The testimony from senior company representatives show Applicant’s work 
behavior has not been indicative of his having a drug problem. He is viewed as a 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on 
the absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
3
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
7 
 
 
valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the 
defense industry is supported by senior company officials, who know him personally 
and professionally, and by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his 
hearing, He expressed a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes 
consistent with total abstinence of marijuana or any other drugs. I find for Applicant 
under this concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline H is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
additional comments are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employer, family, and friends support him. His 
employment history to date is indicative of stability and a strong work ethic. This 
support and self-introspection should ensure his continued success. Applicant 
demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to remaining drug free. 
Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from his 
mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. I find Applicant has 
presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
  
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration 
of the whole-person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
                                                          
4
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
