 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03795 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding use of information 
technology systems, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security 
clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 12, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On December 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated August 12, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines M (Use of Information 
Technology Systems), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 11, 2015. In a sworn statement, dated 
December 22, 2015,2 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government 
was prepared to proceed on March 23, 2016. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 
2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on April 8, 2016. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on April 27, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, 2 Government exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and 11 Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through K, were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and 
one witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 6, 2016. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity. 
He timely submitted a number of documents which were marked as AE L through AE P, 
and admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on May 18, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the factual 
allegations of the SOR, but denied the conclusions derived therefrom. Applicant’s 
admissions and explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since July 
2011, has been serving as a research and development engineer.3 He has never 
served in the U.S. military.4 He was granted an interim top secret (TS) security 
clearance on an unspecified date about one year ago, but that security clearance was 
withdrawn over the current security concerns.5 A 2007 high school graduate, Applicant 
received both a bachelor of science degree (in computer and systems engineering) and 
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 25-26; Tr. at 45-46. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8. 
 
3 
                                      
 
a master of science degree (in computer science) in August 2011.6 He has never been 
married.7  
Use of Information Technology Systems, Criminal Conduct, & Personal Conduct 
  
Over the years, Applicant has spent thousands of dollars on cable subscriptions, 
movies, and other intellectual property.8 However, between the period from October 
2010 to November 2014, Applicant also downloaded approximately 200 to 300 music 
files, network television shows, or movies from various sources on the internet to his 
personal computer. He estimated that 50 to 100 of the downloaded files were for 
television shows.9 He generally watched one particular subscription television series at 
a friend’s residence, and on a few occasions when the friend was away, Applicant 
downloaded several episodes of that series. He subsequently purchased the entire 
series.10 The majority of the downloads occurred while Applicant was in college and for 
a relatively brief period thereafter. After July 2011, the downloaded materials consisted 
primarily of music and network television shows.11 He last downloaded music and 
movies in 2011 or 2012, and network television shows in mid-2015.12 
 
Applicant never uploaded or posted any of the downloaded videos, television 
shows, or music files on the internet, and he never shared his downloaded files on any 
peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. He may have shared some of the downloaded music files 
with his college roommate. He never made copies of the downloaded files. He never 
downloaded or made copies of any propriety software programs.13 There is no evidence 
that criminal charges were ever brought against Applicant, that civil complaints or 
copyright infringement actions were ever lodged against him, or that his employer ever 
disciplined him for misuse of information technology systems.14 
 
Although the Government alleged that Applicant’s downloading activities were 
criminal in nature, it failed or chose not to identify any particular law that Applicant may 
                                                          
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 11; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 4, 2014), at 3; AE H 
(Resume, undated); AE J (Extract of U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Report of Investigation, dated 
December 1, 2014). 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20. 
 
8
 AE M (Opening Statement, undated); AE F (Entertainment Expenses, various dates); AE G (Photo, 
undated). 
 
9
 Tr. at 34-35. 
 
10
 AE K (Corrections to GE 2, undated); Tr. at 38-39. 
 
11
 Tr. at 35-37. 
 
12
 Tr. at 44; AE M, supra note 8. 
 
13
 Tr. at 35-38. 
 
14
 Tr. at 55-58. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
have violated, except during the closing argument phase of the hearing.15 The senior 
director of computer vision at Applicant’s employer likewise concluded that Applicant’s 
downloading activities were illegal.16 While Applicant initially acknowledged that his 
actions were illegal, his subsequent explanations regarding his actions and the 
motivations for those actions appear to support the opposite conclusion. He contended 
that, at the time of his downloading activities, he did not fully understand the impact of 
what he was doing under the law and that he has subsequently matured considerably 
and now fully appreciates that his actions were wrong. He ceased all such activities.17 
 
Applicant’s downloading activities were not for the purposes of commercial 
advantage or private financial gain; he did not download or reproduce for distribution 
one or more copies of any copyrighted works during a 180-day period with a total 
estimated retail value of more than $1,000; and he did not make any of the downloaded 
files available on a computer network accessible to the public, knowing that it was 
intended for commercial distribution.18 The Government offered no evidence to 
contradict those facts. Thus, there is no evidence that Applicant’s activities violated the 
No Electronic Theft Act.19 Additionally, recording music for personal, noncommercial 
use is statutorily recognized as protected from infringement actions by the Audio Home 
Recording Act of 1992.20 Similarly, recording or downloading movies on a videocassette 
recorder (or onto one’s personal computer) for personal, noncommercial use is 
considered fair use.21  
 
Applicant’s use of his personal computer for anything other than work-related 
controlled, unclassified information is not subject to any blanket company prohibitions. 
Corporate policy procedures and prohibitions relate only to services furnished to the 
DOD.22 Applicant’s downloading of music files, network television shows, or movies 
from the internet to his personal computer, had no relationship to any DOD contract. 
  
                                                          
15
 During the closing argument phase of the hearing, Department Counsel raised the applicability of the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 17 U.S.C. § 1201 et seq. (November 29, 1999), which provides, in part, “No 
person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under this title.” 
Department Counsel argued that Applicant obtained private financial gain when he obtained media, without further 
description or specificity, as to the technological measure that was supposedly circumvented, for which he was not 
paying. Tr. at 77. He also referred to a provision of the state penal code that discusses petit larceny. He referred to a 
hearing office decision by another administrative judge. Tr. at 78. 
 
16
 AE A (Character Reference, dated December 21, 2015), at 2. 
 
17
 AE E (Answer to the SOR, dated December 22, 2015), at 1. 
 
18
 AE E, supra note 17, at 1; Tr. at 49. 
 
19
 No Electronic Theft Act, 17 U.S.C. § 506 (Dec. 16, 1997). For an exhaustive discussion of the Act as well 
as other relevant legislation and judicial decisions, see Niels B. Schaumann, Direct Infringement on Peer-to-Peer 
Networks, William Mitchell College of Law, Legal Studies Research Paper Series, Working Paper No. 9 (April 2005). 
 
20
 Audio Home Recording Act of 1992, 17 U.S.C. §§ 1001-1010. 
 
21
 Sony Corporation of America v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417, 442 (1984). 
 
22
 AE L (E-mail, dated May 13, 2016). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Character References and Work Performance 
Applicant’s senior director of computer vision has known Applicant since July 
2011. During the period Applicant had an interim TS security clearance, there have 
been no concerns expressed by anyone related to his handling of classified information. 
Applicant is considered an introspective intellectual with deep technical skills. He is 
considered to be completely trustworthy. Applicant exhibits a “strict adherence to the 
rules about security as well as unclassified information systems at work.” Applicant’s 
downloading behavior is considered a “holdover from his youth, developed in an 
environment where such activities were very common and not viewed as breaking the 
law, unethical of otherwise discouraged.” It is not believed that Applicant’s downloading 
“indiscretions” extend in any way to more serious misuse of information systems, and 
Applicant is fully expected to strictly comply with all laws regarding media downloading 
and copyrights. He strongly supports granting Applicant a security clearance.23 
The company information systems security manager, who also serves as a 
technical expert, opined that Applicant has at all times, “conducted himself responsibly 
and appropriately regarding [company] rules and procedures dealing with classified 
data.”24 A technical leader, under whom Applicant served, considers Applicant to be 
trustworthy and diligent. He does not consider Applicant to be a rule-violator.25 
Applicant’s employee evaluations over the years generally refer to his “demonstrated 
hard work, dedication, responsibility and independence in getting the job done,” as well 
as the fact that he has proven to be “one of the more valuable and sought-after 
members in the group.”26  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
                                                          
23
 AE A, supra note 14, at 2. 
 
24
 AE B (Character Reference, dated December 16, 2015). 
 
25
 Tr. at 63-66. 
 
26
 AE D (Employee Evaluations, various dates). The specific quotes are from the evaluation dated March 21, 
2014. 
 
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
                                                          
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39:   
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 40(a), security concerns may be raised by the “illegal or unauthorized entry into 
any information technology system or component thereof.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 40(c), 
the “use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access to another 
system or to a compartmented area within the same system” may raise security 
concerns. Under AG ¶ 40(f), it is also potentially disqualifying if there is any 
“introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or 
from any information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, 
procedures, guidelines or regulations.” The Appeal Board has previously ruled that “the 
language in [Guideline] M is broad enough to cover misuse of government computers or 
private computers.33  
 
There is no allegation or evidence presented that Applicant ever gained illegal or 
unauthorized entry into either his company computer or his own personal computer. 
There were no government computers involved in any of his downloading activities. 
Although argued, Department Counsel submitted no evidence, except for Applicant’s 
seemingly retracted admissions, that Applicant’s downloading activities were illegal. He 
downloaded music files, network television shows, or movies from various sources on 
the internet to his personal computer. Those activities were not addressed in his 
                                                          
33
 ISCR Case No. 99-0554 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 24, 2000).  It should be noted that the version of the AG 
considered in that decision was not the same as the current version, but was, in fact, the version issued on November 
10, 1998. While the versions are not identical in content or structure, and there are differences in the specific 
language used, there are sufficient similarities to convey the establishment of similar policy in the 2006 version. 
 
8 
                                      
 
employer’s rules, procedures, guidelines, or policies. The sole evidence reflecting any 
illegal activity by Applicant consists of his seemingly retracted admissions, and 
Department Counsel’s suppositions that those activities must have been illegal for at 
least some of the downloaded materials because Applicant did not pay for them. There 
was no evidence presented that particular files were protected by any technological 
measures to effectively control access to those works. Without evidence pertaining to 
those technological measures, there is no evidence of a violation of the DCMA. Simply 
arguing that laws must have been violated, without connecting the specific activity (with 
particular attention to which music files, network television shows, or movies) to the 
specific law, is insufficient.  Neither the No Electronic Theft Act nor the Audio Home 
Recording Act of 1992 was violated. Recording or downloading movies on a 
videocassette recorder or onto one’s personal computer for personal, noncommercial 
use is considered fair use unless proven otherwise. Simply arguing that the activity 
constituted petit larceny under state law is insufficient. AG ¶¶ 40(a), 40(c), and 40(f) 
have not been established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an “allegation of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,” security concerns may be raised. Applicant’s alleged history of criminal 
conduct, during the period October 2010 to November 2014, consisted of his 
downloading music files, network television shows, or movies from various sources on 
the internet to his personal computer. Applicant never uploaded or posted any of the 
downloaded videos, television shows, or music files on the internet, and he never 
shared his downloaded files on any P2P networks. He never made copies of the 
downloaded files. He never downloaded or made copies of any proprietary software 
programs. There is no evidence that criminal charges were ever brought against 
Applicant, that civil complaints or copyright infringement actions were ever lodged 
against him. The majority of the downloads occurred while Applicant was in college and 
for a relatively brief period thereafter. In the absence of evidence, as opposed to merely 
argument, reflecting criminal conduct, the government did not establish by substantial 
evidence that Applicant’s actions are criminal violations. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have not 
been established.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG & 15:       
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(c), security concerns may be raised by:  
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
The alleged personal conduct behavior consisted of Applicant downloading 
music files, network television shows, or movies from various sources on the internet to 
his personal computer during the period October 2010 to November 2014, while he was 
in college and for a brief period thereafter. The evidence is not in dispute. Applicant 
acknowledged his downloading activities. He contended that, at the time of those 
downloading activities, he did not fully understand the impact of what he was doing 
under the law and that he has subsequently matured considerably and now fully 
appreciates that his actions were wrong. He ceased all such activities before the SOR 
was issued. AG ¶ 16(c) has not been established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
 
10 
                                      
 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.34       
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is substantial. Applicant 
is considered an introspective intellectual with deep technical skills. He is considered to 
be completely trustworthy. He exhibits a “strict adherence to the rules about security as 
well as unclassified information systems at work.” Applicant’s downloading behavior is 
considered a “holdover from his youth, developed in an environment where such 
activities were very common and not viewed as breaking the law, unethical of otherwise 
discouraged.” He no longer downloads any music files, network television shows, or 
movies from various sources on the internet to his personal computer, and has not done 
so for a substantial period. With his added maturity, the alleged behavior is unlikely to 
recur. Under the evidence presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
    
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
34
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
