KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Even if the Judge erred in making the challenged findings, such errors were harmless
because they did not likely affect the outcome of the case given the evidence as a whole.  The
Judge’s material findings of security concern are based upon substantial evidence or constitute
reasonable inferences or conclusions that could be drawn from the evidence. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 15-01494.a1
DATE: 07/08/2016
DATE: July 8, 2016
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01494
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 3, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 20, 2016, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis 
  
 The Judge found in a favor of Applicant on the alleged debts and against him on allegations
that he was arrested for, and charged with, possession of marijuana in November 2011 after having
been granted a security clearance.  
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He has worked for his current
employer since 2005.  He served in the U.S. military from 1979 to 1987 and received an honorable
discharge.  He is married and has children.  He has held a security clearance since 1979.
At the hearing, Applicant testified that in 2011 he found a makeup bag in a playground where
his children were playing basketball.  There was marijuana in the bag.  He put the marijuana in  his
pocket with the intent of throwing it away.  He forgot about that marijuana after he placed it in the
console of his truck.  Two weeks later, the police approached his vehicle while he was in a parking
lot of a restaurant.  The police found the marijuana after he consented to a search of the vehicle.  He 
completed 24 hours of court-ordered community service as a result of the possession of marijuana
charge.  He stated that he does not use marijuana or other drugs.  He reported the incident to his
facility security officer, but did not do so right away. 
The police report reflected that a wooden smoking device containing marijuana was found
in Applicant’s truck.  It also indicated that the driver jumped out of the vehicle when he saw the
officer approaching. The report noted that it appeared someone had just packed the smoking device
with marijuana.  Next to the smoking device was a black and tan pouch containing a clear baggie
of a green leafy substance that appeared to be marijuana.  Upon questioning, Applicant told the
police officer that it was for his personal use. 
In post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided a negative drug test and a declaration that
the police report confirmed his testimony.  After reviewing the transcript and police report, the Judge
2
found to the contrary.  She concluded that his version of the events was not credible and differed
from the police report.  She also noted that he testified there was no pipe or drug paraphernalia
present and changed his story from him having found the marijuana to this being an isolated
incident. 
Applicant has received a number work-related awards over the years.  His manager, who has
worked with him for 30 years, testified he is a trustworthy individual and excellent worker.  Two
other coworkers also testified in support of Applicant.   
  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in making findings of fact.  First, he points out that
the  Judge found that Applicant has “adult children” when he has one child who is 15 years old and
another who is 18 years old.  Next, he stated that Judge found the driver (Applicant) jumped out of
the vehicle as the police approached; however, the police report stated that the driver “jumped out
of his seat.”  Finally, Applicant asserts he was not arrested for possession of marijuana, but only
cited for that offense.  Of note, the cover letter forwarding the police report stated it pertains “to the
arrest of” Applicant in 2011, but the police report states he was issued a summons to appear in court. 
Even if the Judge erred in making those findings, such errors were harmless because they did not
likely affect the outcome of the case given the evidence as a whole.  The Judge’s material findings
of security concern are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences or
conclusions that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence in the record.  He
emphasizes that his conduct in question happened over five years ago and cites to the testimony of
witnesses about his trustworthiness. The Judge, however, made findings about those matters.  He
further argues that based on the record the Judge should have found the security concerns mitigated. 
This argument amounts to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04719 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016).  Furthermore,
the Judge’s consideration of the totality of the evidence in reaching her decision complies with the 
whole-person analysis requirements.  See Directive, ¶ 6.3, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2, and  ISCR Case No. 14-
02806 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015). 
Applicant has failed to identify any harmful error.  The Judge examined the relevant
evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on
the record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
