 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01605 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeffrey Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joshua B. Swigart, Esq. 
 
 
July 22, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to seven creditors in the approximate amount of $38,792. Applicant mitigated 
the Financial Considerations security concerns, because the debts were caused by 
unforeseen circumstances beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly with 
respect to his debts. He also has completed a number of financial management 
courses. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On, December 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 12, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 1, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for May 10, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. GE 1 was admitted 
over Applicant’s objection. (Tr. 17-19.) GE 2 through GE 11 were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through V, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called two witnesses. The record 
was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits and on June 7, 2016, Applicant 
presented AE W through AE Z. Department Counsel had no objections to AE W through 
AE Z and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 
19, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegation 1.a. He denied SOR allegations 1.b through 
1.g. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since January 2012. He served in the Navy for 20 years and achieved the 
rate of petty officer second class (E-5). He retired from the Navy in July 2011. Applicant 
held a security clearance from 1991 to 2010. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 34, 44-46.) 
 
 Applicant met and married his wife while in the Navy in the mid-1990s. They had 
three sons together. In 2003, Applicant’s wife developed two serious medical conditions: 
Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma and Borderline Personality Disorder. Prior to 2003, Applicant 
had good credit and successfully paid his bills. However, his wife’s medical conditions 
affected their financial resources. Applicant’s wife acquired debt that Applicant was not 
aware of. His financial problems were exacerbated by his wife abandoning their family 
in May 2003. Applicant was left to care for their three children on his income at that 
time. He has not spoken to his wife since she left in 2003, despite attempts to seek child 
support. Her location is unknown. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 34-47.) 
 
 In 2009 Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations 
processing to renew his security clearance. (GE 2.) In February 2010, while still in the 
Navy, an SOR was issued to Applicant by the Department of the Navy Central 
Adjudication Facility (DONCAF). Applicant was alleged to be indebted to 17 creditors in 
the total amount of $41,903. (GE 9.) Applicant claimed he never received the SOR. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government file contained no signed receipt. (Tr. 83-
86.) Instead, Applicant credibly testified that his security manager called him and told 
him there was a judgment1 against him that caused his clearance to be suspended. 
However, his access was actually revoked on November 24, 2010, via a letter from 
DONCAF that Applicant also never received. (GE 10; Tr. 83-84.) Around that time, 
Applicant hired an attorney to help him resolve his financial issues. He has worked 
                                                          
1 This judgment is the same as that alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g and is discussed in detail below. 
 
3 
 
closely with that attorney over the past six years to research, contest, and resolve his 
delinquent accounts. Of those debts listed on the 2010 SOR, all but three were resolved 
and are no longer identified on Applicant’s credit report. (GE 1; GE 9; GE 11; Tr. 87-88.)  
 
 Following the advice of his attorney, he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, as 
discussed below, to resolve his remaining delinquencies identified in the 2015 SOR. 
(GE 1; GE 3.) As stated in the 2015 SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to seven 
creditors in the approximate amount of $38,792. The status of his 2015 SOR-listed 
debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted on a vehicle loan in the amount 
of $17,893. In 2008 Applicant financed this vehicle for his then girlfriend’s use. They had 
an agreement that she would make the payments. When she left him and took the 
vehicle with her, he filed a police report that she had stolen the vehicle. He also filed a 
claim with his insurance company. However, unbeknownst to Applicant, the police 
considered it a civil matter because he willingly gave her the keys, and the insurance 
did not cover the loss. At that point, he contacted the creditor to arrange payments, but 
was told they were only willing to accept payment in full. He was advised by his legal 
counsel to cease payments until his lawyer could finalize arbitration with this debt. (GE 
1 at 43.) Applicant did not have the funds to repay this debt in full and focused on 
repaying those debts that would accept payments. Applicant included this debt in his 
2016 Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. It is being resolved. (GE 6; AE S; Tr. 51-57, 76-79.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted on a loan in the amount of 
$12,104. This account was opened in 2009. Applicant used this loan to repay some of 
his wife’s debt. It first became delinquent in April 2010, at the advice of Applicant’s 
counsel, because the interest charged exceeded the limits of the Fair Credit Act. (GE 1.) 
Applicant’s most recent credit report reflects that the balance of this debt is now 
$13,595. Applicant included this debt in his 2016 Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. It is being 
resolved. (GE 11; AE S; Tr. 57-60, 79.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c to be indebted on a loan in the amount of 
$2,560. This is one of many loans Applicant took from this creditor. GE 7 reflected this 
account was opened in August 2009. It was charged off by the creditor. Applicant 
included this debt in his 2016 Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. It is being resolved. (GE 7; 
AE S; Tr. 60-61.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d to be indebted on a medical debt in the amount 
of $1,740. This debt has been delinquent since May 2014. Applicant testified that he 
has researched this debt and only recently learned the day before the hearing that it 
was related to dental treatment for his son. He has included it in his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. It is being resolved. (GE 7; AE S; Tr. 61-63.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e to be indebted on a loan in the amount of $241. 
This debt was related to a loan Applicant took, using his vehicle as collateral. The title to 
the vehicle was returned to Applicant after he repaid the loan. He believes this debt was 
 
4 
 
resolved in full, but has included it in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition out of an 
abundance of caution. It is being resolved. (GE 1; Tr. 63-64.) 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f to be indebted on a cable bill in the amount of 
$170. Applicant believes this debt was incurred fraudulently. He has never had an 
account with this cable provider. However, he has included it in his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. It is being resolved. (AE S; Tr. 64.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g to be indebted on a judgment in the amount of 
$4,084. Applicant’s attorney researched this judgment. It was discovered that this debt 
was the result of identity theft. After a lengthy dispute in court with this creditor, the debt 
was vacated and the judgment was dismissed. This debt is resolved. (AE I; AE J; AE K; 
Tr. 48-51.) 
 
 Applicant documented financial counseling from several sources from 2010 
through the present. (AE E; AE F; AE G; AE R; Tr. 65-68.) He reports he has been 
working diligently with financial counselors and his attorneys, attempting to resolve is 
debts with the funds he had available. He has resolved a number of unalleged debts, as 
reflected by the 22 accounts paid and closed identified on his most recent credit report. 
(GE 11.) The financial counseling helped him prepare a budget to address his debts. 
Despite his commitment to repay all of his delinquencies, he has been limited by his 
income. As a result, he sought the protection of Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which would 
allow him to repay all of his SOR-listed creditors as identified on the Schedule E/F, 
albeit at a reduced rate. He filed for Chapter 13 on May 5, 2016. (GE S.) Under his plan, 
he is to make payments of $580 per month until September 2016, when the payments 
will increase to $673 per month. Applicant included proof of payment under the plan in 
his post-hearing exhibits. He testified that his current budget allots adequate funds to 
make his monthly bankruptcy payments. Applicant has actively worked to educate 
himself on financial matters to avoid future financial problems. He took the required 
financial counseling for filing the bankruptcy petition. (AE R; AE Z; Tr. 82.) 
 
 Applicant’s military records and performance evaluations reflect he was a 
hardworking and trusted military member. (AE A; AE B.) Two witnesses, who testified 
on Applicant’s behalf, indicate he is trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 93-105.) One witness, 
who has known Applicant since 2005, testified that Applicant seems to live “below his 
means” and reflected Applicant drives an old car. (Tr. 97.) Character reference letters 
indicate Applicant has a strong work ethic and is hard-working. (AE W; AE Y.) His 
Facility Security Officer reported that he has never heard anything negative about 
Applicant. (AE X.) Applicant’s landlord reflects he is a good tenant and always has been 
on time with his payments. (AE T; Tr. 80.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was indebted to seven creditors in the approximate amount of $38,792, 
as alleged on the SOR. He acknowledged having financial difficulties dating back to 
2003, when his wife left. Since that time, he has been unable to meet all of his financial 
obligations, despite his efforts to address his debts. The Government established a 
case for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets significant mitigating factors for financial considerations. While 
his financial difficulties are recent, they occurred due to circumstances that were largely 
beyond his control and are unlikely to recur. His wife’s illnesses largely caused his 
financial problems. Those problems were exacerbated when she disappeared and left 
 
7 
 
Applicant as the sole provider for their three children. Similar circumstances are unlikely 
to occur. Further, his financial delinquencies do not establish recent poor judgment. 
Applicant has acted responsibly by hiring an attorney and obtaining financial counseling 
in 2010. Since then, he has slowly been working to resolve his delinquencies, with his 
attorney’s assistance. After resolving the majority of those debts listed on the 2010 
SOR, and fighting a lengthy court battle on debt incurred through identity theft, his 
attorney advised him the best way to address his remaining debts was to file for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He has followed this attorney’s advice and is going through the 
bankruptcy proceeding now. He listed all of his unresolved debts in the schedule of 
creditors who have unsecured claims. Under the circumstances, he is acting 
responsibly. Further, he has received a significant amount of education on how to avoid 
future debt. It is clear that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Moreover, 
bankruptcy is a legally viable option to discharge debt. While Applicant’s debts had not 
been discharged by the close of the record, he has been attempting to resolve his 
debts, in good faith, through this legally viable option. 
 
 Applicant can be trusted to monitor his finances closely and resolve his debts in 
the future. Applicant has acted responsibly by following the advice of his counsel and 
educating himself on how to avoid future debt. Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant successfully disputed SOR ¶ 1.g. He provided 
documentation to substantiate the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to this debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
 
8 
 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by his supervisor. He performs well at his job. His integrity and his 
military service record show a pattern of trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
