                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------   )       ISCR Case No. 15-00984
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Robert Schultz, Personal Representative
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his use of drugs. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
History of Case
On September 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 22, 2015, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on March 9, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on
2
April 28, 2016.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-2).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and four exhibits (AEs A-D). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on May 12, 2016. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used marijuana from April 1994 to
May 2013 on several occasions for recreation purposes and (b) used cocaine on a few
occasions from approximately June 2008 to May 2010.  No further details are alleged.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant  admitted to casual use of marijuana from
April 1994 to May 2013 and to casual cocaine usage from June 2008 to May 2010. He
claimed he told an interviewing agent three years previous of his casual, infrequent use
of marijuana and his intention never to use the drugs again. He claimed he has
abstained from all illegal drug use since May 2013, and intends never to use illegal
substances in the future. He claimed, too, he is a reliable, punctual, and creative
engineer and wishes to continue doing so until retirement. And he claimed he wants to
make his father (a longtime DOD employee) proud of him.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old web developer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has no children. (GE 1) He claimed no post-high
school educational credits and no military service. 
Applicant has been employed by his current employer as a web developer since
June 2013. (GE 1) He was employed by another web developer between May and June
2013 before resigning on a mutual understanding that his skill sets were not strong
enough to complete the tasks expected for his position. Prior to a brief period of
unemployment, he held web-designer positions for other companies between October
2010 and March 2013. (GE 1) He has never held a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 24)
Drug history
While in high school in April 1994, Applicant was introduced to marijuana by his
high school friends. (GEs 1-2) He used marijuana infrequently (about 30 times in all
between April 1994 and May 2013 in social situations) before quitting his use of the
substance altogether in May 2013. (GE 2; Tr. 22-23) He first tried marijuana out of
curiosity at social functions. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 22-23) He has never had a positive drug test
or been ordered, or volunteered, to participate in drug counseling. (GE 2; Tr. 23) He is
committed to avoiding marijuana use in the future and has abstained from marijuana
use since May 2013. (GEs 1-2) His close friends and family are aware of his past drug
use, and he cannot be blackmailed or coerced. (GE 2) 
3
Besides marijuana, Applicant also tried cocaine on a few occasions at parties
with high school friends between June 2008 and May 2010. He ceased all use of
cocaine in May 2010 and is committed to avoiding any further use of the substance and
situations where he might be exposed to cocaine use by friends and acquaintances.
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 26-28, 30-34) 
In his letter of April 2016, Applicant reaffirmed his commitment to avoid all
involvement with illegal drugs, to include his knowingly being in the presence of others
who are in the possession of illegal drugs. (AE D; Tr. 26) In his drug certification, he
affirmed his understanding that should he break his commitment to avoid all
involvement in illegal drugs, even once, he risks loss of his security clearance. (AE D)
Applicant’s assurances are credible and accepted. Based on Applicant’s credible
assurances of his future intentions to abstain from drug use and situations where drugs
might be used by others, his accounts and assurances are accepted. 
Character References and Certifications 
Applicant is well-regarded by his managers who have worked with him for over
two years. (AE A) Both credit him with working with government officials of their primary
client to produce mission-critical pieces of software data. (AE A) They characterize him
as a reliable, hardworking employee who has always had the interests of their client at
heart. His program manager described Applicant as a diligent, professional, and
trustworthy individual with a conscientious attitude for meeting deadlines. (AE A)
A close friend since high school, who is employed by a DOD agency and
interfaces with Applicant on a regular basis, credited Applicant with being responsible,
resourceful, and an asset to his company. (AE A) Other friends who have known
Applicant have always found him in their professional dealings to be honest,
trustworthy, dedicated, and dependable, in addition to being creative, intelligent, even-
tempered, and highly skilled. (AE A) 
Applicant earned a number of training certificates for 2016. (AE B) His
performance evaluations for 2016 credited him with successful performance ratings in
all of the identified categories. (AE C) 
          Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as
well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. 
The AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
4
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of
the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with
AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations  AG ¶ 24.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
5
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Between April 1994 and May 2013, Applicant used marijuana infrequently in
social situations (approximately 30 times in all). He also tried cocaine on a few
occasions between June 2008 and May 2010, before ceasing his use of all illegal drugs. 
On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and
¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” Judgment concerns exist over
Applicant’s past drug use.  He has over three years of  demonstrated abstinence.
Considering Applicant’s limited use of marijuana and cocaine over a number of
years and demonstrated abstinence since May 2013, eough time has elapsed to
facilitate safe predictable judgments that he will not return to illegal drug use in the
foreseeable future.  Pertinent mitigating conditions covered by AG ¶ 24 are available to
Applicant. MC ¶ 24(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and MC ¶ 24(b), “a
demonstrated intent not to use any drugs in the future, such as (1) disassociation from
drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing and avoiding the environment where
drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of
intent with automatic revocations of clearance for any violation,” apply to Applicant’s
limited and aged use of marijuana and cocaine.
Since Applicant ceased using drugs (in May 2010 for cocaine and May  2013 for
marijuana) over six years have elapsed for his cocaine use and over three years for his
marijuana use. When combined with considerable periods of abstinence from illegal drug
use and a demonstrated intent not to use illegal drugs in the future at the risk of losing
his clearance, it is unlikely that he will resume his use of illegal drugs in the foreseeable
future. 
6
Applicant is credited with good judgment and reliability by his current managers
and friend employed by DOD who has worked closely with Applicant for a number of
years. Safe predictable judgments, accordingly, can be made about his ability to avoid
recurrent drug involvement. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of his limited use of illegal drugs (marijuana and cocaine) and the
unlikelihood of ever resuming his use of the substances in the foreseeable future.  He
has provided endorsements from his managers and close friends (one of whom is
employed by a DOD agency who interfaces with him) to soften or mitigate any of the
drug and judgment concerns associated with his past use of marijuana and cocaine.
Applicant’s own acknowledgment of poor judgment and disassociation of contacts with
the former high school friends with whom he shared drugs in social situations help to
reinforce favorable conclusions about his overall judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
isolated drug use and judgment lapses, Applicant mitigates security concerns related to
his drug use. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of Guideline H.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):         FOR APPLICANT
   
Sub-paras. 1.a-1.b:           FOR  APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
