1
                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-02227
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: 
Arran Treadway, Esquire
Claery & Green LLP
July 29, 2016
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on September 29, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On October 26, 2015, the
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) concerning Applicant. The action was
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 17, 2015 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on January 20, 2016. This case was assigned to me on March 15, 2016. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March
2
18, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 19, 2016. The Government
offered Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection.
Administrative notice was taken of Government Exhibit 3, which was admitted over
Applicant’s objection. (Transcript 60-61.) Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibits A
through C, which were admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf.
Applicant asked that the record remain open until May 3, 2016, for the receipt of
additional documents. Applicant’s Exhibit D was received in a timely manner and
admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing
(Tr.) on April 26, 2016. The record closed on May 3, 2016. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 32, and single. He has a Ph.D in engineering. He is employed by a
defense contractor and seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his
employment. Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with explanations.
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the following findings of fact.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he used illegal drugs. Applicant used and purchased marijuana with
varying frequencies from 2002 through approximately 2013. In addition, the Applicant
used and purchased Ecstasy from 2008 through 2009, and one time in 2012. Applicant
also testified that he knew purchasing marijuana and Ecstasy was criminal conduct. (Tr.
34-35.)
 
Applicant began using marijuana in 2002, when he was a sophomore in college.
He continued to use it approximately twice a month until 2013, when he was in post-
graduate school getting his Ph.D. According to Applicant he used marijuana
approximately twice a month at parties as a way to relax from his engineering studies.
(Tr. 15-16, 31-33, 50-51.) 
As stated, Applicant stopped using marijuana in 2013, about a year before he
received his doctorate. At that time Applicant was beginning to think about his career
after school. He found out from other people that the best jobs require a security
clearance. He stated, “And after consulting some friends who have gone through that
[security clearance] process, they made me aware about you had to state your drug
history and any type of criminal history. So, that’s when I immediately stopped taking
any sorts of drugs.” The impact that Applicant’s continued drug use could have on his
employability was a major reason that he stopped using marijuana. He also has a
considerable amount of student loans and was concerned about his ability to pay them
back. (Tr. 17-19, 42, 45, 52-55.)
See Government Exhibit 3.1
3
Applicant used Ecstasy with friends at rave parties in 2008 and 2009. During that
period he used it about ten times. He used it one additional time at a party in 2012. He
stopped using Ecstasy because of concerns about the drug’s affect on his health. (Tr.
23-24, 30-31, 43; Government Exhibit 2 at 2.)
Applicant stated that he was fully aware of the impact his drug use could have on
him. He stated, “I never took it in times when it would affect my academic performance,
especially when I was teaching because I didn’t want to show up to class, in front of my
students, looking strung out or anything. I always, you know, took these drugs in times
where I had free time.” (Tr. 23-25, 37-38, 44.)1
As he has grown older, and has a responsible job, Applicant has found himself
moving away from his old friends. He stopped associating with the people he used
drugs with years ago. He looks back on his drug use with a sense of regret stating, “it
really exemplifies the foolishness that I’ve done in the past.” (Tr. 26, 43-44, 50-51.)
Applicant emphasized his truthfulness during the complete security clearance
investigation process. He testified, “So, . . . it is shameful for me to state all these things
I truly regret now, but I simply wanted to be honest about my past behavior.” (Tr. 29, 36-
37, 42-43, 58; Government Exhibits 1 and 2.)
Three negative drug tests from 2016 were submitted by Applicant. (Applicant
Exhibits B, C, and D.) He took them to “exemplify that I have been clean.” (Tr. 19, 39,
58.)
 
Mitigation
Applicant had a successful college career in a very demanding subject. He
authored several journal articles, and was on the Dean’s List. During his academic
career he conducted research with the Federal Government as well, but he did not
require a security clearance. (Tr. 19-22, 24-25, 45-47.)
Applicant has worked for his current employer since September 2014.
Accordingly, as of the date of the hearing he had received a single employee
performance evaluation. That evaluation indicates Applicant met standards for his
position. (Applicant Exhibit A.) 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
4
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; possession of drug paraphernalia.
 Applicant admitted the occasional use of marijuana over a period of
approximately ten years, ending in 2013. He used Ecstasy during 2008 and 2009, then
once more in 2012. He was in college during the entire time he used drugs, and
stopped when he was informed that drug use was incompatible with holding a security
clearance.
I have studied all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.
6
Applicant stopped using marijuana about two and half years before the record
closed. Applicant freely admitted at the hearing that his conduct was foolish, and he
looks back on it with regret. It is obvious that as he grew up, continued with his studies,
and looked to his future, he discovered that continued drug use was not the road to
success.
In addition to two and a half years of continued abstinence, Applicant
discontinued contact with drug-using associates. As a professional, he is in an entirely
different environment. Under the particular circumstances of this case, his repeated and
credible testimony that he would no longer use drugs in the future is the functional
equivalent of a signed statement of intent. He clearly understands the negative impact
that any further drug use would have on his future.
Applicant offered sufficient evidence that would support mitigation under AG ¶¶
26 (a), and (b). Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s
conduct is not recent. Based on the state of the record, I find that there have been
permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I
find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶
2(a)(8)), and that there is also little to no possibility of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use. 
7
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
