 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-01709 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated September 22, 2015, Applicant admitted two of the three 
allegations raised under Guideline B, denied both allegations set forth under Guideline 
C, and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge. I was assigned the case on December 1, 2015. A hearing 
originally scheduled for January 26, 2016, by notice dated December 8, 2015, was 
postponed due to inclement weather. By notice of February 19, 2016, the hearing was 
reset for February 25, 2016. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered one document and a request for administrative notice 
concerning facts regarding the People’s Republic of China (China) and including seven 
attachments. The proffered documents were accepted into the record without objection 
as Exhibit (Ex.) 1 and Hearing Exhibit (HE) A, respectively. Applicant gave testimony, 
 
 
 
 
2 
presented four witnesses, and offered 13 documents, which were accepted into the 
record without objection as Exs. A-M. Also introduced was Applicant’s request for 
administrative notice, including 30 attachments, concerning United States relations with 
China, which was accepted without objection as HE A. As a preliminary matter, the 
Government withdrew the allegation raised under Guideline C at SOR 2.a.(2), 
incorrectly alleging that Applicant had used a Chinese passport for travel after becoming 
a naturalized United States citizen. After the conclusion of the hearing, the record was 
closed. Based on a thorough review of the case file, I find that Applicant failed to carry 
her burden in mitigating security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
Both Department Counsel and the Applicant submitted a Request for 
Administrative Notice regarding certain facts about the nation of China. Administrative 
or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. 
See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 
(3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings 
is to notice facts that are either well known or from Government reports. Both requests 
and their respective attachments were reviewed and considered. Various facts 
pertaining to China were specifically derived from the offered requests and their 
attachments, including those noted below.  
 
China’s government is authoritarian and controlled by the Communist Party. The 
nation has a poor human rights record, curbs political dissent, conducts arbitrary 
arrests, forces involuntary confessions, and conducts torture. China commits a 
significant portion of its industrial and domestic production to its enormous military force 
and nuclear arsenal. China, however, is a major trading partner with the United States. 
Both countries worked together in counter-terrorism efforts after September 11, 2001. 
On the other hand, China directly competes with the United States on several 
geopolitical and economic levels. China has targeted the United States with legal and 
illegal intelligence gathering operations. The country is a leading collector of military, 
economic, industrial, and technological information from the United States. Recent 
examples of China’s attempts to collect technological information suggest that the 
country’s collection efforts pose a substantial threat to U.S. national security.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 The applicant in this matter is a 44-year-old electrical engineer. She has worked 
within the defense community for the past 12 years. During that time, she rose from a 
junior research scientist to a divisional director. She is married and has one young child. 
 
Applicant was born and raised in China, where her education culminated in a 
master’s degree. While still in China, she married a fellow student from her academic 
field. Applicant came to the United States in early 1999 to pursue a doctoral degree, 
 
 
 
 
3 
where she accepted a full scholarship that paid for her education and living expenses. 
Her husband accepted a similar academic scholarship and joined her several months 
later to pursue doctoral studies. During their respective programs, they worked for the 
university as researchers and by providing academic assistance.  
 
After completing their degrees, the couple decided to remain in the United 
States. Applicant earned a doctorate in computer engineering in 2004 and quickly found 
a job. She obtained a green card in 2008. (Tr. 75)  
 
Applicant received a new, valid passport from China in April 2009. It had an 
expiration date in April 2019. She became a naturalized United States citizen in the 
summer of 2013. (Ex. B) Since becoming a United States citizen, Applicant has not 
used her Chinese passport. While submitting her application for a security clearance in 
2014, she relinquished her foreign passport to her company’s general counsel, who 
destroyed it. (Tr. 36-37; 100-101; Ex. A) Applicant does not consider herself to be a dual 
citizen. She noted that her citizenship with China was automatically forfeited when she 
became a United States citizen because China does not recognize dual citizenship. (Tr. 
101; Ex. K) She received a United States passport in late August 2013. (Ex. M) Neither 
she nor her family members have been approached by foreign interests regarding her 
work. 
 
Applicant and her husband have a joint annual income of about $300,000. They 
purchased their current home in 2014. They have over $400,000 in equity invested in 
their house, which is valued at about $1.2 million. (See Ex. G and Ex. I) Their former 
home, a townhouse worth approximately $370,000, is currently used as a rental 
property. They have a net worth of approximately $1,522,000. (Ex. G) Applicant has no 
foreign assets. (Tr. 79) She and her husband are active within their professional 
community and at their community social club. Their child attends a local preschool. 
   
Remaining in China are Applicant’s mother, father, and two brothers, all of whom 
are citizens and residents of China. Applicant’s mother is a 73 year old retiree, a former 
private sector accountant. Her husband, who is 80 years old, is a retired public school 
teacher. They derive their income from savings and a private retirement insurance 
plan.1 (Tr. 84) They visited Applicant in 2011 and 2015. Applicant generally visits her 
parents every year or two, and usually sees her brothers while she stays with her 
parents. (Tr. 86-87). Although they feel isolated in China, Applicant’s parents do not 
speak English and feel they are too old to move to the United States. Applicant speaks 
with her parents about every two weeks, usually about their health and grandchild. They 
know little of Applicant’s work except that she conducts research. 
 
 Applicant’s two brothers are middle aged, have college degrees, and live in the 
same town as Applicant’s parents. Applicant’s eldest brother works for a private sector 
law firm and has a generalized family practice. Her other older brother owns a small 
business. Applicant and her brothers seldom correspond. (Tr. 99) They have physical 
                                                          
1 Applicant is unsure whether her father derives any income from the Chinese government for his former 
public employment. (Tr. 100) 
 
 
 
 
4 
contact about every year or two, when Applicant visits China. Neither brother has a 
nexus to the Chinese government or military. They only know that Applicant works in 
the area of research. (Tr. 98) Applicant does not keep in contact with any former friends 
or colleagues in China. (Tr. 106)  
 
 Applicant’s in-laws are retired. Applicant’s 63-year-old mother-in-law was a 
private sector manager. Applicant’s 70-year-old father-in-law is a retired traffic 
policeman. Both remain citizens of China, but each became a permanent United States 
resident in May 2014, has a green card, and lives with Applicant.2 (Tr. 91; Ex. C and Ex. 
D) Like Applicant’s parents, they live off of savings and private retirement insurance 
proceeds. They have minimal contact with any relatives in China, and have not visited 
China since coming to the United States. (Tr. 116)  
 
 The executive vice president and co-founder of Applicant’s company, who holds 
a security clearance, testified on Applicant’s behalf. She has known Applicant for nearly 
a dozen years. She testified that Applicant is an “absolutely outstanding” employee, who 
is precise, dedicated, and always happy. (Tr. 19-23)  
 
The company’s general counsel, who also maintains a security clearance, 
testified that she has never received any negative feedback regarding Applicant. She 
described Applicant as a dedicated and valuable employee who has a good work ethic, 
is a fine citizen, and is one who always follows the rules. (Tr. 34-38) The general 
counsel stated that when Applicant applied for a security clearance in 2014, she was 
given Applicant’s Chinese passport. That witness testified that she personally “chopped 
[the passport] up with a paper chopper, and then put the pieces in the shredder box,” 
noting that she did not first make a copy of the document. (Tr. 36-37; Ex. A) 
 
Applicant’s company’s senior vice president holds a security clearance and is 
Applicant’s direct supervisor. He described Applicant as an excellent, careful, detail-
oriented, and diligent employee. (Tr. 45) He considers Applicant to be “one of the best” 
in terms of following organizational rules and performing her function. (Tr. 46) Similarly, 
the vice president of research, who maintains a security clearance as well, finds 
Applicant to be hardworking, responsible, and ethical. (Tr. 56-58)    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
2 The SOR incorrectly alleges at ¶ 1.c that Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of China. 
 
 
 
 
5 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence   
 
 Foreign Influence AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts 
and interests” stating: “[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial 
interests, [she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.” Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country at issue, including, but not limited to, 
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States 
citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying here: “(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
 
 
 
 
6 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion;” “(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information;” and “(d) sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  
 
  Applicant’s contact with her brothers in China is minimal and irregular. News 
regarding the siblings, when raised, generally comes from Applicant’s mother. 
Applicant’s brothers are professionals working in the private sector with no ties to the 
Chinese government or military.  
 
 Of lessened, but still significant, concern is Applicant’s relationship to her 
Chinese in-laws. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection 
for, or obligation to, immediate family members of the person’s spouse. (ISCR Case No. 
07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009), citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002)) The facts that they are now permanent United States residents, holding 
green cards, and living with Applicant and her husband, however, are notable.  
 
 In contrast, Applicant has regular and frequent contact with her parents, with 
whom she speaks about twice a month and visits in China every year or two. This is 
significant. For example, if intelligence agents or government officials in those countries 
wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on her relatives 
residing in China. Applicant could then be subject to coercion through her relatives and 
classified information could potentially be compromised. Applicant’s possession of close 
family ties with her family members living in China, are not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or their spouse has a close 
relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. (See generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99- 0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001))  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
collection operations against the United States. The relationship of China with the 
United States places the burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her and 
her spouse’s relationships with family members living in China do not pose a security 
risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where she might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives abroad.  
  
 
 
 
 
7 
 There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or her 
relatives abroad. Nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. Applicant’s relationships with family members living in China create a potential 
conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security 
concern about her desire to assist them by providing sensitive or classified information. 
Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts and 
relationships with family living in China. Department Counsel has raised the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation by the government of China. AG ¶¶ 
7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) are thus established, and further inquiry is necessary about the 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: “(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.”; “(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest”; and “(c) contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the 
granting or maintenance of a security clearance. (See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 
1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)) After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut 
or mitigate those concerns. (See Directive ¶ E3.1.15) The standard applicable in 
security clearance decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra: “Any doubt concerning 
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor 
of the national security.” (Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b); ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 
(App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013))  
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. It is notable that none of the kin at issue have a 
current nexus with the Chinese military, but it remains unknown whether Applicant’s 
father or father-in-law, former government employees, receive any form of government 
pension from China. Applicant’s in-laws no longer live in China and are now living in the 
United States with Applicant as permanent United States residents. It is also notable 
that Applicant’s contact with her siblings is generally during her visits to China every 
year or two, although the depth of their relationships was unexplored.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 While there is no evidence Applicant provides financial support to her parents, 
siblings, or in-laws, Applicant has regular and frequent contact with her parents in 
China, both by telephone and in person. Applicant’s loyalty and connections to family 
are positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same 
connections with relatives living in foreign countries negate the possibility of mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), and Applicant failed to fully meet her burden of showing 
there is “little likelihood that [her relationships with her relatives who are living in foreign 
countries] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
 In contrast, AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in an AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s relationships and loyalties in this country. Applicant’s relationship with the 
United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interest created by her 
relationships with family living in foreign countries, especially her parents.  
 
 There is no evidence that the Chinese government, or those conducting 
espionage, have approached or threatened Applicant, her spouse, or their families to 
coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced 
possibility that Applicant or her family living in a foreign country would be specifically 
selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation.  
 
 While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in China. 
Applicant’s family living abroad could become potential targets of intelligence agents 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, if disclosed, and Applicant’s 
potential access to classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s 
family living in China.  
 
 As noted, Applicant’s foreign connections and loyalties are clearly represented by 
her parents and two brothers. These family members live in China, a country known for 
its efforts to collect technological information from the United States. Applicant visits 
them every year or two in China, her parents have visited the United States, and they 
speak by phone about every two weeks. They are clearly close. In contrast, Applicant 
has lived in this country for 17 years. During that time, she completed a doctoral 
program, found stable employment, had a child, bought homes, excelled at work, and 
became a naturalized United States citizen. She destroyed her Chinese passport upon 
submission of her security clearance application. She and her husband jointly generate 
about $300,000 a year in employment earnings. They have about $400,000 in equity on 
their current home and maintain a townhouse valued at $370,000. Their current net 
value is about $1.5 million. Applicant helps care for her elderly in-laws. She considers 
herself to be an American only. In no way has she manifested any patriotism, loyalty, or 
fidelity to any other country but the United States.  
 
 In sum, Applicant and her spouse have significant ties to the United States, both 
in terms of their family life, professions, and investments. Despite these tethers, 
 
 
 
 
9 
Applicant maintains a clearly loving, dutiful, and understandably close relationship with 
her parents, as well as a natural nexus to her brothers. Their relationships sustain 
foreign influence security concerns inasmuch as they potentially compromise both 
Applicant and her family should any actions by China’s authoritarian government be 
implemented to acquire classified information. Applicant’s present situation, however, is 
fluid and may change. Moreover, this conclusion in no way suggests Applicant is not a 
loyal United States citizen. I conclude at this time, however, that Foreign Influence 
security concerns under Guideline B remain unmitigated.  
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference   
 
 AG ¶ 9 sets out the security concern relating to Foreign Preference:   
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.   
 
 The Government noted that Applicant possessed a valid passport issued by 
China with an expiration date in 2019. This fact is sufficient to raise:  
 
 Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(a)(1):   
  
. . . exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (5) possession of a current 
foreign passport.    
     
 Applicant had a Chinese passport issued in 2009, before she became a 
naturalized United States citizen in 2013. Upon application for a security clearance in 
2014, she tendered that document to her company’s general counsel, who destroyed it 
and did not retain a copy. Therefore, Mitigating Condition AG ¶11(e) (the passport has 
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated) applies. Foreign Preference security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
 
10 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under the above guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
There are facts supporting denial or revocation of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s parents and brothers are citizens and residents of China. Her 
in-laws are Chinese citizens, although currently they are permanent United States 
residents. Applicant regularly visits and communicates with her parents, has daily 
contact with her in-law, and maintains contact with her brothers in China. Moreover, a 
Guideline B decision concerning a foreign country must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers in that country including from intelligence agents. The 
danger of coercion from China is more likely than in many other countries. China has an 
authoritarian government; is a leading collector of industrial and technological 
information; competes with the United States militarily, diplomatically, and through 
trade; and violates human rights. China has a history of espionage targeting U.S. 
military and industrial secrets.  
 
The weight of the evidence against granting or continuing Applicant’s access to 
classified information is greater than the evidence in favor of the granting or 
continuation of a security clearance. As a witness, Applicant was credible and sincere. 
She came to the United States 17 years ago to study. After completing their doctoral 
degrees, she and her husband decided to stay in the United States permanently. They 
eventually started the process for becoming naturalized United States citizens. In the 
interim, Applicant’s career blossomed, she had a child, and the couple settled in a 
home. They have a net worth of about $1.5 million and no financial holdings abroad. 
Applicant tendered her Chinese passport to her security officer, and now travels on a 
United States passport. She considers the United States to be her home.  
 
However, Applicant maintains telephonic contact with her parents in China about 
every two weeks, visits them in China every year or two, and has hosted them in this 
country twice in the past few years. Their relationship is obviously, and understandably, 
very close. While the depth of her relationships with her brothers was not explored, they 
do visit every year or two when Applicant visits China. Meanwhile, her in-laws, who are 
now permanent United States citizens and live with Applicant and her husband, remain 
citizens of China. Such familial ties to citizens of China pose potential risks that could 
lead to the compromise of classified information.   
 
As previously noted, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. I have 
carefully applied that dictate and the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to these facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. While I find that Applicant mitigated 
Foreign Preference security concerns, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate Foreign 
Influence security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a(1):   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a(2):   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
