KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J
DIGEST: The fact that Applicant has had no alcohol-related incidents since 2014 and has
remained sober for more than a year does not compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance
decision.  The Appeal Board has never established a “bright line” rule as to the recency of
conduct raising security concerns.  The extent to which security concerns have become mitigated
through the passage of time is a question that must be resolved based on the evidence as a whole. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-02479.a1
DATE: 07/27/2016
DATE: July 27, 2016
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-02479
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 10, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 10, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He has worked in the defense
industry since 2003.  He is married and has three children.  He is active in the community and has
held a security clearance for about 13 years. 
In 1987, Applicant began consuming alcohol at about age 18.  In 1988 and 1996, he was
arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI).  He was convicted of those offenses
and punished.  In 2005, he was arrested and charged with DUI, but was convicted of reckless
driving.  In 2011, he was arrested and charged with DUI and later convicted of that offense.  He was
required to attend a 12-week alcohol rehabilitation program and believes he was placed on probation
for two years.  In 2014, he was arrested and charged with speeding, fleeing and evading, wanton
endangerment, and DUI.  At that time, his blood alcohol content was .240.  About seven months
later, he pled guilty to all of the charges (the DUI charge was reduced to a misdemeanor), and he
was sentenced to 14 days in jail, 26 weeks of probation, and ordered to attend his second alcohol
education program, which he completed in March 2015.  His probation was scheduled to end in
early April 2016.  
Although Applicant considers himself an alcoholic, he has not been diagnosed as alcohol
dependent or as an alcohol abuser.  He has experienced blackouts a couple of times.  After
completing his alcohol education program, he has not participated in any ongoing substance abuse
programs, such as Alcohol Anonymous.  For emotional support, he speaks to his pastor and sister. 
He has never been told to stop consuming alcohol nor advised to participate in any aftercare
program.  He stated that he has changed his life following his last DUI charge and his date of
sobriety is January 1, 2015.  
   
Applicant has a successful employment history. He submitted favorable letters of
recommendations from colleagues as well as current and former supervisors.  In February 2016, he
received an employee of the month award. 
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge found that Applicant had a history of alcohol abuse that spanned from 1988 to
2014.  Although Applicant recognizes his alcohol problems, he has not yet established a sustained
track record of abstinence.  No evidence of a favorable prognosis from an appropriate healthcare
professional was presented.  The Judge concluded that enough time has not passed since he last
consumed alcohol in January 2015, and it was too soon to determine that similar misconduct will
not recur.  
Discussion
In the appeal brief, Applicant contends the Judge did not render a fair decision by
highlighting that he has been sober for 18 months and two years have passed since his “last
infractions.”  He argues that his non-participation in a 12-step program does not mean that he cannot
maintain sobriety and notes he has made positive lifestyle changes and found tremendous strength
through his church, family, and friends.  
The fact that Applicant has had no alcohol-related incidents since 2014 and has remained
sober for more than a year does not compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  The
Appeal Board has never established a “bright line” rule as to the recency of conduct raising security
concerns.  The extent to which security concerns have become mitigated through the passage of time
is a question that must be resolved based on the evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
01847 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015). Specifically, the Judge has to weigh the record evidence in its
entirety, including Applicant’s five alcohol-related arrests and his four DUI convictions, in deciding
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence or vice versa.  Applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or his ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-06634 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 28, 2016).  Applicant has not identified any harmful error
likely to change the outcome of the case. 
 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  The decision
is sustainable on this record.  
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
