 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                             ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00736 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E 
and financial considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on May 13, 2014. (Item 4) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
September 9, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for personal conduct under Guideline E and financial considerations 
under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 29, 2015. He admitted four and 
denied two of the six allegations of personal conduct with detailed explanation. He 
admitted the two financial allegations under Guideline F with explanation. He elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on January 29, 2016.1 Applicant received a complete file 
of relevant material (FORM) on February 10, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant timely filed a reply to the FORM on February 26, 2016. I was 
assigned the case on May 5, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM2 that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as it was not authenticated by a 
Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not comment on the admissibility of the 
PSI when he replied to the FORM. Applicant waived any objection to the admissibility of 
the PSI summary by not providing any comments on admissibility when responding to 
the FORM. I will consider information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2012. He was a 
government civilian employee as a logistics management specialist for over 35 years, 
retiring in November 2013. He has been employed as an acquisition specialist for a 
defense contractor since December 2013. While serving as a government employee 
and since his retirement, he has been granted eligibility for access to classified 
information. He married in November 1973 and divorced in May 1978. He married again 
                                                          
1 The FORM was incorrectly dated as January 29, 2015. 
 
2 The FORM lists four attachments, Item 1, the SOR and related documents; Item 2, the E-QIP; Item 3, a credit 
bureau report dated June 6, 2014; and Item 4, the PSI. However, in addition to the correctly numbered and named 
Items 1 and 2, the actual Items attached to the FORM are Item 3, the 2012 Chapter 7 bankruptcy documents filed by 
Applicant; Item 4, a 1998 Department of Navy Central Adjudication Facility (DON CAF) determination of 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information; and Item 5, the PSI of May 13, 2014. I added Applicant’s 
response to the FORM and Department Counsel’s endorsement of no objection as Item 6. 
  
 
3 
 
 
in October 1994 and divorced in January 2012. He has two adult children. (Item 2, e-
QIP, dated September 9, 2015; Item 5, PSI, dated May 13. 2014) 
 
The SOR alleges personal conduct security concerns for unauthorized use of a 
Government travel card (GTC) from July 2012 to July 2013 (SOR 1.a); that Applicant 
retired in November 2013 from his government civilian position in lieu of being fired for 
the misuse of the travel card (SOR 1.b); that Applicant used his Government charge 
card (GCC ) for unauthorized personal charges in October 1994 (SOR 1.c); that 
Applicant was placed on administrative leave for three months for misusing his GCC 
(SOR 1.d); that Applicant misrepresented material facts on his security clearance 
application concerning the improper use of his GTC from July 2012 to July 2013 (SOR 
1.e); and that Applicant misrepresented on his e-QIP the amount of his debt listed in his 
2012 bankruptcy documents (SOR 1.f).  
 
The SOR financial allegations are that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
February 2012 with debts discharged in 2012 (SOR 2.a); as well as the misuse of the 
GTC and GCC as noted in SOR 1.a to SOR 1.d (SOR 2.b). Applicant admitted SOR 
personal conduct allegations 1.a to 1.d. He denied the two falsification allegations under 
SOR 1.e and 1.f. He admitted the financial allegation concerning filing a bankruptcy in 
2012. Since SOR financial allegation 2.b was based on personal conduct allegations in 
SOR 1.a to 1.d. Applicant admitted SOR allegation 2.b.  
 
Applicant admitted the unauthorized use of a GCC for personal purchases in July 
2012 to July 2013. Applicant admits he had to voluntarily retire from his Government 
civilian position in November 2013 in lieu of being fired for the improper use of this GTC. 
(SOR 1.b) Applicant admitted to previously using his GCC for unauthorized purchases 
in 1994, to include for his wedding and honeymoon. He had retained the credit card 
when he transferred to a new command in 1993. He continued to use the charge card 
for personal purchases as he had done in the previous command. He did not know 
using the card for personal purchases was improper until after being so advised in his 
new command in 1994. Applicant admitted he was placed on administrative leave in 
1994 for the improper use of the GCC. He never used it improperly again while working 
for this command. (SOR 1.d) He continued to work for this command until 2008 and he 
was eligible for access to classified information. (SOR 1.c) He voluntarily left this 
command in September 2008 for a position in another command. 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted using his GTC from July 2012 to 
July 2013 for unauthorized purchases in a new command. He again claimed that he 
believed at the time that the use of the card for personal reasons was proper. The travel 
card administrator knew how he was using the card and never told him to stop. He was 
only advised to be sure to pay the bill on time. He claims that he always paid the bill on 
time, but he presented no information to verify his claim of timely payment. He also 
used the card for personal purchases while employed previously by a different 
command. He reported that the unauthorized charges were not detected in an audit of 
his account, but that he reported the unauthorized charges to his supervisor after 
 
4 
 
 
learning from travel card training that use of the card for personal purchases was 
improper. (Item 1, Response to SOR, dated September 29, 2015)  
 
Applicant, in his response to the SOR, denied misrepresenting material facts on 
his security clearance application concerning the improper use of his GTC in 
2012/2013. During this timeframe, he reported that he used the travel card just like a 
regular credit card. The command travel card administrator knew how he was using the 
card and did not tell him the use was improper. He no longer has the travel card. (SOR 
1.e) Applicant denied deliberately providing false information about the amount of debt 
in his 2012 bankruptcy action. He inadvertently did not include the amount of a second 
mortgage on his house in calculating the amount of his liability. It was not his intent to 
deliberately misrepresent the amount of the debt. (SOR 1.f)  
 
Applicant’s explanation of how he used his GTC and GCC has been consistent 
since the issue was first raised in 1994. He claims not to have known it was improper to 
use the Government-issued cards for private purchases until he received training in 
2012. Once he learned about the improper use, he immediately stopped using the card 
for personal purchases.  
 
Applicant’s second wife left him in 2012. He was unable to pay all of his debts 
without his wife’s income. His house was foreclosed satisfying his first mortgage. The 
second mortgagee did not receive any funds from the foreclosure, so the second 
mortgage creditor garnered Applicant’s wages to cover the second mortgage. Applicant 
had mounting debt because he was without his wife’s income and his wages were being 
garnished. He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2012, and his debts were 
discharged in November 2012. The total amount of liability in the bankruptcy was 
approximately $127,000. (Item 3 at 6) In his e-QIP, Applicant listed debt of only $30,000 
in response to the bankruptcy question at Section 26 of the e-QIP. He inadvertently did 
not include the second mortgage in his calculation of the debt. He stated that he simply 
made a mistake with no intention to mislead or misrepresent the amount of his debt. 
(Response to SOR, dated September 29, 2015 at 1)  
 
Applicant reports that he has no financial issues. He reestablished his credit after 
the 2012 bankruptcy. His debts are paid as agreed, and he is living within his means. 
He earned a college degree and has significant funds in savings. He had a difficult time 
financially when his wife left him, but he is no longer financially overextended. His 
current finances are excellent. (Item 6 at 1) 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant noted that his finances are now sound. 
Since his wife left him in 2010 and their divorce and bankruptcy discharge in 2012, he 
rented a house and paid his lease on time. He purchased a car and his car payments 
are timely. He saved over $8,500, received his college degree, and is not financially 
overextended. He pointed out again that he filed the Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012 
because his pay was being garnished for over $1,700 month to pay the second 
mortgage on his foreclosed house. The erroneous amount of debt in the bankruptcy he 
listed on his e-QIP was an honest mistake. He had no reason to mislead adjudicators 
 
5 
 
 
concerning the amount of debt. He also noted that he has held a security clearance, 
including access to top secret and sensitive compartmented information, without issue 
for over 43 years.  
 
Applicant again reiterated in response to the FORM that he believed that he 
could use the GTC as if it were a regular credit card. The card administrator for the 
command knew how he was using the card, and he was never told he could not use the 
card as a regular credit card. He did not realize he could not use the card in this manner 
until he took the travel card training in 2013. He always paid the balance owed on the 
card on time. When he realized his use of the card was not correct, he stopped using 
the card and notified his supervisor. He accepts his improper use of the card. It has cost 
him his Government career.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
6 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
 Applicant admitted he made personal unauthorized charges for his wedding and 
honeymoon on his Government-issued charge card in 1994. In December 1994, he was 
placed on administrative leave for over two months for his misuse of the charge card. 
Applicant admitted he again used a GTC from July 2012 until July 2013 for 
unauthorized personal purchases. He retired from Government service in November 
2013 rather than being terminated because of his improper charges on his GTC. The 
charging of personal purchases to the charge and travel cards are in violation of the 
rules concerning the proper charges to the cards. These actions are security concerns 
and raise the following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information); and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, 
 
7 
 
 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rules violation; 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time 
or resources. 
 
 Applicant potentially misrepresented material facts on his January 24, 2014 
security clearance application when he provided his explanation for why he used the 
GCC for personal and not Government purchases. Applicant also misrepresented 
material facts on the same security clearance application when he listed his liabilities in 
his Chapter 7 bankruptcy as only $30,000 when in fact his liability was in excess of 
$127,000. The misrepresentation of material facts raises the following Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personal security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(d) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
 
 I considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 for all of the 
disqualifying conditions: under personal conduct: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before bin confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
cause by or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information the individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstance that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
8 
 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthiness, 
unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
 There are two types of personal conduct security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
conduct: conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations; and second the failure to provide 
full, complete, and candid answers during the security clearance process.  
 
 Applicant knew that he could not use the GTC and GCC for personal purchases. 
He received training on the use of the card when it was issued to him in 1993. It is 
commonly known by Government employees that the GCC cannot be used for personal 
purposes. It can be used only for Government required expenses. Applicant admits that 
he misused his GCC in 1993/1994 to purchase personal items to include paying for his 
marriage and honeymoon. He was placed on administrative leave for over two months 
for this unauthorized use of the charge card. From this time forward, there is no 
question that Applicant knew or should have known that the use of a GCC or GTC for 
personal purchases was improper. Applicant again used the card for personal purposes 
from July 2012 to July 2013. At this time, Applicant was in a tight financial circumstance 
because he lost the benefits of his wife’s income when she left him in 2012. Even 
though he paid the balance on the card monthly, he was using it for improper purposes. 
He was terminated in November 2013 for misusing the card. I find against Applicant for 
misconduct under Guidelines E. He knew he could not use the card for personal 
purposes but he used it knowingly and purposely. He knew the use of the card for 
personal purchases was improper and contrary to rules and regulations. He was 
suspended from work for over two months for the improper charges to the Government 
credit card. SOR allegations 1.a to 1.d are decided against Applicant.  
 
 Applicant denied intentional falsification in explaining that he thought the GTC 
could be used for personal use. He claims he did not know it was improper to use the 
card for personal purposes until he received training in July 2013. As noted above, 
Applicant knew or should have known the use of the GTC for personal purchases was 
improper in July 2012 since he had previously been disciplined for the using the card for 
personal purchases. His statement that he did not know about the proper use of the 
card until he received training in July 2013 is not credible. Also not credible is 
Applicant’s claim that the card administrator knew of his use of the card and permitted 
him to continue to use the card improperly. He presented no statement from the 
command credit card administrator to corroborate his claim. It is not reasonable to 
believe a program administrator would knowingly permit improper use of the card since 
he himself could be disciplined under the circumstances. However, it is conceivable that 
Applicant inadvertently listed the wrong amount of the bankruptcy on his e-QIP. I find 
against Applicant on SOR 1.e but for Applicant on SOR 1.f.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s improper use of the GTC and the filing of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
February 2012 is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG 
¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or 
illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income 
tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other 
intentional financial breaches of trust). The information raises both an inability and an 
unwillingness to pay delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition under AG 
¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
10 
 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s wife left him in 2012 with two children and the loss of her income. He 
was unable to meet the requirements of his debts and mortgage. His house was 
foreclosed and the primary mortgage was satisfied. There were insufficient funds to 
satisfy the second mortgagee so that mortgage holder garnished his wages. He filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy to permit him to care for his children. Bankruptcy is a legal and 
permissible means of resolving debt. Applicant’s financial situation from his wife’s 
departure was correctly resolved by bankruptcy discharge. I find for Applicant on SOR 
2.a. SOR allegation 2.b is held against Applicant for the same reasons noted in the 
discussion of the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant knew that the use of 
Government charge and travel cards for personal purchases was improper and contrary 
to the rules and regulation for the use of the cards. He used his card improperly in 1994 
and was suspended for three months. He used his travel card again for personal 
purchases in 2012 and was terminated from Government employment. His personal 
conduct shows questionable judgment, dishonesty, and unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations thereby questioning his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
11 
 
 
safeguard protected and classified information. Even though Applicant has been eligible 
for access to classified information for over 43 years without a known security violation, 
his violation of charge card rules and regulations is sufficient to raise doubts about his 
ability to continue to protect classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation and his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
