 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01405 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, GREGG A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 28, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 16, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
April 25, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 25, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 6, 2016. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted AE C, 
which was admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2012. He is applying for his first security clearance. He 
graduated from high school in 2006, and attended college from 2007 to 2008. He was 
married in 2011. Before obtaining a position with his current employer, Applicant 
suffered periods of unemployment and under-employment since graduating from high 
school. He was unemployed from 2006 to 2009, and employed in food service or other 
low paying positions until 2012. During this period, he accumulated debts that resulted 
in collection and charged-off accounts. He worked extended over-time1 in his current job 
to accumulate sufficient assets to pay his delinquent debts. Additionally, his spouse is a 
full-time medical office worker and contributes to the household income. 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts. Applicant paid or resolved the SOR debts 
as noted below: 
 
SOR DEBT ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Student loan charge-off 
for $27,774 
Settled and paid (AE A) Paid 
1.b Student loan charge-off 
for $2,349 
Settled and paid (AE A) Paid 
1.c Student loan – same as 
1.b 
Duplicate Duplicate 
1.d Phone service collection 
for $505 
Paid (CBR) Paid 
1.e Satellite TV service 
collection for $463 
Paid (CBR) Paid 
1.f Medical collection for 
$548 
Paid – no record with 
collection agent  
Paid  
1.g Student loan collection 
for $8,918 
Consolidated into current 
student loan agreement 
Resolved - paying 
consolidated student loan  
                                                          
1 Tr. 20. He worked over 400 overtime hours in 2015. 
 
3 
 
1.h Medical collection for 
$98 
Settled and paid – collection 
agent shows $0 balance 
Paid 
1.i  Medical collection for 
$271 
Paid (Answer) Paid 
1.j Student loan collection 
for $22,945 
Consolidated into current 
student loan agreement 
Resolved – paying 
consolidated student loan 
1.k Phone service collection 
for $1,050 
 
Settled and paid (CBR) Paid 
1.l Student loan collection 
for $6,012 
Settled and paid (AE B) Paid 
 
Applicant’s budget shows a positive monthly net remainder. He resolved all of his 
delinquent debts and consolidated his remaining student loans. He is paying them on-
time. He has a net remainder after paying monthly expenses of $1,500. He has 
approximately $5,000 in a checking account, $14,000 in a savings account, and owns 
his own home. His most current credit report shows no new delinquencies. He received 
financial counseling and uses a budget to manage his household finances. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a history of delinquent debts and was mostly unable to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  There is sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial problems 
have been resolved. He suffered a financial impact from a period of unemployment and 
under-employment after completing high school and some college. Once Applicant 
found his current job, he volunteered to work overtime to accumulate funds to pay his 
debts. I find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances once he was able to 
address his debts. He dedicated his financial resources wisely to resolve his debts, 
obtained financial counseling, and budgets his resources to meet his financial needs. 
Since he paid-off his debts, he saved his money and purchased a home. 
 
 He has gained control of his financial situation, and his overall efforts show a 
clear intent to resolve his debts. He has a steady work history and his income is 
sufficient to meet his family’s needs. His financial issues no longer cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c), and (d) 
apply. 
 
 Overall, Applicant’s financial problems are resolved. I find that the financial 
considerations concerns have been sufficiently mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
GREGG A. CERVI 
Administrative Judge 
