 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02806 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 12, 2014. On 
December 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines H, J, and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 18, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
17, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on March 22, 2016. On March 24, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for April 18, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of four witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A through N, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until 
April 25, 2016, to enable him to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AX O 
through U, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
April 26, 2016. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleged, “While in the United States Air Force, you received an Article 
112 for wrongfully using marijuana.” SOR ¶ 2.b alleged, “In approximately September 
2002, you received an Article 92 for wrongfully possessing two handguns and being 
derelict in performance of duties while in the United States Air Force.”  
 
On my own motion, without objection from either side, I amended the SOR to 
conform to the evidence. (Tr. 72-74.) As amended, SOR ¶ 1.c alleges: 
 
In January 2003, while in the United States Air Force, you were convicted 
by a court-martial of dereliction of duty by negligently possessing two 
unregistered handguns in your dormitory room on or about September 11, 
2002, in violation of Article 92, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ); 
and wrongfully using marijuana on divers occasions from September 
through November 2002, in violation of Article 112a, Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ). 
 
As amended, SOR ¶ 2.b alleges: “You were convicted by a court-martial as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c above.” 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 
2.b-2.e, and 3.a-3.d. He denied SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old apprentice electrician employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2007. He served in the U.S. Air Force from March 2001 to 
March 2003, and he received a general discharge. He worked in various private-sector 
jobs until he began his current job. He was unemployed for about three months from 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
December 2004 to February 2005 after being fired for making inappropriate comments 
to a customer. He was unemployed from December 2005 to March 2006 after 
voluntarily resigning to seek a better-paying job. He was fired from a private-sector job 
in February 2007 for repeated tardiness. (GX 2 at 4-5.) He has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant married in August 2008. He and his wife have three daughters, who are 
five years old, two years old, and six months old.  (Tr. 40.) 
 
 In July 1999, when Applicant was 18 years old, he was cited for underage 
possession of alcohol, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to 50 hours of community 
service.  
 
In the spring of 2002, Applicant was accused of raping a heavily intoxicated 
woman. He denied raping her, but he admitted that she was sufficiently intoxicated to be 
unable to exercise good judgment. He testified that he and a friend met the woman at a 
club, and she invited them to her house and then invited both Applicant and his friend to 
her bedroom, where they both had sexual intercourse with her. Applicant, his friend, and 
the woman were all heavily intoxicated. He was never charged with rape or any other 
offenses related to this incident.  
 
Applicant used marijuana and “spice,” a synthetic drug, with varying frequency 
from June 1993 to March 2011. He stopped using marijuana when he enlisted in the Air 
Force in 2001, but he resumed using it in September 2002. He stopped using it in July 
2006 when he began attending church, and he abstained until December 2011, when 
he used it one time. He decided to use spice because it was legal at the time, and he 
used it from December 2011 to March 2011. (GX 2 at 12.) Spice was not a controlled 
substance until March 1, 2011, when the Drug Enforcement Administration issued an 
order temporarily placing it in Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act. (40 Fed. 
Reg. 11075 (Mar. 1, 2011.)) 
 
In January 2003, Applicant was convicted by a court-martial of dereliction of duty 
by failing to register two handguns with military authorities and using marijuana on 
divers occasions in September through November 2002. He was sentenced to 
confinement for four months, forfeiture of $400 pay per month for four months, and 
reduction to the lowest enlisted grade. (GX 5 at 10.) He received a general discharge 
from the Air Force for drug abuse in March 2003. (GX 5 at 1, 11-22.)  
 
Applicant’s court-martial conviction for using marijuana was the result of a 
positive urinalysis. After he was notified of the urinalysis results, he checked himself into 
a mental health facility. He claimed that he was suicidal so that he would be admitted to 
the facility. He testified that he was desperate, because he knew he was “throwing [his] 
life away and needed help.” He received a one-day pass while admitted to the facility, 
and he smoked marijuana while on pass. (Tr. 49-52.)  
 
 
4 
 
In March 2003, Applicant was cited by civilian authorities for disturbing the peace 
by shouting at an individual he suspected of previously assaulting him. He appeared in 
court and the charge was dismissed. 
 
In July 2005, Applicant was stopped by police after a minor car accident. The 
police found marijuana in his car. He was charged and released. His court date was 
changed several times, and he failed to appear on the appointed date. He testified that 
he failed to appear because his attorney informed him that he was not required to 
appear on that date. In April 2006, he was charged with contempt of court. He was 
notified by mail that a warrant had been issued for his release. He turned himself in and 
was jailed for ten days. The marijuana charge was dismissed after he completed 500 
hours of community service. (GX 2 at 10; GX 3 at 2; Tr. 58-60.) 
 
In August 2005, Applicant was arrested for felony breaking and entering with 
intent to commit a felony, use of a firearm in the commission of a felony, and carrying a 
concealed weapon, a misdemeanor. He admitted kicking in the door of a house while 
carrying a concealed handgun, intending to steal marijuana from a person who had 
previously refused to share the marijuana with him. He spent ten days in jail until his 
mother posted bail. In January 2006, he pleaded guilty to misdemeanor trespassing and 
was sentenced to 12 months in jail, which was suspended, and placed on probation for 
two years. (GX 2 at 11; Tr. 62-64.) 
 
Applicant used hydrocodone with varying frequency from August 2008 to January 
2012. He had received a prescription for hydrocodone after corrective surgery for a foot 
injury in August 2008, but he consumed more than the prescribed dosage. When he 
had consumed all the prescribed pills, he took some from his father, who also had a 
prescription for hydrocodone. He estimated that he took 10 or 15 pills from his father’s 
prescription. He stopped using hydrocodone when the pain stopped in January 2012. 
(GX 2 at 13; Tr. 54-57.) 
 
 Between February 1999 and May 2012, Applicant attended several educational 
institutions, and he received an associate’s degree in May 2012. (AX F.) He has been 
enrolled in a shipyard apprentice program since July 2014. He is an “A” student. He 
holds a leadership position in the apprentice school student association. His instructors 
regard him as hardworking, compassionate, knowledgeable, and trustworthy. He is a 
“Christian rapper,” and has written, recorded and performed music designed to motivate 
others by describing his own struggles. (AX A-C, L, N, P, T.) He is active in his church, 
working in a soup kitchen, providing haircuts to the homeless, and ministering to 
inmates in the local jail. (AX D, E, O.) He has been recognized for his community 
service by his fellow apprentice Jaycees. (AX G-K.) He is devoted to his family. (AX M, 
O, Q, R, S, U.) He testified that he no longer associates with drug users or persons 
involved in criminal behavior. (Tr. 66.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor, an apprentice craft instructor, has known Applicant for 
about seven years. He gave Applicant high marks in all nine criteria pertaining to 
leadership. He regards Applicant as very trustworthy and an asset to the community. He 
 
5 
 
has noted that Applicant is a “go-to-guy,” is well liked, respected, and a source of 
motivation for his peers. He was unaware of the SOR allegations until he came to the 
hearing. (Tr. 77-81.) 
 
 Another apprentice craft instructor, who has known Applicant since 2013, 
described Applicant’s work as “fantastic.” He testified that Applicant was a hard worker, 
very reliable, and very responsible. He was familiar with Applicant’s music, in which he 
sings about his mistakes and how he learned from them. He testified that Applicant 
makes no excuses for past mistakes. Instead, he uses them to help others avoid going 
down the same path. This witness was familiar with some of the SOR allegations, but 
not the details. (Tr. 82-85.) 
 
 Applicant’s father retired from the Air Force after 23 years of service and now 
works as a DOD civilian. He testified that Applicant was “spoiled a little bit” as the oldest 
child, but that his mother kept in contact with him and kept him in church. He testified 
that Applicant has atoned for his mistakes and become an excellent father to his 
children and an excellent son. He is satisfied that Applicant has turned his life around. 
(Tr. 86-90.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother testified that she always believed that Applicant would turn his 
life around. She believes that the time he spent in jail made him realize that his actions 
had consequences. She has frequent contact with Applicant and has seen no signs that 
Applicant has resumed his drug involvement. (Tr. 90-95.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
6 
 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana from June 1993 to March 2011 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); used spice until at least March 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.b); was convicted by a 
court-martial of using marijuana from September to November 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.c, as 
amended); used hydrocodone from August 2008 to January 2012 without a prescription 
(SOR ¶ 1.d); and was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana in July 2005 
(SOR ¶ 1.e).  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
 
7 
 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s use of spice preceded the DEA action placing in in Schedule I of the 
Controlled Substances Act. Thus, he has refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, because 
his use of spice was not illegal at the time. However, his admissions in his answer to the 
SOR, his testimony at the hearing, and the documentary evidence submitted at the 
hearing establish the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c-1.e and raise the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant’s court-martial conviction for marijuana use was based on his positive 
urinalysis. However, AG ¶ 25(b) (“testing positive for illegal drug use”) may not be used 
as an independent basis for denying Applicant’s application for a security clearance, 
because it was not alleged in the SOR. However, the use of marijuana detected by the 
positive urinalysis is included in the court-martial conviction alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
2.b.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(c): abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since 
ended. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) is not established. Applicant’s illegal drug use was frequent and did 
not occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. It is not mitigated by the 
 
8 
 
passage of time. The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (“so long ago”) focuses on whether the 
criminal conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ Id. Applicant’s last use of marijuana was in December 2011, and his 
misuse of hydrocodone ended in January 2012, more than four years ago, which is a 
“significant period of time.” However, his abstinence from illegal drugs must be 
considered in the context of almost 15 years of irresponsible behavior. Furthermore, he 
previously abstained from illegal drug use for five and a half years (July 2006 to 
December 2011) and then used it again. In this context, insufficient time has passed to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by his illegal drug use. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) is not fully established. Applicant no longer associates with drug 
users, and he has immersed himself in his work, his family, and his community service. 
However, “an appropriate period of abstinence” is not established for the reasons set 
out in the above discussion of AG 26(a), and he has not provided the statement of intent 
set out in AG ¶ 26(b)(4). 
 
 AG ¶ 26(c) is established for Applicant’s misuse of hydrocodone. He had a valid 
prescription for the drug, but he exceeded the prescribed dosage and then used his 
father’s hydrocodone after exhausting his own supply. He stopped using hydrocodone 
in January 2012. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that in 2002, Applicant raped a woman who was unable to 
consent because she was intoxicated (SOR ¶ 2.a); he was convicted by court-martial of 
dereliction of duty and wrongful use of marijuana (SOR ¶ 2.b as amended); he was 
charged with felony breaking and entering, use of a firearm in commission of a felony, 
and carrying a concealed weapon; and he pleaded guilty to misdemeanor trespass and 
was sentence to 12 months in jail, suspended (SOR ¶ 2.c); and he was charged with 
contempt of court in April 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.d). The SOR also cross-alleges the conduct in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 3.b, and 3.c under this guideline (SOR ¶ 2.e). 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” The evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 
31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted”).  
 
 
9 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 32(c): evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
AG ¶ 32(a) is not established. Applicant’s criminal conduct did not occur under 
unusual circumstances and it is not mitigated by the passage of time for the reasons set 
out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 26(a).  
 
 AG ¶ 32(c) is established for the rape alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. The only evidence of 
the circumstances surrounding this incident was provided by Applicant. He denied 
raping the woman, and the circumstances he described reflect that the woman was a 
willing participant, even though her judgment was impaired.  
 
 AG ¶ 32(d) is not fully established. Applicant abandoned his drug abuse and 
irresponsible behavior in 2011. Since Applicant entered the apprentice program, he has 
earned the respect of his supervisors, become a leader among his peers, and is 
involved in community activities. However, insufficient time has passed without 
recurrence of criminal activity, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 
26(a). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant received a general discharge due to misconduct 
from the Air Force in March 2003 (SOR ¶ 3.a); he was cited in July 1999 for underage 
possession of alcohol (SOR ¶ 3.b); and he was cited disturbing the peace in March 
2003 (SOR ¶ 3.c). The SOR also cross-alleges the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 
2.a-3.c (SOR ¶ 3.d).2 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. . . .” 
 SOR ¶ 3.a does not allege misconduct; it merely alleges a consequence of the 
misconduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.b. As such, it duplicates SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 2.b. 
                                                          
2 SOR ¶ 3.d erroneously purported to cross-allege conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 3.d, the same paragraph 
making the cross-allegation.  
 
10 
 
See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). Accordingly, I have resolved it 
in Applicant’s favor.  
 The evidence establishes SOR ¶¶ 3.b and 3.c and raises the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s misconduct was not minor, did not 
occur under unique circumstances, and is not mitigated by the passage of time for the 
reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 26(a).  
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is partially established. Applicant has acknowledged his behavior. He 
has not obtained formal counseling, but he has involved himself in his work, his family, 
and his community activities. For the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 
26(a), insufficient time has passed to conclude that his misconduct is unlikely to recur. 
 
 
11 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant has been open and candid about his past. 
He has incorporated his irresponsible behavior into his music and used it to help others 
avoid the mistakes he has made. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant was candid, 
sincere, remorseful, and credible at the hearing. Although his character witnesses were 
not fully aware of his irresponsible past, their observations of his current behavior reflect 
that he has been a responsible, reliable member of the community since entering the 
apprentice program in July 2014. On the other hand, he has a long track record of 
serious misconduct. He used marijuana while employed by a defense contractor. He 
has stopped using marijuana several times in the past and then resumed using it. He 
has not abstained from illegal drug use for a sufficient period to establish that further 
illegal drug us is unlikely to recur.  
 
“Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 8, 2011), citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). Applicant has taken 
significant steps to turn his life around. Although this is a close case, insufficient time 
has passed to overcome the strong presumption against granting him a security 
clearance. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security." If 
Applicant continues on his current path, he may well qualify for a security clearance in 
the future. 
 
 
12 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, J, 
and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement, 
criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.b-3.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
