 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02673 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Frederick J. Assenza, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by a looming financial crisis 
triggered by a sharp decrease in his family’s household income. He took proactive, 
prudent steps to address his debts. He retained the services of a debt consolidation firm 
that helped him consolidate and resolve his debts. For about four years, Applicant paid 
on a consistent monthly basis into the firm’s debt repayment plan. He satisfied his 
debts. He did not falsify his security clearance application. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
On October 9, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish 
his continued eligibility for access to classified information (Answer).2 
 
 On April 21, 2016, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed. On May 2, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice scheduling the hearing for June 9, 2016.3 The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Applicant testified and offered exhibits A – C. I granted Applicant’s request 
for additional time post-hearing to supplement the record.4 He timely submitted exhibits 
D – F. All exhibits were admitted in evidence without objection. The hearing transcript 
(Tr.) was received by DOHA on June 20, 2016, and the record closed on July 8, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his early fifties. He has been married for over 25 years and has 
four adult children. He has lived at the same address, a home that he owns, for nearly 
20 years. He has been with his current employer for nearly 15 years. He is employed as 
an area manager, supervising a workforce of approximately 700 individuals. The vice 
president of the company Applicant works for submitted a reference letter attesting to 
Applicant’s judgment, honesty, and professionalism. Applicant has held a security 
clearance since 2009. (Tr. 12-15, 22, 53-54; Exhibit (Ex.) 1; Ex. E) 
 
 In 2011, Applicant’s mother passed away. Applicant and his sister paid for their 
mother’s funeral expenses. Around the same time, his wife’s employer was 
experiencing a business downturn. Applicant’s wife was told by her employer that she 
could keep her job, but only if she accepted a 20% reduction in salary. Unable to find 
another job, Applicant’s wife stayed with her employer at the reduced salary. At the 
time, Applicant and his wife were also assisting their son pay for college. Applicant and 
his wife had accumulated about $50,000 in debt between paying for his mother’s funeral 
expenses, making needed repairs to their home, and incurring other consumer-related 
debt. Applicant’s wife, who has a background in finance, did some research and 
identified a debt consolidation firm (DCF) that could assist them in paying their debts.  
 
In July 2011, Applicant and his wife retained the DCF. The DCF consolidated 
their outstanding debts and established a payment plan. Over the course of the next 
four years, Applicant paid $874 a month to the DCF. He satisfied all his debts through 
                                                          
2 Sometime thereafter, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to correctly reflect the Guideline E 
concern. The the requested amendment was granted without objection. (Tr. at 6-7)  
 
3 Prehearing correspondence, notice of hearing, and case management order are attached to the record 
as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively.  
 
4 The record was originally kept open until June 24, 2016, but was extended at Applicant’s request to July 
8, 2016. Post-hearing correspondence is attached to the record as Hx. IV and V.  
 
3 
 
 
the DCF repayment plan. Applicant submitted documentation, to include the DCF 
contract, schedule of debts, and proof that all the listed debts were satisfied.5  
 
Applicant and his wife currently earn a combined annual income of approximately 
$150,000. They use a household budget to manage their finances. Their son recently 
graduated from college. Applicant submitted a current credit report that reflects his 
accounts are in good standing. (Tr. 15-43, 49-54; Ex. A – C; Ex. D; Ex. F)  
 
 In August 2013, two years after Applicant started resolving his debts through the 
DCF, he filled out and submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In response to 
questions regarding whether he had any derogatory financial accounts to report, 
Applicant answered “no.” (Ex. 1)  
 
Applicant explained that before retaining the DCF his debts were not in 
collection, seriously past due, or otherwise derogatory. He was unaware at the time he 
submitted the SCA that some of the same accounts he was using the DCF to resolve 
had been turned over by the original creditor(s) to a collection agency or otherwise 
designated derogatory in some fashion. He was specifically advised by the DCF not to 
have further communication with his creditors and if they contacted him that he should 
refer them to the DCF. He immediately stopped using credit cards associated with 
accounts turned over to the DCF. Applicant credibly testified that he did not know he 
had any derogatory accounts that needed to be reported at the time he submitted his 
SCA. A month after submitting the SCA, Applicant was interviewed by a background 
investigator. He freely informed the investigator that he was using the DCF to resolve 
his debts and fully discussed his financial situation in detail. (Tr. 15-35, 48-49; Ex. 5) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
                                                          
5 Department Counsel conceded in his opening statement that Applicant satisfied the debts referenced in 
SOR 1.c and 1.d in December 2013 and June 2014, respectively; or, over a year before the SOR was 
issued. (Tr. 8) The remaining two SOR debts total less than $1,800 and were also resolved. 
 
4 
 
 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges that the four listed debts, totaling less than $1,800, implicate 
the financial considerations security concern. The concern is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
By 2011, Applicant had amassed a substantial amount of consumer-related debt 
and was financially overextended, which contributed to his precarious financial situation 
and arguably raises the financial considerations concern. Applicant mitigated those 
concerns. In mid-2011, he took proactive, prudent steps to address a looming financial 
crisis that was triggered by matters largely beyond his control (i.e., wife’s loss of income 
and mother’s funeral expenses). He consolidated his outstanding debts and resolved 
them with the assistance of a debt consolidation firm. He took this responsible action 
well before the initiation of the reinvestigation of his background. His current finances 
 
5 
 
 
appear good and, notwithstanding the financial hardships that befell his family in 2011, 
he remained in control of his finances. Accordingly, I find that Applicant established the 
following mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified the SCA when he did not list the four 
SOR debts on his SCA. Specifically, the SOR alleges that Applicant did not disclose 
these four SOR debts in response to questions asking:  whether in the past seven (7) 
years he had any debts turned over to a collection agency or credit cards suspended, 
charged off, or canceled for failure to pay? This falsification allegation raises the 
potential applicability of the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 16 (a), “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . used to determine security clearance eligibility . . . .” 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout the security 
clearance process. An applicant should disclose any potential derogatory information 
responsive to the questions asked on the SCA. However, the omission of material, 
adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant 
 
6 
 
 
intentionally falsified his or her SCA. An omission is not deliberate if the person 
genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood 
the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be reported. An 
administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding the 
omission to determine an applicant’s true intent. See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-
12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally falsify his SCA. He credibly testified that since he 
was addressing and resolving his debts through the DCF, he did not believe he had any 
derogatory accounts that needed to be reported. His “innocent” state of mind is 
corroborated by his actions just a month after submitting the SCA, when he freely 
volunteered information about the DCF and the troubled state of his finances. 
Additionally, I had an opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor at hearing and found 
him credible. Accordingly, I find that AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a responsible, 
family-oriented individual. His employer has great confidence in his abilities and placed 
him in charge of managing a fairly large, disparate, and challenging workforce. When 
faced with a looming financial crisis in 2011, Applicant took prudent, responsible steps 
to address his finances. His actions are consistent with what is expected of those 
granted access to classified information. His explanation for not listing on his SCA his 
derogatory accounts or that he was using the services of a DCF was reasonable, 
credible, and consistent with other record evidence. After considering the record 
evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant met his burden in 
establishing his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
