 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00860 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 29, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 11, 2014. 
(Item 3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
November 12, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2015. He admitted 5 of the 16 
allegations of delinquent debt with explanations. He did not have knowledge of seven 
accounts so he denied the seven debts. He directly denied four debts. He elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on January 19, 2016. Applicant received a complete file 
of relevant material (FORM) on January 28, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity 
to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on June 9, 
2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the information in the PSI. Any objection to the information 
is waived. I will consider information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He is seeking employment in a defense contractor 
shipyard as a shipfitter. Applicant worked as an iron worker from April 2004 until 
February 2011 when his employer went out of business. He has been unemployed form 
since March 2011. During some of this time, he drew state unemployment 
compensation. He has been offered employment at the shipyard but he is waiting for the 
decision on his access to classified information to commence working. He had five 
children from a relationship before marrying in July 1999. He also has two stepchildren. 
(Item 2, e-QIP, dated July 29, 2014; Item 3, PSI, dated September 11, 2014)  
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (Item 4, dated August 9, 2014, and Item 5, 
dated July 8, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a medical 
account in collection for $844 (SOR 1.a); accounts to a law firm collecting for a health 
exercise client for $137 (SOR 1.b), $549 (SOR 1.c), $129 (SOR 1.d), and $463 (SOR 
1.e); a television account for $956 (SOR 1.f); a credit card account in collection for 
$2,284 (SOR 1.g); three telephone accounts for the same provider in collection for $915 
 
3 
 
 
(SOR 1.h), $847 (SOR 1.i), and $1,880 (SOR 1.j); a credit card charged off for $277 
(SOR 1.k); a credit card debt charged off for $684 (SOR 1.l); an automobile 
repossession charged off for $12,294 (SOR 1.m); an account charged off for $2,450 
(SOR 1.n); a store account placed for collection for $580 (SOR 1.o); and a debt to a city 
for a traffic ticket for $75 (SOR 1.p). The amount of the delinquent debt is approximately 
$25,384, with over 50% of the debt being the car repossession debt. All of these debts 
are listed on the credit reports. Applicant admitted to the OPM security investigator that 
he owed an unknown amount in back child support that the mother of the children is not 
seeking. However, he believes the state is seeking the back child support. (Item 3, PSI, 
dated September 11, 2014) 
 
Applicant attributes his debts to long-term unemployment. Applicant’s wife has 
reportedly been employed during his periods of unemployment. She has been the 
financial provider for the family. Applicant claims he is able to live within his means, and 
no one should question his willingness to pay his debts. He intends to pay the past-due 
debts listed on his credit reports once he starts work at the shipyard. He describes his 
current financial situation as “tough” and is relying on his potential employment at the 
shipyard to start paying his past due bills. Applicant presented no information 
concerning any attempts to contact creditors or to pay debts. (Response to SOR, dated 
December 10, 2015; Item 3, PSI, dated September 11, 2014) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant acknowledges that he has debt and he 
struggles financially. He owes some of the SOR debts and he has little if any knowledge 
of the other debts. Of the unknown debts, Applicant stated that he will “look into them”. 
He presented no information of any attempt to learn more about his debts. He 
acknowledges that he had telephone service with the telephone service provider at 
SOR 1.h to 1.j. Applicant disputes the amount owed. He presented no information on 
attempts to resolve disputes with the creditor.  
 
Applicant notes that he never received any correspondence from some creditors, 
so he does not know anything about these debts. He presented no information of 
attempts to contact the creditors listed on the credit reports. He presented no 
information of attempts to contact the creditors for debts he admits. 
   
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
 
5 
 
 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in his credit reports, by his admissions to the OPM investigator, and his 
response to the allegations in the SOR. All of Applicant’s SOR debts are listed on the 
credit reports at Items 4 and 5. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt. Once the Government has established delinquent debt, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate those debts. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Even though Applicant had long periods 
of unemployment, he did not establish that his delinquent debt was incurred as a result 
of these conditions. He did receive some unemployment compensation and his wife has 
been employed during his periods of unemployment. Applicant did not provide any 
information to establish that he is paying or has paid any delinquent debts. He has not 
shown that he acted reasonably and responsibly to resolve his financial problems. The 
evidence does not support responsible management of his finances. His financial 
problems are not under control. Applicant claims lack of knowledge of some of the 
debts, but he made no attempt to learn of the debts. He knows about some of the debts, 
but he has not contacted the creditors. Based on Applicant’s failure to verify his debts 
and make any arrangements to pay his debts, it is clear that he has not been 
 
6 
 
 
reasonable and responsible in regard to his finances. His lack of reasonable and 
responsible action towards his finances is a strong indication that he will not protect and 
safeguard classified information. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to show that he paid or is paying his delinquent debts. 
He did not establish that he has taken reasonable and responsible action to resolve his 
financial problems. Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of his 
finances and a consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
