                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-02913        
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Shirin Shokrollahi, Attorney At Law
The Edmunds Law Firm
July 21, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on March 20, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On November 6,
2015, the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security
clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in November 20, 2015, and he requested a
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals administrative judge.  This
case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge on March 15, 2016.  A
notice of hearing was issued on March 22, 2016, scheduling the hearing for April 28,
2016.  The Government presented six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 6, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented sixteen
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through P, which were admitted without
objection.  The Applicant testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until
2
close of business on May 10, 2016, to allow the Applicant to submit additional
supporting documentation.  Applicant did not submit any additional documentation.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on May 5, 2016.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 61 years old and divorced with three children.  He has two
Master’s degrees.  He is employed with a defense contractor as an Engineer and is
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant denied each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated April 2, 2014; February 17, 2015;
February 8, 2016; and April 23, 2016, reflect that the Applicant was indebted to each of
the  creditors in an amount totaling in excess of $16,000.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4,
5 and 6.)  Applicant has worked for the defense department for about 27 years.  He has
held a security clearance for about 20 years and has never violated company policy or
security rules or regulations.  
Applicant married his wife in the early 80's, and went through a difficult divorce in
2005.  Applicant claims that during his marriage, all of his bills were paid on time, he
lived within his means, and he had good credit.  When Applicant divorced in 2005, it is
likely that his ex-wife illegally opened a number of accounts in his name and charged
them up without his knowledge.  Applicant was completely unaware that he had any
delinquent debts.  He testified that he became aware of his delinquent debts for the first
time when he met with the investigator during his security clearance background
investigation.  Applicant’s divorce was final in August 2005.  (Tr. p. 52.)  
Applicant hired counsel and started trying to find out how the debts were
incurred.  There is no one else besides his ex-wife that had his social security number,
but when he contacted her about the matter, she refused to talk with him.  According to
his credit reports, the following delinquent debts were owing:
1.a.  Applicant was indebted to a bank for an account placed for collection in the
approximate amount of $8,119.  Applicant has no knowledge of the debt.  He sent a
letter of dispute to the creditor.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L, and Tr. p. 33.)   
3
1.b., a delinquent credit card debt owed to a creditor for an account that was
charged off in the approximate amount of $5,601.  Applicant has no knowledge of the
debt.  He contacted the creditor and settled the debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibit K, and Tr. p.
34.)
   
1.c., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in
the approximate amount of $818.  Applicant has no knowledge of the debt.  He sent a
letter of dispute to the creditor.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H, and Tr. p. 36.)    
1.d., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in
the approximate amount of $612.  Applicant has no knowledge of the debt.  He
contacted the creditor and settled the debt.  (Tr. p. 37.)
1.e., a delinquent credit card debt owed to a creditor for an account that was
charged off in the approximate amount of $561.  Applicant has no knowledge of the
debt.  He contacted the creditor and settled the debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I, and Tr. p.
39.) 
1.f., a delinquent debt owed to a creditor for a delinquent medical account placed
for collection in the approximate amount of $72.  Applicant had no knowledge of the
debt.  He contacted the creditor and paid off the debt.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G, and Tr.
pp. 40 - 41.)
Applicant’s financial statement dated December 4, 2015, indicates that after
paying his regular monthly expenses, his taxes and credit card debt, he has
discretionary monies in the amount of $2,000 at the end of the month.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit E.)  Applicant’s most recent credit report shows a good credit rating, between
710-718. He completed a credit counseling class to show his commitment to financial
responsibility.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated March 20, 2014, and answered, “NO,” to a series of questions concerning
his finances.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Section 26 asked, “In the past seven years, have
you defaulted on any type of loan? . . . had bills or debts turned over to a collection
agency? . . . has any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for
failing to pay as agreed?”  As stated, Applicant answered, “NO.”  This was a false
answer.  Applicant was indebted to each of the creditors listed in the SOR.  Applicant
credibly testified that he had no knowledge of any delinquent debts until he met with the
investigator about his security clearance.  He has always paid his debts on time during
4
his marriage, and was never delinquent on his payments to his creditors.  (Tr. p.44.)  He
did not intend to lie to the Government or conceal any information.  (Tr. p. 45.)
A letter of recommendation from the Applicant’s supervisor indicates that
Applicant is a senior in his field who shows dedication, an excellent work ethic, does a
good job interacting with a large multi-organizational test team, and consistently shows
integrity and leadership skills.  He is recommended for a security clearance.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
Applicant’s performance appraisal for 2014 demonstrates that he “achieves
expectations” on the job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  His most recent performance
appraisal for 2015 demonstrates that he “consistently exceeds expectations.”
(Applicant’s Exhibit P.)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
5
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
20. (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
None.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
6
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
 
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of dishonesty and/or financial irresponsibility
that demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
7
The Government has met its initial burden of proving that the applicant has been
financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  The evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope
and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his
security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that until Applicant divorced his wife in 2005, he had great
credit.  In 2005, several accounts were opened in his name without his knowledge.  He
incurred a number of delinquent debts that he has either disputed or paid that were not
his own.  For obvious reasons, Applicant has not chosen to prosecute his wife or report
her to the police.  Instead he has worked to resolve the debts by himself and even
completed a financial counseling class to show his dedication and seriousness to the
matter.  Under the circumstances he has shown good judgment and acted reasonably
and responsibly.  At this time, there is sufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation.
Applicant has demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs. 
Applicant has met his burden of proving that he is worthy of a security clearance.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  Mitigating Conditions  20.(a) the behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control; 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts, and 20.(e) the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
In regard to his personal conduct, Applicant was truthful and candid with the
Government on his security clearance application when he answered the questions
concerning his finances.  He did not know that he had any delinquent debts when he
completed the security application.  Once he learned of them, he contacted the
creditors, informed them of his situation, and either disputed the debt or otherwise
resolved it.  I find that he answered the questions correctly and to the best of his
knowledge and ability at the time.  I find that he did not conceal this information from the
Government on the application.
  
8
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It mitigates the negative effects
of his financial indebtedness and his personal conduct, and the effects it can have on
his ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the
Applicant has overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:       For the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.                  For  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.b.                 For  the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.c.                   For  the Applicant. 
Subpara.  1.d.                  For  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.e.                      For  the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.f.                   For  the Applicant. 
Paragraph 2:                  For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.                  For  the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.b.                  For  the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
9
