 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00911 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2012, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On August 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
 
2                                                                                                                                                                                           
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On August 27, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On October 1, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On October 15, 2015, the case was 
assigned to another administration judge. On October 28, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for 
November 16, 2015. After the case was scheduled, it was continued at Applicant’s 
request. On March 9, 2016, the case was reassigned to me. On April 1, 2016, DOHA 
issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for April 19, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was 
held as rescheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
GE 5 and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were received into evidence without objection. 
Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and 
AE B, which were received into evidence without objection. On April 26, 2016, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.k, 
1.t, 1.w, 1.y, 1.z and 1.aa. After a thorough review of the record, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old aviation scheduler employed by a defense contractor 
since October 2012. Shortly after he began working for his employer, he was granted an 
interim secret security clearance which was revoked in August 2015 as a result of these 
proceedings. Applicant is currently filling a company position that does not require a 
clearance, but is unsure of his future with his company should he lose his clearance. 
(Tr. 11-13, 17-18; GE 1) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1994. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in business marketing in August 1999. (Tr. 18-19; GE 1.) Applicant 
married in November 2003 and has been separated since April 2013. He is representing 
himself in his divorce and stated that he has been having difficulty getting his wife to 
sign off on the final divorce papers. Applicant and his wife have two minor children – a 
son and a daughter. He is paying $800 in monthly child support. His wife is not 
employed outside the home. Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (Tr. 19-21, 37-
38, 48-49; GE 1.)  
 
 
3                                                                                                                                                                                           
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 43 separate allegations, 42 of those allegations are debts 
totaling $32,205, and 1 of those allegations is a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in March 
2009 and discharged in August 2009. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.qq) Applicant’s 2009 Bankruptcy 
and debts alleged in his SOR were substantiated in his November 17, 2012 Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), his October 23, 2012 
and January 12, 2015 credit reports, his SOR answer, and hearing testimony. (Tr. 22-
36; GE 2 – GE 5) 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to uncovered medical expenses 
related to his being plagued with kidney stones since he was 15 years old and his 
daughter being diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome, a severe kidney disorder. Applicant 
did not have insurance to cover the cost shares associated with his numerous medical 
bills. Applicant was also laid off from January 2009 to October 2012. (Tr. 9-11, 21-22)  
 
Applicant testified that he is current on his taxes, but noted that he does owe 
$1,565 for tax year 2015 and has set up a monthly payment plan to the Internal 
Revenue Service. (Tr. 35-37) He further testified that his net monthly income is $3,800 
and estimated that he has a net remainder of “$700 to $1,000.” He uses his remainder 
to “pay more on credit cards or take care of whatever is needed . . . .” As of his hearing 
date he had “$200 maybe” in his savings account. (Tr. 38-41)  
 
Applicant has not contacted any of his medical creditors, which make up the 
majority of his SOR debts, nor did he produce any evidence that he resolved or 
attempted to resolve any of his non-medical debts. He did testify that he planned to 
make payments on debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, which are student loans in the 
respective amounts of $291 and $250, and on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.u, which is a dental 
bill in the amount of $461. (Tr. 42, 44-46) Applicant has not sought financial counseling. 
(Tr. 47-48, 52-54) 
 
Applicant further testified that he has worked hard his entire life. He added that 
his wife was unable to contribute financially to their marriage because of various 
medical issues. (Tr. 43-44) Applicant’s wife and daughter are currently living with her 
mother, and he and his son are living with his parents. (Tr. 49-50) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted two reference letters from his former supervisors. The 
collective sense of these letters is very favorable pertaining to his character, work 
performance, and accomplishments. (Tr. 50-52; AE A, AE B) 
 
4                                                                                                                                                                                           
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
5                                                                                                                                                                                           
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6                                                                                                                                                                                           
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there is 
more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is a 
“continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Furthermore, the evidence does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant experienced some significant family medical issues as well as a loss of 
income when he was laid off from January 2009 to October 2012. However, there is no 
evidence that he took any corrective action to mitigate his SOR debts having been put 
on notice that these debts were a concern to the Government in his November 2012 
OPM PSI or after having received his August 2015 SOR. There is no documented 
evidence that Applicant remained in contact with his creditors or tried to resolve his 
debts.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek or receive financial 
counseling. Absent documentation and given Applicant’s very recent attempts to resolve 
three small debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.u,                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
7                                                                                                                                                                                           
he is unable to receive credit under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant’s overall efforts to resolve his 
SOR debts are not sufficiently mitigating. I recognize that he was unemployed from 
January 2009 to October 2012, however, I also note that he has been employed since 
October 2012. The vast majority of his debts have been lingering and remain 
unresolved, and his recent attempt to resolve three long overdue smaller debts shortly 
before his hearing date does not constitute good faith.  AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Applicant’s reference letters and employment with his defense contractor 
employer weigh in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of 
                                                          
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8                                                                                                                                                                                           
society. There is no evidence to suggest that he is not current on his day-to-day 
expenses. 
 
However, given the amount, number of debts involved, time elapsed since being 
notified these debts were a concern, and minimal evidence of documented effort to 
resolve any of the SOR debts, I am unable to find in Applicant’s favor. I recognize the 
challenges Applicant has faced, but I also note that he has been employed for the last 
four years. It is difficult to accept the notion that Applicant was precluded from taking 
more corrective action during that time period. Unfortunately, these concerns, taken as 
a whole, leave me with doubts regarding Applicant’s security worthiness. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.qq:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
