 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02788 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 27, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Under the guideline for Foreign Preference, it was alleged that Applicant 
possessed a valid passport issued by the United Kingdom (U.K.) after becoming a U. S. 
citizen. However, he surrendered his U.K. passport to his facility security officer (FSO) 
in July 2014. He did not use his U.K. passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. Security 
concerns were also raised under the guideline for Foreign Influence because his 
mother-in-law and father-in-law are resident citizens of Turkey. Security concerns raised 
under Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence are mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the Guidelines for 
Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 23, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
16, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. The Government also offered documents pertaining to Turkey, marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, for administrative notice. Applicant had no objection to 
Department Counsel’s exhibits, and they were admitted. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) 
A through F, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied SOR allegations 1.a and 2.a. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He has worked as an employee of a government 
contractor since April 2014. He was born in the U.K. and immigrated to the United 
States in 2000. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in August 2010. Since his 
naturalization, he considers himself to be solely a U.S. citizen. He pledged in his 
naturalization oath to renounce all prior citizenship or allegiance to another country. He 
is willing to formally renounce his U.K citizenship through further action. (GE 1; Tr. 17-
19, 21.) 
 
Applicant was issued a U.K passport in April 2007. It was set to expire in April 
2017. Applicant used that passport for travels to the U.K. in 2007 through 2010. 
However, he did not use his U.K. passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
surrendered his U.K. passport to his facility security officer (FSO) in July 2014. (GE 1; 
GE 2; AE B; Tr. 18, 23.) 
 
Applicant is married, pending a final divorce decree. (AE C.) He met his wife in 
1995 in the U.K. She was raised by her deceased grandmother. Applicant’s wife was 
never close to her parents, who are divorced and reside in Turkey. His parents-in-law 
were not invited to their wedding. Neither Applicant nor his wife have talked to or seen 
the father-in-law in the past four years, or the mother-in-law in the past 17 years, due to 
disagreements. Applicant has never been to Turkey. Applicant’s wife has not been to 
Turkey since prior to their marriage in 1995. Applicant has “absolutely no loyalty to 
Turkey, the people of Turkey, or [his] parents-in-law.” (Tr. 19-20, 25.) 
 
 Applicant presented two letters of recommendation: one from his facility security 
officer, and one from the president of his company. His facility security officer opined 
that Applicant is a “socially responsible person” who is a valued employee. (AE E.) The 
president of his company indicated that Applicant is an “integral and well respected 
employee.” (AE F.)  
 
3 
 
Turkey is a NATO ally that controls the straits linking the Black Sea with the 
Mediterranean, and it borders Iran, Iraq, and Syria. There have been violent terrorist 
attacks in Turkey, and the possibility of future terrorist attacks against U.S. citizens and 
interests there remains high. Additionally, significant human rights problems in Turkey 
have been identified including interference with freedom of expression and assembly. 
Authorities have used excessive force to disperse protests and detained demonstrators, 
and have been alleged to have participated in unlawful killings. (HE I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
  Applicant was a citizen of the U.K. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2010. 
He used his U.K. passport, issued in 2007, prior to becoming a U.S. citizen in 2010. He 
retained that valid U.K. passport after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2010. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. Two are applicable: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 When Applicant applied for a security clearance and learned of the DoD policies 
regarding foreign passports, he immediately surrendered his U.K. passport to his facility 
security officer. He is willing to renounce his U.K. citizenship. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) 
provide mitigation for the security concerns raised by his former exercise of his U.K. 
citizenship rights. 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Turkey. While he and his 
wife are in the process of divorcing, they were still married and residing together as of 
the close of the record. The familial relationships with Applicant’s parents-in-law could 
potentially create a risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Additionally, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The 
heightened risk required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low 
standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having 
a family member living under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign 
nation. Terrorist groups operate within Turkey. Further, the government of Turkey has 
been identified as committing human rights violations. In this instance, a potential for 
heightened risk is present. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 8. Two are applicable: 
  
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
 
6 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant demonstrated that there is neither potential for conflict of interest, nor 
risk of foreign influence or exploitation, because his sense of loyalty or obligation to 
Turkey and his in-laws is virtually nonexistent. He has not spoken to his father-in-law in 
more than 4 years, or to his mother-in-law in 17 years. He feels no sense of familial ties 
or obligation to them. His wife does not communicate with them either. Further, he and 
his wife are divorcing, so there is little likelihood that his extremely limited ties to his 
parents-in-law could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. He plans to 
remain in the United States permanently and is proud to be an American. He can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8 
(c) apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature individual who voluntarily immigrated and chose to become 
a U.S. citizen. He is respected by his facility security officer and the president of his 
company. His ties to the U.K are limited and his ties to Turkey are essentially 
nonexistent. His circumstances create little, if any, potential for pressure, coercion, 
 
7 
 
exploitation, or duress. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
