 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01122 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan Bell, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2015, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on October 27, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 
2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 7, 2016, and the hearing was 
 
2 
 
 
convened as scheduled on March 31, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
and 2, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, presented one 
witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, but denied SOR ¶ 1.b.  
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, 
I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He lives with the mother of his two children. He has a 
high school diploma and obtained a technical apprenticeship level-3 certification. He 
has worked for several defense contractors since 2003. Since June 2010, he has 
worked for a defense contractor as an engineering aid. He has no military service, but 
has held a security clearance since 2006.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes using marijuana on more than 
one occasion from June 2008 to at least September 2011, while holding a security 
clearance (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Both allegations allege essentially the same 
conduct, except ¶ 1.b adds the element of holding a security clearance). 
  
 When Applicant was 23 years old, he was involved in a serious car accident. He 
suffered significant injuries from the accident, including injuring his shoulders, back, 
knees, and ribs. All these injuries led to chronic long-term pain. Additionally, Applicant’s 
physically demanding job, involving construction work at U.S. facilities overseas, led to 
several other injuries over the years including a broken rib cage, sprained ankles, and 
broken elbows. He tried to deal with the constant pain through stretching exercises, and 
he used Vicodin, which was prescribed by his physician. In discussing his pain issues 
with his physician, he was told about alternative pain treatment using marijuana since 
he resided in a state that legalized the use of medical marijuana. Applicant obtained a 
medical marijuana prescription in December 2010 that expired in March 2011. 
Sometime around December 2010, he purchased 24 marijuana brownies using his 
prescription.2  
 
 Applicant never used marijuana before 2008, and he may not even have used it 
in 2008. He reported on his 2012 security clearance application (SCA) that he used 
marijuana in 2008 because he was attending a street festival in an overseas location 
and purchased a brownie that he believed was legitimate. Later, the concessionaire 
who sold him the brownie came up to him and asked how he liked the brownie. 
Applicant replied that it was fine, and then was told that it contained marijuana. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 32, 65; GE 1-2. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-37; 41-43; Ans. and attachment. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant informed his security manager the next day about what transpired. No drug 
testing was performed on Applicant to either confirm or rebut the presence of marijuana 
in his system. Applicant testified that if there was marijuana in the brownie purchased at 
the festival, this unknowing use was the only time he used marijuana until he received 
his medical marijuana prescription and bought the two dozen brownies in December 
2010. He never bought any more marijuana, brownies or otherwise, after his December 
2010 purchase.3 
 
 Applicant admitted ingesting marijuana brownies on several occasions between 
December 2010 and September 2011. He used the marijuana to relief his chronic pain. 
He would eat about one fourth of a brownie and that would relieve his pain for an 
extended time. Over this course of time, he ate 20 of the 24 brownies and threw away 
the remaining ones. When he used the marijuana he was never on a job or at an 
overseas location. His job involved working a particular project overseas, coming home 
when it was completed, then being essentially unemployed until the next job came up. 
He only used marijuana during these periods of unemployment between jobs. When he 
started a new job, he was always drug tested and always passed these tests. This was 
verified by the vice president of operations for one of his employers who testified for 
Applicant. Applicant credibly testified that he knew he had a security clearance during 
this time, but mistakenly believed his duty to remain drug free only applied when he was 
working on a U.S. government-sponsored contract. His last use of marijuana was in 
September 2011.4 
 
 Applicant testified that his security clearance interview summary was not 
accurate when it stated that he purchased the 24 brownies in June 2008. That purchase 
occurred in December 2010, as corroborated by the date of his medical marijuana 
prescription. He further testified that he was not given a chance to review his interview 
summary and make any corrections to it. I find Applicant’s testimony more credible than 
a summarized interview, which Applicant was not given a chance to correct for any 
inaccuracies.5 
 
 Applicant has no friends who use marijuana. He manages his chronic pain now 
through regular exercise, a proper diet, and taking care of his body. There is no 
evidence that he was diagnosed as a drug abuser, as drug dependent, or that he has 
been through a drug treatment program.6  
 
 Applicant admitted the full extent of his drug use in his SCA and he also 
described in detail his drug use to a DOD investigator. He offered into evidence a 
urinalysis test that showed negative results for seven drugs including cannabinoid 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 37-41. 
 
4 Tr. at 23, 26, 28, 41, 43-49, 64; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 62; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 59, 67; GE 1-2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
(marijuana). The test was reported on March 16, 2016. Applicant also stated that he 
does not intend to use marijuana in the future as long as it is a federally prohibited 
drug.7  
 
 As stated above, Applicant’s employer’s vice president of operations testified 
(and provided a reference letter) that he worked with Applicant on several contracts 
since 2006 and judged him to be a top performer and completely trustworthy. So much 
so that he asked Applicant to babysit his two young children while they were in a foreign 
country. He completely supports Applicant retaining his security clearance. Applicant 
also presented four other reference letters from supervisors and coworkers who all 
verified Applicant’s professionalism, honesty, and job dedication. None observed him 
having any type of drug problem.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 50; GE 1-2; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 21-29; AE B-F. 
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession. 
 
 Appellant used and possessed marijuana on a number of occasions. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
 
6 
 
 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was relatively infrequent, since he used it during a 
short window from December 2010 to September 2011 (the evidence does not support 
that Applicant used marijuana in June 2008). During his window of use, he ingested 
medical marijuana for the purpose of treating his chronic pain issues. The treatment 
was suggested by his physician and he obtained a prescription for the marijuana. 
Although he held a security clearance when he used marijuana, his use occurred when 
he was between federally contracted jobs. He was under the mistaken believe that his 
duty not to use drugs only applied when he was actively employed on a federal contract. 
He has abstained from all drug use for nearly five years. That abstinence is partially 
corroborated by the drug test offered into evidence. Given the circumstances of his use 
(treatment for chronic pain), the uses happened under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
His change of lifestyle, the negative drug test, and the positive recommendation from 
the supervisors and coworkers all support the conclusion that his past use does not 
affect his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. His 
five years of abstinence is sufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the 
future. AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the Applicant’s 
supportive character evidence and his negative drug test. I also considered Applicant’s 
statement of intent not to use drugs in the future. I also weighed that he used marijuana 
 
7 
 
 
while holding a security clearance. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
