 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01329 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference), and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) because of Applicant’s Iranian 
citizenship, passport, and family ties to Iran. Applicant failed to disclose information 
related to her family members residing in Iran, raising security concerns under Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct.) She failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the 
foreign preference and foreign influence guidelines. She mitigated those raised under 
the personal conduct guideline. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under the guidelines for foreign 
preference, foreign influence, and personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 25, 2015 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on March 10, 2016, and issued a Notice 
of Hearing that same day. The hearing convened on April 7, 2016, as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. She 
offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A into evidence, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 14, 2016.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Iran. She provided 13 supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts 
(HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and Department Counsel’s 
request was granted. (Tr. 16.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the facts alleged in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR. She 
denied the allegation contained in Paragraph 3 the SOR. (Answer.) Those admissions 
are incorporated into these findings.  
 
Applicant is 24 years old and single. In 1992 she was born in Iran. She has dual 
citizenship with the United States and Iran. In 1995 Applicant, her parents, and her 
brother moved to England. They spent eight years there and in 2003 they returned to 
Iran. She completed middle school and one year of high school in Iran. In 2007 she and 
her family moved to the United States. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. 
In June 2014 she graduated from a U.S. university and started a position with a defense 
contractor in July 2014. She attends graduate school. She received high performance 
ratings for 2014 and 2015. (Tr. 17-21.)     
 
Applicant’s mother, father, and brother were born in Iran. All of them have dual 
citizenship with the United States. Her father attended college in the United States in 
the late 1970s. (Tr. 10; GE 1.) Applicant’s parents and brother have resided in the 
United States since 2007. They work in the United States. Some of her mother’s aunts 
and uncles are citizens and residents of the United States. (Tr. 22.)  
 
Applicant’s maternal grandparents are citizens and residents of Iran. Her paternal 
grandfather is a citizen and resident of Iran. Her mother’s siblings are resident citizens 
of Iran. Her father’s siblings are resident citizens of Iran. She has cousins who are 
resident citizens of Iran. None of her relatives work for the Iranian government. (GE 2.)  
 
Applicant said that she has not spoken to her paternal grandfather for two years. 
The last time she spoke to her maternal grandparents was during the holidays in 2015, 
when she visited her parents and they spoke to her grandparents by telephone. She 
said she no longer has ongoing contact with her maternal aunts, uncles, or cousins in 
Iran unless her parents call them while she is home. She uses Facebook to follow some 
cousins’ activities. At the time of her interview in September 2014, Applicant stated that 
she was speaking to her relatives more frequently because she was living at home with 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
her parents. Her maternal grandparents visited her family in the United States in 2013. 
She maintains contact with one Iranian friend. (Tr. 26-31; GE 2.) Her parents are aware 
that her employer is sponsoring her for a security clearance, but not her family in Iran. 
Applicant’s Facebook profile lists her position with a defense contractor. (Tr. 39.)  
 
Applicant had an Iranian passport that was issued in June 2007 and expired in 
June 2012. Applicant used that passport to visit Iran in September 2009, July 2011, and 
September 2011. She stayed with family members during those visits. (Tr. 24; GE 2.) 
Her parents renewed that passport for her after it expired, and she provided them a 
photo for the renewal. The new passport was issued in August 2014 and expires in 
August 2019. She said her parents have possession of the passport. She is willing to 
surrender it. She does not intend to use it. (Tr. 25-26, 33; GE 2.) 
 
During a September 2014 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
said that she maintained her Iranian passport so she could visit her family in Iran 
because Iran does not honor U.S. passports. She told the investigator that she is willing 
to relinquish it and her Iranian citizenship. (GE 2.)  
 
When she completed the August 2014 SF-86, Applicant did not disclose in 
Section 19 her foreign contacts or relatives in Iran, viz., her grandparents, aunts, uncles, 
cousins, or friends. During her September 2014 interview, she stated that she did not 
disclose those people because she misread the question and thought she did not need 
to list them because they were not affiliated with a foreign government. (GE 2.) She 
testified that she misunderstood the question or definition of a foreign contact. She 
thought a foreign contact meant someone associated with the Iranian government. (Tr. 
28-29.) She denied that she deliberately attempted to mislead the government and said 
it was a mistake due to “misreading” the question. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant submitted 12 letters of recommendation from supervisors, work 
colleagues, and academic references. All of them attest to her trustworthiness, 
character, and achievements. Several authors strongly assert that she has the ethics 
and integrity to hold a security clearance. (AE A.)   
 
Applicant’s boyfriend testified. He has known her for two years. He said she is an 
honest person and successful employee. (Tr. 37-38.) 
 
Iran 
Iran is a theocratic Islamic republic dominated by Shia Muslim clergy, with 
ultimate political authority vested in a learned religious scholar. Current U.S. concerns 
about Iran are based on its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of 
mass destruction; support for and involvement in international terrorism; support for 
violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its human rights abuses, 
including summary executions, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and restrictions on 
civil liberties. Iran has provided guidance, training, and weapons to Shia political and 
militant groups in Iraq. It also provides encouragement, training, funding, and weapons 
to anti-Israeli terrorist groups in its efforts to undermine the Arab-Israeli peace process. 
Iran’s intelligence operations against the United States, including cyber-intelligence 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
capabilities, have dramatically increased in depth and complexity during the past few 
years. Iran has aggressive programs for collecting U.S. dual-use technologies and 
advanced materials development, especially in the area of a nanotechnology.  
 
The current government of Iran is hostile to the United States. The United States 
has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism. The United States broke diplomatic 
relations with Iran in April 1980, prohibits most trade with Iran, and uses multilateral 
sanctions and diplomatic pressure to contain the threats posed by Iran. Iran does not 
recognize dual citizenship. Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely 
Iranian citizens by the Iranian authorities, and they are subject to surveillance, search, 
harassment, arrest, and imprisonment while traveling or residing in Iran. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
Applicant was born in Iran and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. She 
holds dual citizenship with both countries. Based on her Iranian citizenship, she was 
able to renew her Iranian passport in 2014.1 It expires in 2019. Her previous Iranian 
passport was issued in June 2007 and expired in June 2012. After leaving Iran in 2007 
to reside fulltime in the United States, she used her Iranian passport to travel to Iran in 
September 2009, July 2011, and September 2011. The evidence raises the above 
disqualifying conditions and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concern.  
 
                                            
1 Although Applicant stated that her parents renewed her Iranian passport in 2014, she was an adult at 
that time and was responsible for the renewal and consequences of possessing said foreign passport in 
terms of determining eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 11 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
  Applicant’s dual citizenship with Iran is based on her birth there and her parents’ 
dual citizenship with the country. AG ¶ 11(a) provides some mitigation. Applicant 
expressed a willingness to renounce her Iranian citizenship, but has not taken official 
steps to do so. AG ¶ 11(b) provides minimal mitigation. As an adult, she exercised a 
right of Iranian citizenship by using her foreign passport from 2009 through 2011 to 
travel to Iran, after becoming a U.S. citizen. She subsequently renewed her Iranian 
passport in 2014. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 11(c). 
Although Applicant stated that she would relinquish her Iranian passport in order to 
obtain a security clearance, she has not destroyed or surrendered it to the appropriate 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated the passport. AG ¶ 11(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns under this guideline are set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Iran’s hostility to the United States places a 
“very heavy burden of persuasion” on Applicant to demonstrate that her immediate 
family members in Iran do not pose a security risk, and she will not be placed in a 
position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and family 
members.3  
 
Applicant’s grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, and friends are resident 
citizens of Iran. After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant visited her family once in 2009 
and twice in 2011. Her family’s presence in that country, which consistently engages in 
espionage and terrorism against the United States, raises a security concern and 
generates a heightened risk of exploitation, pressure or coercion of Applicant. Those 
circumstances could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between her 
family members residing in Iran and the United States, in the event intelligence 
operatives learned of Applicant’s position. The Government met its burden of production 
by raising the above disqualifying conditions and shifts the burden to Applicant to prove 
mitigation. 
 
  Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the security 
concerns raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
                                            
2The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005). 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) has limited applicability. From the time Applicant left Iran in 2007 until 
sometime in 2014 when she moved out of her parents home, Applicant maintained 
ongoing contact with grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins, and a friend, who are 
citizens and residents of Iran. She continues to have some contact with those family 
members when she visits her parents, who are dual citizens of Iran and the United 
States. While her connections to family members and a friend in Iran are positive 
character traits, for security clearance purposes those connections negate the 
possibility of full mitigation under this mitigating condition. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her 
relationships with her relatives who are Iranian resident citizens] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established some connections to the United States. In 2007 she immigrated to the 
United States from Iran with her immediate family members and became a U.S. citizen 
in 2008. She graduated from a U.S. university and obtained a position with a defense 
contractor in 2014. She has gained the trust and admiration of supervisors, colleagues, 
and friends since her arrival in the United States in 2007. 
 
From 2007 until at least 2014, Applicant maintained ongoing communications 
with her Iranian family members. Since moving out of her parent’s home in 2014, she 
asserted that she has less interaction with her family in Iran. The evidence establishes 
some mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c).  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose her Iranian family members and friends in response to a question on her 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
September 2014 SF 86. The Government contended that that failure to disclose 
constituted a potential disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that she did not disclose information about her extended 
family residing in Iran, but denied that she intentionally attempted to mislead the 
Government. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, 
the Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred.4 Applicant’s assertion that she did not 
intentionally fail to disclose relatives living in Iran is credible. She said she misread the 
question and made a mistake. After listening to Applicant’s testimony, observing her 
demeanor, and reviewing her letters of recommendations about her honesty and 
character, I find that her explanations for failing to disclose specific information, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a, are adequate and credible. SOR ¶ 3.a is found in her favor. As a 
consequence, a discussion of the applicability of mitigating conditions is not warranted.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case 
No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).  
 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was a candid and 
credible witness. She submitted many impressive recommendations from people who 
have worked with her or observed her conduct and character for many years. She 
graduated from a U.S. university and has successfully worked for a defense contractor 
for two years. Her immediate family resides and works in the United States. These are 
factors in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. 
 
  However, the factors that weigh against granting Applicant a security clearance 
outweigh the above facts. Applicant spent some of her formative years in Iran, and 
attended school there. She maintains dual citizenship with Iran, a country that 
consistently expresses hostility against the United States. She used her Iranian 
passport to travel to Iran once in 2009 and twice in 2011 because the country does not 
recognize dual citizenship for a person born in Iran. She renewed her Iranian passport 
in 2014. While her parents and brother are citizens and residents of the United States, 
she has many familial connections to Iran, which are not easily mitigated.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under the guidelines for 
foreign preference, foreign influence, and personal conduct, and evaluating the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns raised under the guideline for personal conduct, but not those raised under 
the guidelines for foreign preference and foreign influence. Accordingly, she failed to 
carry her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:        Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:                 Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:        For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
