 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01702 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by the accumulation of delinquent 
debt. He started addressing and resolving his delinquent debts in 2010, about two years 
before submitting his recent security clearance application. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 On October 20, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
to establish his continued eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On May 2, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice scheduling the hearing for June 9, 2016.2 The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Applicant testified and I admitted, without objection, Government exhibits 
(Gx.) 1 – 7 and Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 6. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received 
by DOHA on June 20, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his mid-fifties. He served in the U.S. military from 1979 to 1985. 
He married his wife in 1987. He has a master’s degree in electrical engineering and has 
been with his current employer since 1996. Currently, he is a senior systems engineer, 
earning an annual salary of approximately $110,000. He has received several awards 
and commendations for his work. (Tr. 25-29, 55; Ax. 2 – 4) Applicant’s recent 
performance appraisal reflects he exceeds expectations and his supervisor wrote that:  
 
[Applicant] can always be counted on to deliver timely and thorough work. 
. . .  [He] is respected by co-workers as someone who works unselfishly 
and always meets team’s goals. [He] is a responsible team member who 
takes responsibility for his work. He always accepts accountability for his 
decisions. (Ax. 1 at 8)  
 
 Applicant, in his off time, has been engaged in online investment trading. He 
caps his investment trading to $5,000 to $10,000. He had significant gains from his 
online trading in 2008, 2009, and 2011. He was unable to pay the resulting tax liability 
because he was using his excess income to assist a niece, who was a single mother 
raising a child on her own. Also, he was using his excess income to pay increased real 
estate taxes resulting from an improperly conducted assessment that inflated the 
property value of his home.  
 
 Applicant filed his 2008 and 2009 tax returns in November 2010. At hearing, 
Applicant voluntarily provided his IRS account transcripts, which show that he owed 
approximately $24,500 in taxes for both years and withheld about $17,000 in taxes from 
his wages. He entered into an installment agreement with the IRS and has been paying 
$350 on a consistent monthly basis since January 2011. He has satisfied all past-due 
amounts owed for the 2008 tax year and, as of March 2016, owed approximately $3,600 
for the 2009 tax year.  
 
 Applicant filed his 2011 tax year tax return in April 2014. He owed about $14,000 
in taxes and had approximately $8,900 in taxes deducted from his wages. He paid the 
remaining nearly $8,000 in taxes and penalties in May 2014. Applicant’s IRS account 
transcripts reveal that he has timely filed his tax returns for tax years 2012 – 2014. He 
has voluntarily deducted more in taxes from his wages to satisfy his past-due taxes. He 
voluntarily disclosed his past tax problems on his current security clearance application 
                                                          
2 Prehearing scheduling correspondence, notice of hearing, and case management order were marked 
and attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 
 
 
(SCA), which he submitted in November 2012. Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay 
his 2008, 2009, 2011 taxes are listed in SOR 1.a – 1.c. (Tr. 29-40, 50-58; Gx. 1; Ax. 6)3 
 
 Applicant, while financially assisting his niece and paying the inflated real estate 
taxes, amassed some delinquent consumer-related debt. He disclosed these debts on 
his SCA, to include a delinquent $16,000 credit card account referenced in SOR 1.d. He 
satisfied the $16,000 debt in 2011. He testified that he used the excess income he 
gained from his online trading to pay his other debts, which contributed to his inability to 
pay his resulting tax liability. He then waited to file his 2011 tax year tax return until he 
had saved up enough money to pay his taxes. His current credit report does not reflect 
any delinquent accounts. (Tr. 24-25, 38-40; Gx. 6)4 
 
 Applicant succeeded in appealing the inflated property tax assessment. He 
estimates that he paid about $500 more a month in property taxes for about 3 years 
before successfully overturning the assessment in about late 2011 or early 2012. He 
stopped financially supporting his niece in late 2015, early 2016. He has not held a 
credit card for many years and only uses a debit card for purchases. He has set aside a 
small pool of money to offset any tax liability resulting from any potential gains he may 
realize through his online trading. (Tr. 45-50)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
                                                          
3 See also, Tr. 16-17 (Department Counsel, in opening statement, concedes that Applicant filed his 2008 
and 2009 tax returns in November 2010 and has been paying on consistent monthly basis since 2011. 
Department Counsel also conceded that Applicant filed and paid his 2011 taxes in early 2014.) 
 
4 See also, Tr. 17 (Department Counsel, in opening statement, concedes that Applicant paid the $16,000 
debt referenced in SOR 1.d in either August or October 2011.) 
 
4 
 
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The financial considerations security concern is not limited to a consideration of 
whether an individual with financial problems might be tempted to compromise 
classified information or engage in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses 
the extent to which an individual’s delinquent debts cast doubt upon their judgment, self-
control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.5 
 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt implicates the financial 
considerations security concern. The record evidence also raises the disqualifying 
conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), 
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s failure to timely file his 2008, 2009, and 2011 taxes 
raises the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” Due to 
his past failure to timely file and pay his taxes, Applicant bears a heavy burden in 
mitigating the financial considerations security concern.6  
 
 The guideline lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. The 
following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection process. Instead, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles their financial obligations to 
make a predictive judgment about how they may handle their security obligations.7 By 
incurring a sizeable amount of delinquent debt, Applicant placed his continued eligibility 
for a security clearance in jeopardy. Furthermore, Applicant’s failure to timely file and 
pay his taxes raises heightened security concerns about his judgment and ability to 
abide by rules and regulations, requiring a closer examination regarding the 
circumstances giving rise to the tax issues and his response to it. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were, in part, due to an inflated property tax 
assessment. He used a portion of his monetary gain from his online investment trading 
to pay his inflated property taxes, but was then unable to pay the income taxes on those 
gains. Applicant did not simply sit back and do nothing until his federal tax situation 
became a security concern. Instead, in 2010, about two years before submitting his 
                                                          
6 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues, as follows:  “A security clearance represents an 
obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor 
other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013); ISCR Case No. 01-25941 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004).  
 
6 
 
 
SCA and initiating the current security clearance review, Applicant took action to 
address and resolve his delinquent debt. He filed his overdue tax returns and entered 
into an installment agreement with the IRS to pay his outstanding tax obligation. In 
2011, Applicant paid other past-due debts, to include a sizeable credit card debt 
referenced in SOR 1.d. However, due to Applicant’s failure to timely file and pay his 
income taxes that were due in April 2012, I cannot extend full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
and 20(b). 
 
 Applicant did establish the full applicability of AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d). In April 
2014, or over a year before the SOR was issued, Applicant filed his overdue tax return 
tor tax year 2011 and satisfied the taxes and associated penalties. From January 2011 
to the present day, he paid on a consistently monthly basis his outstanding tax liability 
per the monetary terms of the IRS installment agreement. He timely filed his past three 
federal income tax returns and paid the taxes owed. Applicant’s demonstrated track 
record of responsibly addressing and resolving financial issues, which when coupled 
with the whole-person factors8 present in this case, including nearly three decades of 
holding a security clearance without issue, provide a reasonable degree of confidence 
that he will continue to responsibly handle his financial and security obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s past tax issues were not due to procrastination,9 indifference or 
intentional refusal to comply with tax laws.10 Instead, his past tax issues were, in part, 
due to matters beyond his control. He filed his overdue federal tax returns and either 
paid or is paying his federal tax debt. Applicant’s resolution of the federal tax issue is 
but one of several inter-related favorable factors that lead me to conclude he mitigated 
the serious security concerns arising from his past financial circumstances.11 Notably, I 
considered the timing of when Applicant took action to resolve his financial problems 
and his demonstrated track record of responsibly addressing his debts. Accordingly, I 
find that Applicant carried his heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating 
security concerns raised by his past financial circumstances and establishing his 
continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
8 See, AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
9 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00221 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016).  
 
10 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999).  
 
11 Contrast with, ISCR Case No. 14-00221 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016), where Board held that the 
judge committed reversible error by limiting analysis to the resolution of the tax issues and, in doing so, 
“failed to assess adequately the overriding issues of Applicant’s lack of judgment and his history of failing 
to abide by rules and regulations.”  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
