 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01623 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 3, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On September 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
 
2 
 
 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted.  
 
On November 12, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On March 7, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 23, 2016, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 1, 2016, 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for April 21, 2016. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through GE 4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
did not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE K, which 
were received into evidence without objection. I held the record open until May 20, 
2016, to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted AE L through AE Q, which were received into evidence without 
objection. I subsequently reopened the record on July 25, 2016, and closed it on July 
27, 2016. Applicant submitted AE R and AE S, which were received into evidence 
without objection. On April 29, 2015, DOHA received the transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old executive project manager engineer employed by a 
large company since February 1999. He transferred to the federal sector in 2012, 
which requires him to have a secret security clearance. GE 1; Tr. 12-13, 16)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1973. He was awarded a 
bachelor of science degree in engineering in June 1978, and was awarded a master of 
science degree in systems technology with a subcategory in space systems 
operations in September 1988. Applicant also received a certificate of completion in 
December 1993 after completing a graduate-level course in program management. 
(SOR answer; GE 1; AE E, AE F; Tr. 13, 17) 
 
Applicant was previously married from June 1978 to December 2001, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He has two adult daughters from that marriage. Applicant 
remarried in January 2002. He served in the U.S. Army from June 1978 to January 
1999 and retired as a lieutenant colonel (pay grade O-5) with an honorable discharge. 
His spouse is employed full-time as owner and operator of a sewing business. (GE 1; 
Tr. 13-16, 46) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists ten debts consisting of seven charged-off accounts and 
three past-due accounts totaling $537,546. Of that amount $453,888 was the past-due 
amount on two homes he owned – one home he purchased for his parents and the 
other home as his primary residence. Four of the SOR debts are credit card accounts 
from the same creditor and two of the four debts are duplicates reducing the total 
number of debts to nine.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.j)  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the financial fallout following the 
passing of his father, his wife losing her job, and the downturn in the housing market. 
Applicant purchased a home in State A in 2006 for his parents, who were paying rent 
to him. In 2008, his father passed away. His father’s estate did not have sufficient 
funds to cover the costs of maintaining the home in State A prompting his mother to 
move in with Applicant and his wife in State B. Applicant attempted to rent or sell his 
parents’ home in State A with no success. (SOR answer; Tr. 19-22, 32-31, 44, 49-50, 
63) 
 
Applicant and his wife were employed by the same company and purchased a 
home in 2002 in State B. In 2010, Applicant’s wife was laid off from her job that she 
had held for 20 years. After Applicant’s wife was laid off, they were unable to afford 
two homes in States A and B on Applicant’s income alone. Despite their best efforts to 
rent or sell the two homes, they were unable to do so as a result of the collapse in the 
housing market. (Tr. 19-22, 31-32, 44-46, 49-50, 63) 
 
Applicant used lines of credit from his credit cards to maintain his two homes to 
shore up the income gap created by his wife’s lay off. When this became 
unsustainable in 2012, Applicant sought professional help from a credit counseling 
firm and later with a local attorney. He was counseled to eliminate the largest debts 
first and to avoid liquidating retirement accounts to pay off debts. Applicant declined to 
file bankruptcy stating that he had an obligation to pay debts he had incurred. And 
lastly, in January 2011, Applicant and his wife moved to State C to benefit from a 
lower cost of living. Applicant continued his company employment transferring to a 
federal sector position. After moving to State C, Applicant’s wife worked until mid-2012 
as a contract project manager until she opened up her sewing business. (Tr. 21-23, 
37-38, 46-48)  
 
The following describes Applicant’s debts and their current status.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Past-due mortgage account of $67,936 with a total loan balance of 
$238,786. This mortgage was on Applicant’s home in State B. He had a 12-year 
history of on-time payments. Applicant was in negotiation with the lender to restructure 
the mortgage; however, the lender chose to discontinue restructuring discussions. 
This debt was completely satisfied through a consent judgment. Debt resolved. (SOR 
answer; Tr. 18-24, 50, 64; AE K, AE L, AE M) 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Charged-off credit card debt for $20,312. Applicant used his line of 
credit to maintain one or both of his homes. Applicant had a 14-year history of on-time 
payments with the account until September 2012. Although this debt is statute barred, 
Applicant intends to pay it when he has the funds available. Debt not resolved. (SOR 
answer; Tr. 25-26, 64) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Charged-off credit card debt for $15,606. Applicant used his line of 
credit to maintain one or both of his homes. In May 2014, Applicant and the creditor 
negotiated a settlement agreement after the creditor filed suit. The parties agreed that 
Applicant would pay an initial lump sum of $3,000 and make $250 monthly payments 
until debt is paid off. Debt being resolved. (SOR answer; Tr. 26-27, 57-58, 64-65; AE 
A, AE B, AE N, AE S) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Charged-off credit card debt for $12,961. Applicant used his line of 
credit to maintain one or both of his homes. He had an 18-year history of on-time 
payments until August 2012. Although this debt is statute barred, Applicant intends to 
pay this debt when he has the funds available. Debt not resolved.  (SOR answer; Tr. 
27-28, 38, 52-57, 65) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Charged-off credit card debt for $11,448. Applicant used his line of 
credit to maintain one or both of his homes. He had a 10-year history of on-time 
payments until August 2012. Applicant received an Internal Revenue Service Form 
1099-C from the creditor cancelling the debt that he claimed when filing his income tax 
return. Debt resolved. (SOR answer; Tr. 28-29, 52-57, 65-66; AE P, AE S) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Charged-off credit card debt for $10,569. Applicant used his line of 
credit to maintain one or both of his homes. He had a 23-year history of on-time 
payments until September 2012. Although this debt is statute barred, Applicant 
intends to pay this debt when he has the funds available. Debt not resolved. (Tr. 29-
30, 52-57, 66; AE S) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g - Past-due mortgage account for $10,737 with a total loan balance 
of $182,312. This is the mortgage on Applicant’s home in State A that he purchased 
for his parents. Applicant attempted to seek a loan modification as well as rent this 
home until the home went into foreclosure in 2013. The loan was completely satisfied 
through the foreclosure process. Debt resolved. (SOR answer; Tr. 30-33, 44, 50-51, 
66) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Charged-off second mortgage account for $32,782 for Applicant’s 
home in State B. This debt was completely satisfied through a consent judgment. 
Debt resolved. (Tr. 33-34, 66; AE Q, AE L, AE R, AE S) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – Past-due credit card debt for $1,528 with a total balance of 
$10,399. This is a duplicate of the account listed in SOR ¶ 1.f. The debts listed in SOR 
¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.i are the same creditor. Duplicate account. (SOR answer; Tr. 
34-35, 52-57; AE S) 
 
5 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j – Charged-off credit card debt for $2,371. The creditor filed suit and 
the case was dismissed. It no longer appears on Applicant’s credit report. Debt 
resolved. (SOR answer; Tr. 35-36, 66-68; AE O, AE S) 
 
Following the financial advice he received and as noted above, Applicant 
tackled his larger debts first and plans to pay off his smaller debts as funds become 
available. He plans to pay his smaller debts off when he receives his annual bonus 
“which is typically $15,000 a year.” As noted, he was counseled to keep his retirement 
accounts in reserve. (Tr. 30, 38-41) Applicant’s monthly budget reflects a combined 
net monthly income of $14,652, with a net remainder of $1,589. His budget reflects 
that he is leading a measured and responsible lifestyle. Applicant’s net worth is 
$861,289. (Tr. 38-40, 58-63; AE H, AE I) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
During Applicant’s 21 years of active duty, he served in the infantry his first 10 
years and after post-graduate school, he served in the acquisition field specializing in 
purchasing and developing weapons systems. While in the Army, Applicant initially 
held a confidential or secret security clearance which was later upgraded to a top 
secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information 
(TS/SCI). He is very familiar with security clearances and security procedures and 
during the 21 years he held a clearance, he never had a security violation. (Tr. 12, 16-
18, 41, 43) Included among Applicant’s two personal military awards are the Defense 
Meritorious Service Medal and the Meritorious Service Medal. (SOR answer; AE E, 
AE J) 
 
Applicant was leading a project for his company from the World Trade Center 
on September 11, 2001, and was in the North Tower when the first plane hit. He led 
his team to safety, but in the process of ensuring his entire team was evacuated, he 
was exposed to the toxic debris cloud. He was subsequently diagnosed with the early 
onset of Parkinson’s disease in 2009 and in 2011 was diagnosed with leukemia. 
Applicant described his 9/11 experience as “more traumatic than anything that 
happened in my 20 years of military career.” He gives presentations on his 9/11 
experience and discusses the attack and aftermath of the attack two to four times a 
year in the local community. (SOR answer; Tr. 42-43; AE G, AE J)  
 
 After 9/11, Applicant continued his career with his company successfully 
leading larger and more complex projects. In 2013, he transferred to his company’s 
federal sector where he is able to utilize his experience in commercial project delivery 
and his expertise in defense systems acquisitions. (SOR answer) In 2013, Applicant’s 
project was recognized by his company as their Distinguished Project of the Year. His 
company certified him as an executive project manager and designated him as a 
thought leader in managing programs and projects. Applicant is an internationally 
certified project management professional and he was also certified in program 
management by the Department of Defense. (SOR answer; AE F, AE G, AE J) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 In his personal life, Applicant holds leadership positions in his church and 
provides regular sermons and other presentations of faith, leadership, and service. He 
spends his discretionary free time with his wife, daughters, and grandchildren. (SOR 
answer) Applicant submitted seven reference letters that include company managers, 
co-workers, a former college classmate, and long-time friends. The collective sense of 
these letters convincingly relay that Applicant is hard working, trustworthy, and an 
individual who contributes to the national defense and his community. (SOR answer; 
Tr. 41-42; AE G, AE J) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s wife lost her job that she 
had held for 20 years when she was laid off in 2010. When Applicant’s father passed 
away in 2008, his mother was unable to afford rent payments to Applicant. Applicant 
found himself in an untenable situation being the owner of two homes that he could 
not afford with his available income. When Applicant tried to sell or rent his parents’ 
home in State A and his home in State B, his timing occurred at the peak of the 
housing market downturn.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are fully applicable. Applicant sought financial 
counseling from a credit counseling firm as well as from an attorney and followed the 
advice provided. Although one can debate the merits of paying the largest bills first 
before paying the lowest bills, Applicant followed the professional advice he received. 
Applicant has made significant progress in addressing the financial concerns raised by 
resolving the mortgages on his two homes, by resolving several of his smaller debts, 
and is committed to paying the smaller debts even though statute barred.1  During this 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
 
9 
 
 
process, he attempted to engage his creditors with mixed results. At the onset of these 
proceedings, the SOR alleged ten debts totaling $537,546. Applicant has mitigated 
seven of those debts amounting to $493,704, leaving three unmitigated debts totaling 
$43,842. AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s 21 years of honorable service in the Army and his current 
employment with a defense contractor weighs heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding 
citizen and a productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, 
lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep her debts current. 
 
10 
 
 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant has resolved his two largest debts, which are his two mortgages.  
Due to circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite his 
financial setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is on the road to a full 
financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his reference letters, 
and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
