                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 10-01519 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 24, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on June 9, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 23, 
2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant did not object and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
they were admitted into evidence. The Government also offered a demonstrative exhibit 
that was marked as Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant testified on her own behalf and offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted into evidence without objections. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 30, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated in 
the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She married in 1989. Her husband is an officer in the 
Navy. They have two children together, and she has a stepson. Applicant has worked 
for her current employer, a federal contractor, since October 2008. She earned an 
associate’s degree in 2005 and has one course to complete for her bachelor’s degree. 
She enrolled in the class for July 2011.1  
 
 Applicant and her husband separated in about 2005. He received transfer orders 
to another state, and their son accompanied him to attend school. Her husband 
purchased a house in his own name at the new location. In January 2006, he asked his 
wife to move to the state with him, so they could work on their marriage. At the time, she 
had been employed by a different federal contractor since 2001. She was told by the 
contractor that they would transfer her job to the new state. She sold her house and 
made about $90,000 to $100,000 profit. She purchased a new house in her own name 
when she moved to the new state. She used $37,000 as a down payment on the house. 
The house her husband purchased was too small for their family. He converted his 
house into a rental property and moved in with her. Her mortgage was about $1,400 a 
month. From March 2006 to June 2007, her husband lived with her until he received 
new orders. He transferred and became a geographical bachelor. Applicant did not 
move with him. She paid her mortgage and bills with the profit she made from the sale 
of her residence. She also gave her son $10,000 to attend college.2  
 
 During this time, Applicant anticipated her job would be transferred. It never 
happened. She worked from January 2006 to August 2007 for a mail-order cosmetic 
company. She estimated she earned between $20,000 and $25,000. She also worked 
as a substitute teacher for the 2007 to 2008 school year, and she estimated her 
cumulative income was about $35,000. Applicant admitted she became depressed over 
her marital situation and was irresponsible with her spending habits, often spending 
frivolously. In about July 2007, she could no longer afford to pay her mortgage. In 
November 2007, the house was foreclosed. Applicant had two mortgages on the house. 
The remaining mortgage debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f ($49,570). When the house was 
foreclosed, Applicant moved into her husband’s house which had been previously 
1 Tr. 42-44. 
 
2 Tr. 43-62. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
rented. She paid $500 a month rent plus utilities. She stayed there for 10 months. Her 
daughter lived with her.3  
 
 Applicant was hired by her current employer in October 2008, and her initial 
salary was $61,000. Her present salary is $64,000. Applicant rents her residence, and 
her daughter lives with her. Her daughter recently completed school and has been 
working for about a month. She is responsible for paying the cable bill.4  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that she had many delinquent debts, and she was 
irresponsible in handling them. Early in 2010, before she received the SOR, she made a 
commitment to set an example for her children and act responsibly by resolving all of 
her debts. She made a list and started to make arrangements to pay her delinquent 
debts. She began by paying the smaller debts, and when one was satisfied she started 
paying the next. She estimated she had about 30 delinquent debts, and she has paid 
27, including some listed on the SOR.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,920) is a tax lien from State A for tax year 2005. 
Applicant disputed the debt with State A because she did not live there during 2005. 
She moved to State A in January 2006. She did not file her state income tax returns in 
State B, where she lived in 2005, because she mistakenly filed her federal tax returns 
twice, thinking she filed her state income tax returns. She does not know why State A 
imposed a tax lien on her. Applicant admitted that she ignored the tax notices from 
State A because she did live there in 2005. She contacted the State A tax office in 2009 
and was advised that she was required to file in the state where she was living during 
2005. In April and October 2010, Applicant contacted two national tax preparer 
companies and was told because her failure to file her state income tax returns was 
more than five year old, it was too late to file. Later she contacted State B’s tax office 
and was told she still could file, but she would not be eligible to receive a refund, if she 
was entitled, because of the delay. She did not immediately file her state income tax 
returns for State B because she did not have the money at the time to pay it, and she 
did not want to start the process until she could pay. She filed her 2005 State B income 
tax returns in May 2011 and owes $1,943. She intends to negotiate a payment plan with 
State B after she receives correspondence from them. She is now in a better financial 
situation to repay this debt. She contacted State B again in June 2011 and was advised 
they received her tax return, and now she must wait for its processing to be completed. 
Once the process is completed she will request State A to release the lien.  
 
3 Tr. 44, 46, 51-62, 73-74. 
 
4 Tr. 62-65, 88. 
 
5 Tr. 40-41, 74-81; GE 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($174) was paid in May 2011. This was for a phone bill 
Applicant believed had been paid before she moved to her new residence. She 
provided proof of payment. The debt is resolved.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($712) is a cable bill. Applicant arranged a payment plan 
to pay $100 a month by automatic withdrawal from her account. She mistakenly 
believed she had returned the equipment. She provided proof of the payment 
agreement. The debt is being resolved.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($771) is to a collection company for two bills, but they are 
not combined. Applicant began a payment plan in December 2010 or January 2011. 
She made the final payment for one of the debts within the account on December 26, 
2010, and she settled the remainder of the account in May 2011. Applicant provided 
supporting documents and the debt is paid and is resolved.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,947) is a credit card debt. Applicant has been making 
payments on the debt since early 2010. She made the final payment in May 2011. She 
provided documented proof and the debt is resolved.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($49,570) is the amount owed on the remaining mortgage 
that was foreclosed. Applicant contacted the creditor, who initially did not want to 
discuss a payment plan. She contacted their recovery department a second time and 
explained her financial situation. They agreed to accept $100 a month by automatic 
withdrawal that will go towards the principal of the loan. After Applicant has established 
a consistent payment record they told her they would offer her a lump-sum settlement 
amount. She indicated that the loan company wanted to clear the debt and would be 
willing to work with her. Applicant began making automatic payments in June 2011.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($448) was for service fees for a timeshare she owned 
with her husband. She believed her husband was paying the bill. She found out he was 
not. She made arrangements with the creditor and satisfied the debt. She provided 
documented proof and the debt is resolved.11 
 
 Applicant is committed to not making the same mistake mismanaging her money. 
She is living within her means. She remains married, and her husband does not provide 
6 Tr. 29-31; AE B. 
 
7 Tr. 31-32, 72-73; AE C. 
 
8 Tr. 32, 73; AE D, E. 
 
9 Tr. 37-38; AE F. 
 
10 Tr. 38-40; AE G. 
 
11 Tr. 40; AE H. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
marital support. She provided numerous letters that praise her character, integrity, 
ethics, patriotism, and dedication.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
12 Tr. 82-83; AE I. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ration, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
Applicant accumulated numerous debts that became delinquent and were 
unpaid. She admitted she was spending beyond her means. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant left her job to follow her husband to his new duty station. She had a 
tumultuous marriage, and due to the stresses associated with it she became depressed 
and made poor financial decisions. Before she received the SOR, she made a 
deliberate decision to rectify her financial problems. She methodically has been 
resolving all of her delinquent debts. She is living within her means and actively 
addressing all of her financial issues. I find that she has taken responsibility for her 
finances, and the circumstances that affected her finances are unlikely to recur and do 
not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶ 
23(a) applies. For a period, Applicant was unemployed waiting for her job to transfer, 
which never transpired. She was also underemployed for a period. These conditions 
were beyond her control. Although, she and her husband were separated, she had 
sufficient means at the time to pay her bills. Applicant had the profit from the sale of her 
house and admitted she was not acting responsibly by spending her money wisely 
during this time. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant resolved and paid many of 
her delinquent debts. She has payment plans for the remaining debts. I find she initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay her overdue creditors and has been aggressively resolving 
her debts. I find there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved, and her 
finances are under control. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. Applicant disputed she 
owed a tax debt to State A. She acknowledges she owes a tax debt to State B. She 
provided evidence to show she is resolving the debt. I find AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but others warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant went through a difficult period of her life when she had marital 
problems. She became depressed and did not handle her finances responsibly for a 
period. She made a conscious decision to change her ways and began eliminating her 
delinquent debts. She has methodically paid many of them, and she has payment plans 
for all but one of the remaining debts. She is addressing her tax debt and waiting for the 
process to be completed. She is financially able to repay the debt. Applicant has met 
her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
