                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-05826
           )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 4, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on August 17, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 4).  On June 4, 2013, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on June 14, 2013, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on August 23, 2013.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on August 30, 2013, and he failed to submit a response to DOHA.  The case
was assigned to the Administrative Judge for resolution on October 21, 2013.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 36 years old, and married with two children.  He holds an
Associate’s Degree from a Technical Community College.  He is employed with a
defense contractor as a Quality Control Manager and is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he has engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations that can raise questions about an individuals reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.     
The Applicant admitted the single allegation set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  In 2005, Applicant married a Mexican
citizen who was, and continues to be, in the United States illegally.  They reside
together and have two children who were born in the United States.  Applicant has
worked for his current employer since 2005.
   Applicant’s wife came into the United States in 1994, at the age of seventeen to
escape the crime and poverty in Mexico.  She passed through the border checkpoints in
Tijuana, Mexico without inspection.  Once in the United States she lived with her brother
who is a United States citizen.  She then moved to another state and started working at
a company where she met the Applicant in 1995.  She and the Applicant started dating
in 1997, and eventually married in 2005.  Prior to their wedding, Applicant became
aware that his wife was undocumented.  Following the wedding, he consulted an
attorney regarding her status and learned that in order for his wife to obtain a green
card or visa, she would have to process outside of the country, which would require that
she return to Mexico until her green card was granted.  Although her paperwork could
be done in the United States, she would have to return to Mexico for her interview.
Once her interview was completed, she would have to wait there until her green card
was issued.  Applicant decided not to pursue this process since his wife was pregnant
at the time.  Applicant also believes that the process would be dangerous for her.
Applicant now indicates that he is waiting to see if some laws pass or change that would
allow his wife to adjust her status in the country without having to return to Mexico.
Applicant’s wife remains in the United States in an undocumented status.  (See
Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Government Exhibit 5.)       
3
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(c) Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, and other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and
16.(d) association with persons involved in criminal activity.
Conditions that could mitigate a security concern:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
4
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
 
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of poor personal conduct, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
5
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has displayed questionable judgment and poor personal conduct  (Guideline
E).  The evidence indicates unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the
Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there
is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Under Guideline E disqualifying conditions 16.(c) credible adverse evidence in
several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under
any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information, and 16.(d)
association with persons involved in criminal activity apply.    
Applicant’s spouse has been in the United States illegally since 1994, and she
remains in that status.  Applicant resides with her in the United States knowing that she
is undocumented.  He explained that she could have gone through the process of
obtaining a green card or a visa but the inconvenience was something they chose not to
deal with.  An Applicant who is involved in a relationship with an individual who is in the
United States illegally displays questionable judgment because of his continuing
association with a person involved in criminal activity.  So long as the status of the
Applicant’s wife remains unchanged, there is no mitigating conditions that are
applicable.  
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his personal conduct and the effects it can have on his ability to safeguard
classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not overcome
the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
6
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:       Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.    Against  the Applicant.   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
