 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04325 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 21, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 18, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
21, 2013, scheduling the hearing for April 16, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted documents that were collectively marked AE B through I and 
admitted without objection. Correspondence about the additional exhibits is marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 22, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2008. He served in the U.S. military from 1986 until he 
retired in April 2008 in the pay grade E-7. He has an associate’s degree, and he is 
attending college in pursuit of a bachelor’s degree. He is married with two adult 
children.1 
  
 Applicant has numerous physical ailments, and he received an 80% disability 
rating from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). He has chronic pain. His 
prescribed medication includes daily doses of methadone. Applicant’s wife has had 
substance abuse problems that involve pain medication. In 2008, she was prescribed 
pain medication for dental problems. She took more of her pain medication than was 
prescribed. She also took Applicant’s methadone without his knowledge or permission.2 
 
 Applicant had a security clearance while in the military and through his current 
employer. He was interviewed in conjunction with a polygraph for another government 
agency in November 2008. The other government agency reported that Applicant 
“initially provided no information of adjudicative significance.”3 After further questioning, 
however, he provided the following:”  
 
[Applicant] admitted intentionally puckering his anal sphincter throughout 
the course of the test at the diagnostic questions in an effort to 
overshadow the relevant questions and manipulate the polygraph test. 
[Applicant] manipulated his physiology in this manner to avoid admitting 
he had taken three pills of his wife’s narcotic prescription pain medication 
(Roxcicet) to get high or “not feel anything” in April 2008. [Applicant] was 
in the U.S. [military] and maintained a TOP SECRET security clearance at 
the time. He was aware of the drug policies for the military and for 
maintaining security clearances and chose to use the drug anyway to 
escape. [Applicant] learned of this countermeasure technique through an 
unrecalled temporary coworker at his present work site at [employer].4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21, 40-42, 53; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-31, 37-39; GE 8; AE A, B, E. 
 
3 Tr. at 21, 43-44; GE 2. 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 The other government agency denied Applicant’s access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI). Applicant submitted a letter of appeal to the other 
government agency in February 2009. Applicant denied using his wife’s pain 
medication, and he denied that he used countermeasures to fool the polygraph. He 
admitted that he “took” three of his wife’s pills in April 2008, but he stated that he did not 
ingest the pills. He stated that his wife was abusing her pain medication, so he “took the 
last three [pills] and flushed them down the toilet.”5 He further stated: 
 
At no time did I state that I took my wife’s medication to “get high.” I told 
the tester that I took the medication so that I would not have to think 
about it if even for just a little while, that at the time I was in so much 
physical and emotional pain that I didn’t want to feel anything if even for 
a little while. I had previously informed that that my wife had been 
abusing her medication and had been sneaking mine as well. This 
finally stopped once I took all of her medication and mine and began 
locking them up until I got my wife into see her doctor; I also informed 
that I gave my wife's medication back to her since I could have gotten 
into trouble with the clinic for keeping her medication from her.6 
 
 Applicant also denied employing countermeasures to the polygraph. He stated 
that his numerous physical problems made him uncomfortable and parts of his body 
started twitching during the examination.7 He explained: 
 
At no time did I pucker my sphincter nor did I say I puckered my 
sphincter during the test. I told the tester that I had squeezed my butt 
cheek. It was the only way to describe the twitch I had on the right side 
of my lower body due to the way I was positioned during the test. I 
never stated that I learn[ed] any countermeasure from any co-worker. 
When asked if I had ever spoken with anyone about the polygraph, I 
recalled a conversation that took place sometime prior to my polygraph 
between myself and a fellow co-worker. This conversation in no-way 
had any effect on my performance during the test.8 
 
 Applicant’s letter was considered during his first appeal review of the denial of his 
eligibility for access to SCI. The appeal decision stated that a “management review of 
the polygraph interview summary tape revealed the report was accurate as written.” The 
other government agency issued a final clearance decision statement in December 
2009, denying Applicant’s eligibility for access to SCI.9  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 22-37, 43, 45-48; GE 2; AE E. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-33, 45-52; GE 3. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. at 42, 52-53; GE 2-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2009. He discussed the actions by the other government agency. He denied 
ingesting his wife’s pain medication, and he denied employing countermeasures to the 
polygraph. Based upon the determination by the other government agency, Applicant’s 
DOD security clearance was suspended in February 2010.10 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on May 2010. A signed statement was not 
taken, but the interview was summarized in a report of investigation (ROI). He again 
denied ingesting his wife’s pain medication, and he denied employing countermeasures 
to the polygraph. Applicant’s testimony was consistent with his statement to the other 
government agency in 2009, his comments in the 2010 SF 86, and his 2010 OPM 
interview.11  
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters attesting to his excellent job performance, 
honesty, truthfulness, generosity, compassion, work ethic, leadership, professionalism, 
reliability, dependability, trustworthiness, ethics, judgment, and integrity. He is 
recommended for a security clearance.12 
 
 After considering all the evidence, I find by substantial evidence13 that Applicant 
ingested his wife’s prescription pain medication in April 2008. I also find that he utilized 
countermeasures in November 2008 in an attempt to alter the results of the polygraph. I 
further find that he intentionally provided false information about those matters in his 
statement to the other government agency in 2009, in his 2010 SF 86, during his 2010 
OPM interview, and during his testimony.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 43; GE 1, 5. 
 
11 Tr. at 22-37, 43, 45-52; GE 9; AE E. 
 
12 AE B-D, F-I. 
 
13 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal or 
professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to 
classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. at 518 (1988). “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 
(4th Cir. 1994). 
 
14 Applicant’s false statements to the other government agency in 2009, in his 2010 SF 86, during his 
2010 OPM interview, and during his testimony were not alleged in the SOR, and they will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. They may be considered when assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
 
5 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
While holding a security clearance, Applicant ingested his wife’s prescription pain 
medication in April 2008. He utilized countermeasures in November 2008 in an attempt 
to alter the results of the polygraph. That conduct showed poor judgment and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also created a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges information that is also alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
7 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
During his interview in conjunction with a polygraph for another government 
agency in November 2008, Applicant admitted to taking his wife’s prescription pain 
medication and to utilizing countermeasures in an attempt to alter the results of the 
polygraph. He has been untruthful about those matters ever since. There are no 
applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his honorable military 
service. However, he cannot be trusted to be honest and truthful.  
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
