 
1 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06044 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The vehicle repossession debt 
and 13 charged-off or collection accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
totaling more than $50,000, have been not been resolved. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on September 26, 
2012, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On October 19, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing. On March 20, 2013, I was assigned the case. On April 10, 2013, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Video Teleconference 
Hearing for the hearing convened on April 23, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
(Ex) 1 through 8 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional information. Additional material (Ex. D) was submitted and admitted into the 
record without objection. On April 30, 2013, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR, and his admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old simulation technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2011, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. Applicant served 
in the U.S. Army from April 2001 through April 2005. He served in Iraq from January 
2004 through January 2005. He was a specialist four (E-4) when he received his 
honorable discharge. He receives $527 monthly disability payments from the 
Department of Veterans Affairs. (Tr. 64) His wife is a head start mentor with an annual 
salary of $20,000. (Tr. 24) He has three children ages 8, 10, and 12. (Tr. 17) His annual 
salary is $47,000 to $48,000. (Tr. 24)  
 
Applicant testified and called no other witnesses. He provided two letters of 
character reference. Applicant’s co-worker and supervisor state: Applicant is an 
intelligent, capable, and dedicated individual who handles situations with 
thoughtfulness, integrity, and maturity. (Ex. A and B, Tr. 38) 
  
Applicant has had numerous periods of unemployment. He works on contracts 
and when the contracts end so does his employment. From May 2005 until June 2006, 
he was unemployed. (Ex. 4) During this period, he was a full-time student and collected 
unemployment compensation. (Ex. 4) From January 2007 through November 2008, he 
was unemployed. (Ex. 4) From October 2009 through December 2009, he was 
unemployed when the contract he was working on ended. (Ex. 4) He collected 
unemployment compensation during this period. In January 2010, he was unemployed 
for eight months. In June 2011, he obtained his current job. In October 2011, he 
separated from his wife, and he had to rent his own apartment. (Tr. 46)  
 
Applicant attended community college from August 2005 through August 2007 
and state university from June 2008 through December 2008. (Tr. 22) His schooling 
was partially paid for by the G.I. bill. He incurred a debt to the school (SOR 1.a) when 
he failed to pay the school from the payments he received. 
 
In July 2009, Applicant contacted Consumers Credit Counseling Service (CCCS) 
for assistance with his delinquent accounts. (Ex. 3) As of July 2009, his monthly net 
remainder (monthly income less monthly expenses and debt payment) was $119. (Ex. 
3) When he was out of work, he was unable to make payments to CCCS. (Tr. 40) In 
January 2013, Applicant sought the assistance of a credit service for which he pays 
$216 monthly. (Tr. 55) He has met with the counselor three or four times, and two or 
three times a month Applicant sends correspondence to the counselor that he has 
received from his creditors. (Tr. 57) The credit service counselor said Applicant hoped 
 
3 
 
 
 
to enter into a credit counseling plan to settle his valid debt and hoped to complete the 
process by January 2014. At some future date, Applicant will make $500 monthly 
payments to the credit service, which will be divided and sent to Applicant’s creditors. 
(Tr. 55) Applicant has considered getting a second job and has made application for 
work in several places. (Tr. 70)  
 
In mid-2011, Applicant had $2,600 in unexpected engine repairs. (Tr. 40, 41) In 
early 2012, he experienced $2,200 in transmission repairs to this 2000 car. (Tr. 40) In 
May 2012, he had gallbladder surgery and was out of work, without pay, for two months. 
His portion of the treatment cost, following payment by his insurance provider, was 
$4,000 to $5,000, which he has yet to address. (Tr. 41-42)  
 
In February 2009, Applicant was asked about his delinquent debts during a 
personal subject interview. (Ex. 3) In December 2010 and February 2011, he was asked 
about his delinquent debts in additional personal subject interviews. (Ex. 4)  
 
The SOR alleges a $7,704 collection account (SOR 1.j). This account appears on 
his August 2012 credit bureau report (CBR) as seriously past due. (Ex. 4) There are two 
derogatory entries for May 2012 and August 2012. There is no other record of payment 
on that CBR. The debt is not listed on the earlier CBR reports of January 2009 (Ex.5), 
December 2010 (Ex. 6), October 2011 (Ex. 7), or June 2012. Nor was he asked about it 
during the written interrogatories, the latest of which was dated August 2012.  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s collection accounts, charged-off accounts, and other 
unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a University collection 
account for 2006 student 
loan. 
 
$3,742 Unpaid. In Applicant’s interviews in 
December 2010 and February 2011, he 
stated he planned to pay half of the 
debt, which would reinstate his financial 
aid and allow him to return to school.  
b Medical account debt 
from emergency room 
treatment.  
 
$192 
 
Unpaid. Applicant said he was going to 
make a payment on August 24, 2012. 
(Ex. 4) No payment was made, and he 
has not recently talked with the creditor. 
c Medical account debt 
from emergency room 
treatment. 
$210 
 
Unpaid. Applicant said he was going to 
make a payment on August 24, 2012. 
(Ex. 4) He was asked about this debt 
during his February 2009 personal 
subject interview. (Ex. 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Cable account collection 
account for the last two 
months of service. (Ex. 4) 
 
$452 Unpaid. In his February 2009 statement, 
he said almost immediately after getting 
cable he knew he could not afford it. 
(Ex. 3) In his interviews in December 
2010 and February 2011, he stated he 
planned to pay this debt within the next 
six months. (Ex. 4) 
e Telephone collection 
account. In 2011, he had 
lost his job. 
$995 Unpaid. In August 2012, the creditor 
offered to settle this debt for $746. (Ex. 
4, Tr. 29) He did not recognize this debt 
when asked about it during his February 
2009 personal subject interview. (Ex. 3) 
f Collection account 
possibly used to buy 
college books. (Tr. 31) He 
was laid off from work in 
2008.  
$683 Unpaid. Applicant’s was asked about 
this debt during his December 2010 and 
February 2011 interviews. Since it was 
charged off he did not intend to pay it 
unless he had to. (Ex. 4) He stated he 
was going to pay the balance of this 
debt in August 2012. (Ex. 4) He was 
asked about this debt during his 
February 2009 personal subject 
interview. (Ex. 3) 
g Collection account for the 
debt from a voluntary 
repossession of a Ford 
truck. (Tr. 31)  
$27,878 Unpaid. Applicant had purchased the 
vehicle for $27,000 with $488 monthly 
payments. (Ex. 3, Tr. 31) Two weeks 
after purchasing the vehicle the contract 
he was working on ended. He 
maintained payments for about a year 
before returning the vehicle. (Ex. 4, Tr. 
32) He was asked about this debt during 
his February 2009 personal subject 
interview. (Ex. 3) 
h Credit union charged-off 
account. Applicant’s 
checking account was 
overdrawn by $100. (Tr. 
33) 
$113 Unpaid. Applicant was unsuccessful in 
his attempts to settle this debt with the 
credit union. In his interviews in 
December 2010 and February 2011, he 
stated he planned to pay this debt within 
the next three months. (Ex. 4)  
i Vehicle repossession. 
This vehicle had engine 
problems. (Tr. 34-35) 
$8,050 Unpaid. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
j Collection account. 
 
$7,704 Applicant is unable to recall this 
account. First derogatory information 
was in May 2012. He and his credit 
counselor are investigating this debt. 
(Tr. 35) 
k Credit card collection 
account.  
$662 Unpaid. Applicant had obtained a credit 
card, which he intended to use for 
emergencies. He obtained it just before 
his job ended in 2008. (Tr. 36) He was 
asked about this debt during his 
February 2009 personal subject 
interview. (Ex. 3)  
l Video store collection 
account. 
 
 
$99 
 
Unpaid. Applicant is attempting to have 
this debt and the following two debts 
removed from his CBR because the 
store is no longer in business. Applicant 
was unsure this was his debt. 
m Video store collection 
account. 
$99 
 
See L above. 
n Video store collection 
account. 
$351 See L above. 
 Total debt listed in SOR $50,634  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
 
7 
 
 
 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant has had two vehicle 
repossessions and has numerous delinquent, charged-off or collection accounts, which 
total in excess of $50,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not fully meet any of the financial considerations mitigating 
factors. He would like to pay his delinquent accounts, but is not in a position to do so. In 
early 2013, he sought the services of a credit service. However, in 2009, he contacted 
CCCS and was not able to pay his bills with that service. Although currently working 
with the credit service, he has yet to make monthly payments to the service that will be 
distributed to his creditors.  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. AG & 20(a) does not 
apply. He has experienced periods of unemployment, vehicle repair bills, medical 
surgery, and in 2011 separated from his wife, which were all events beyond his control. 
However, he was first questioned about the majority of these delinquent accounts In 
February 2009. Four years after being interviewed the debts remain. Even the five that 
are less than $200 each have yet to be addressed. Little has been done to address the 
delinquent debts. He has not demonstrated that his financial problems are under 
 
8 
 
 
 
control, or that he has a plan to bring them under control. It is too speculative to 
conclude the credit service will be able to address his delinquent obligations when he 
has yet to make his first payment that would go to paying his creditors. AG & 20 (b) 
does not fully apply.  
 
Under AG & 20(c), there is no evidence Applicant has received current 
counseling or that there is a clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. The counseling he has received to date has had little effect on his 
finances.AG & 20(c) does not fully apply. Under AG & 20(d), he has made no payments 
on the delinquent obligations nor has he reached a repayment plan with his creditors. 
AG & 20(d) does not apply. AG & 20(e) does not apply because he has admitted all of 
the debts except for SOR 1.j, which he and his credit service counselor is investigating.  
 
The video store related to the debts in SOR 1.l ($99), SOR 1.m ($99), and SOR 
1.n ($351) is no longer in business and Applicant has no method to verify these debts or 
establish a repayment arrangement. I find for him as to these three debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
The potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions have been considered in 
light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in 
favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He went through several periods of 
unemployment, he separated from his spouse, and he also underwent surgery. 
However, he was first asked about his delinquent obligations more than four years ago, 
which was prior to his surgery and some of his unemployment.  
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While the periods of unemployment as well as the surgery, were circumstances beyond 
his control, he either had no ability or intention of paying his delinquent accounts. It has 
been more than four years since first questioned about his financial problems. He has 
 
9 
 
 
 
failed to document any payments on his delinquent accounts. His long-standing failure 
to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, 
reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant would like to pay his delinquent debt, 
but he has not. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.n:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
