KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Although the Judge acknowledged Applicant’s unemployment, she concluded
Applicant had done little to address her debts once she became fully employed.  The Judge
concluded Applicant’s claim to have been unaware of the judgments against her lacked
credibility.  The Judge’s findings and conclusions are sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-09060.a1
DATE: 05/16/2013
DATE: May 16, 2013
In Re:
-------------------------------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 11-09060
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
On September 26, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On March 4, 2013,
1See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1: In performing its review, the Appeal Board “shall give deference to the credibility
determinations of the Administrative Judge.”  
after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse determination was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, being discharged in January
2001.  The SOR alleges 22 delinquent accounts, totaling over $50,000, including three judgments
entered against Applicant.  In her answers to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that she was
going to resolve her debts by filing for bankruptcy, in the “middle of 2012.”  Decision at 2.  There
is nothing in the record to show that she followed up on that resolve.  Although she stated that one
of her debts had been resolved through garnishment, she provided no corroboration.  In completing
her application, Applicant denied having any judgments against her within the previous seven years.
She also denied having any debts delinquent for more than 180 days.  These denials were false.  The
Judge cited to evidence regarding collection notices, etc, to demonstrate that Applicant was aware
of the age of her delinquent debts.
The Judge’s Analysis
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstances set forth
security concerns under Guideline F.  She concluded that Applicant had not mitigated those
concerns, in that Applicant had not demonstrated responsible action in regard to her debts, which
the Judge characterized as “recent and ongoing.”  Id. at 5.  Although acknowledging that Applicant
had experienced unemployment, the Judge concluded that Applicant had done little to address her
debts once she became fully employed.  The Judge repeated her finding that Applicant had not
presented evidence of her proposed bankruptcy filing.  
Regarding Guideline E, the Judge explained why she found Applicant’s false answers to
have been deliberate.  She cited to evidence that Applicant had been aware of her delinquent debts
for some time.  She also concluded that Applicant’s claim to have been unaware of the judgments
against her lacked credibility.1  She stated that Applicant’s falsifications were not minor and that she
did not seek to correct them until confronted by the interviewer.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding about the deliberate nature of her omissions.  With
regard to the adverse finding for SOR ¶ 2(b) as it pertains to SOR ¶ 1(w), she  states that she failed
to list her 2001 bankruptcy because it was not within the seven years preceding her application.
Applicant’s argument on this point has merit.  SOR ¶ 2(b) alleged that Applicant omitted several
debts that were over 180 days delinquent, including in a list of these debts Applicant’s bankruptcy
action.  The Judge entered an adverse formal finding on this allegation without addressing the
bankruptcy.  Obviously, a bankruptcy discharge over a decade ago is not an example of a current
delinquent debt.  Applicant did not err in failing to list this discharge action in response to the
question at issue here.  However, the Judge’s finding regarding the deliberate nature of Applicant’s
other omissions was consistent with the record that was before her.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-
07172 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007).  The Judge’s formal finding regarding Applicant’s omission
of her bankruptcy is harmless error.
Applicant cites to record evidence she believes to be favorable to her, for example that she
has a hardship forbearance on her student loans.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the
evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 11-11592 at 2 (Ap. Bd. Aug. 23, 2012).  Applicant
has not rebutted this presumption.  After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge examined
the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)). 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
