 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-03719
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s debts arose from circumstances beyond his control. He is now acting
responsibly to resolve his past-due debts and improve his finances. It is unlikely that his
financial problems will recur. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation, Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information.  On1
November 9, 2012, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guideline  for financial2
considerations (Guideline F).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on February 12, 2013, and I convened a hearing on March 5,
2013. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented one exhibit, which was
admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on March 20, 2013. The record closed on March 29, 2013, after receipt
of Applicant’s post-hearing submission, admitted without objection as Ax. B.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed approximately
$23,922 in past-due debts for seven accounts specified in SOR 1.a - 1.g, all of which
Applicant admitted. (Answer; Tr. 8 - 10) In addition to the facts established by
Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 47 years old and works as a supply technician for a defense
contractor. Applicant is a candidate for an overseas position that requires a security
clearance. He was hired by his current employer in July 2010. After graduating high
school in 1984, Applicant held a variety of jobs before enlisting in the U.S. Army in
November 2007. He was honorably discharged with a 30 percent disability in June
2010. Applicant held a security clearance without incident while in the Army. (Gx. 1; Tr.
10 - 14, 31)
Since 1989, Applicant has been married four times. He married his current wife in
April 2009, and they have adopted twin children, now age four. His previous marriages
all ended in divorce and produced no children. (Gx. 1)
Beginning around 2000, Applicant experienced difficulty properly managing his
personal finances. A debt remaining from a car repossession, alleged at SOR 1.d,
occurred while he was in basic training. Of the remaining debts alleged in the SOR, all
but one, a $1,123 property tax debt alleged at SOR 1.e, arose during Applicant’s
marriage to his second wife between June 2001 and January 2006. The tax debt went
unpaid when he divorced his first wife in 2001. Each thought the other had paid the bill.
(Gx. 2 - 5; Tr. 28 - 30)
For most of his second marriage, Applicant worked as a long-distance truck
driver and was away from home for long periods. He relied on his ex-wife to manage
their household finances and pay their bills on time. However, she opened unnecessary
credit card accounts, wrote bad checks, and did not keep up with their bills. Applicant
 At the time Applicant enlisted, the Army had received permission to raise the maximum age for enlistment3
from 35 to 42. Effective April 1, 2011, the maximum age was returned to 35.
 See Directive. 6.3.4
3
became aware of these problems around the time they divorced and changed jobs to
stay at home. However, this resulted in lower income and he was unable to resolve all
of his debts at that time. (Gx. 2; Tr. 31, 33)
Applicant’s 2007 military enlistment at age 41  was, in part, an effort to find3
steady employment with family benefits and a better income. Unfortunately, he injured
his back in the line of duty and was physically unable to finish his enlistment. Applicant
receives disability payments of about $1,000 each month from the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA). (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 31 - 32)
Applicant disclosed he had unpaid debts when he submitted his Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (eQIP). His eQIP disclosures and his
interviews with Government investigators also indicated that he had resolved other
debts not alleged in the SOR. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 19 - 20, 44 - 45)
Applicant and his current wife have started a debt management plan (DMP) that
will resolve his remaining unpaid debts in four years through monthly payments of $405.
Under the DMP, his payments are automatically deducted from his checking account. A
personal financial statement (PFS) he submitted in August 2012, before he established
the DMP, showed Applicant and his wife had about $870 remaining each month after
expenses. At hearing, Applicant estimated they now have $500 remaining each month
after expenses, including the DMP payment. They are also on a regular budget
established as part of the DMP, and Applicant has not incurred any new unpaid debts
since he divorced his third wife. (Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. B; Tr. 22 - 24, 32, 34 - 39)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government’s information supported the SOR allegations that Applicant
accrued significant delinquent debt between about 2000 and 2009. Until recently, most
of his past-due debts remained unresolved. That information raised a security concern
expressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), information shows an
inability to pay, not an unwillingness.
Most of Applicant’s debts arose because his second wife mismanaged their
finances in his absence between 2001 and 2006. However, available information also
showed that Applicant has been trying to correct his financial problems by taking
employment that did not require him to be away; by enlisting in the Army; and by
enrolling in a DMP. His initial change of employment helped him regain control of his
finances, but did not allow him to earn enough to resolve much of his debt. His Army
enlistment was cut short when he was medically discharged. Since leaving the Army
and marrying his current wife, he has resolved debts that were not alleged in the SOR,
he has not incurred any new delinquencies, and he has embarked on a structured
repayment plan and budgets his money responsibly. He and his wife have a good
monthly cash flow, and they are unlikely to experience a recurrence of the financial
problems documented by the Government’s information.
All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems do not reflect adversely on his judgment or
reliability. His financial problems did not arise from any misconduct, and he has been as
proactive as his circumstances permit in trying to resolve his debts. Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
6
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 47-year-old Army veteran, who
has endeavored for most of the past seven years to resolve his financial problems. I
found his testimony to be credible and straightforward, and all available information
shows he is a mature, responsible adult. His personal and professional circumstances
are now more stable than in the past, and he is likely to successfully complete the debt
resolution efforts currently in place. A fair and commonsense assessment of available
information shows that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
