 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08941 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 25, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 28, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on April 12, 2013, scheduling the hearing for April 30, 2013. The 
hearing was cancelled. The case was reassigned to me on May 8, 2013. DOHA issued 
 
2 
 
another notice of hearing on May 9, 2013, scheduling the hearing for May 14, 2013. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 21, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2010. He served in the U.S. military from 1997 until he 
received an other than honorable (OTH) discharge in 2001. He has a General 
Educational Development (GED) high school equivalency diploma. He married in 1999 
and divorced in 2006. He has a 12-year-old child from that marriage. He married again 
in 2009. He has two stepchildren, ages 14 and 8.1 
  
 Applicant has had financial problems for several years. He had periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. His ex-wife handled the family’s finances, and 
she did not always pay their bills. After they separated and divorced, she did not pay her 
share of the marital debt. His current wife also had periods of unemployment. Applicant 
had to have an operation in 2007, and he had other medical problems. He did not 
always have medical insurance, and when he did have medical insurance, it did not 
cover all his treatment. He was unable to pay all his bills, and a number of debts 
became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 38 delinquent debts. All of the debts appear on at least one 
credit report. The majority of the debts are medical debts. Applicant denied owing the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($366), 1.p ($366), 1.q ($366), 1.hh ($317), and 1.jj ($65). 
He stated that the three debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.p, and 1.q are duplicates of the $366 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. I find that the debts are duplicates. He admitted owing the 
remaining debts. Individual debts are discussed below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a judgment of $1,183 awarded to a car dealer. Applicant 
worked as an automotive technician for the car dealer. He stated that the service 
manager had him work on a car with which he was unfamiliar. He damaged the car 
when he repaired it. The dealership told him to sign an acknowledgment that he would 
pay for the bill to repair the car. He was afraid that he would lose his job if he did not 
sign the acknowledgement. The dealership terminated his employment after he signed 
the document and sued him for the damage to the car. Applicant admits that the court 
ordered the judgment against him in 2007. He feels that he should not have to pay the 
judgment because of the way he was treated by the dealership.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-20, 26, 46-49; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-19, 25-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 30-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $1,962 delinquent debt to a tool company that is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ff. The debt became delinquent in about 2010. Applicant testified 
that he intends to start paying $45 per week on his account.4  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.gg alleges a $560 delinquent debt to a utility company. Applicant stated 
that the debt is for propane used to heat the house where he and his ex-wife lived. The 
account was in his name. He moved out of the house, but he left the account in his 
name because his ex-wife had poor credit. She did not pay the bill. He stated that he 
made a payment of $25 toward the debt, but he did not provide any documentation of 
the payment.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.hh alleges a $317 debt to a cable television company for equipment. 
Applicant credibly testified that he returned the equipment but did not retain a receipt. 
He contacted the cable company, but they would not acknowledge that he returned the 
equipment without a receipt.6 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $1,962 delinquent debt to a cellular telephone 
services company that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ii. He has not made any payments on the 
debt.7 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he paid the $65 debt to an insurance company 
(SOR ¶ 1.jj) at least five years ago. He stated that he does not understand why the 
company listed this delinquent debt on his credit report because he currently has 
insurance through the company. The debt was transferred to a collection company. He 
contacted the insurance company and was told that it did not show the debt. He 
contacted the collection company who told him that he owes the debt.8 
 
 Applicant admitted owing 29 medical debts totaling about $24,000. The debts 
range from $23 to $7,048. Applicant stated that he paid $25 per month to the hospital 
for a period. His finances worsened and he was unable to maintain the payments. He 
stated that after the medical debts went to collection, he contacted the collection 
company, but it wanted more each month than he could afford to pay.9 
 
 Applicant received advice from a financial counselor. His finances remain tight. 
His wife has worked for the same company as Applicant for the last 18 months. 
Applicant stated that he and his wife “make enough money to basically take care of 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
5 Tr. at 36-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
6 Tr. at 21-23, 25; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
8 Tr. at 23-24; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. at 29-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
 
4 
 
[their] kids, pay [their] mortgage and you know, put food on the table, and whatever else 
happens, if the car breaks down or something like that.” He stated that his salary will 
increase substantially if he receives a security clearance. He stated that he would use 
that extra money to pay his delinquent debts. He also plans on obtaining a $10,000 
consolidation loan that he will use to pay his debts.10 
 
A witness testified, and Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his 
excellent job performance, character, professionalism, kindness, honesty, maturity, 
trustworthiness, and integrity.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 20, 27, 38-46, 48; GE 2; AE B, D. 
 
11 Tr. at 50-54; AE A, C. 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($366), 1.p ($366), and 1.q ($366) are 
duplicates of the $366 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.p, and 1.q are concluded for Applicant. 
 
I am satisfied that Applicant returned the cable equipment that is the basis for the 
$317 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.hh and that he paid the $65 debt to an insurance 
company (SOR ¶ 1.jj) at least five years ago. SOR ¶¶ 1.hh and 1.jj are concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused or aggravated by his medical issues, 
his and his wife’s periods of unemployment and underemployment, and his ex-wife’s 
failure to pay her share of the marital debt. Those matters were beyond his control. To 
be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer since July 2010. In that time he 
has made no payments toward his delinquent debts. He received financial counseling, 
but he is essentially living paycheck to paycheck. He stated that his salary will increase 
substantially if he receives a security clearance, and that he would use that extra money 
to pay his delinquent debts. He also stated that he planned to obtain a $10,000 
consolidation loan to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has held that a “promise to take 
remedial action in future, however credible and sincere, is not evidence of actual 
rehabilitation.” See ISCR Case No. 08-05379 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2009) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 96-0544 at 5 (App. Bd. May 12, 1997)).  
 
  I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His finances are not yet under control. 
His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are 
unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second section is not. I find 
that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, he has not 
convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r-1.gg:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.hh:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ii:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.jj:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.kk-1.ll:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
