1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-09253
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Security concerns about two instances of criminal conduct are mitigated by the
passage of time without further incident. However, Applicant failed to mitigate the
security concerns raised by significant delinquent debt, which arose between 2008 and
2010, and which remains unresolved. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On July 14, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation, which
included his responses to interrogatories from Department of Defense (DOD)
 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
2
adjudicators,  it could not be determined that it is clearly consistent with the national1
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.  2
On November 20, 2012, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).  Applicant timely responded to the3
SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On February 27, 2013, Department
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant4
received the FORM on October 23, 2012. He did not respond to the FORM. The case
was assigned to me on May 14, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes approximately
$40,700 for seven delinquent debts alleged at SOR 1.a - 1.g. The debt at SOR 1.d is
alleged as the subject of a civil judgment against Applicant. The rest are alleged to be in
collection status or charged off as business losses. 
Under Guideline J, it was alleged Applicant was arrested in November 2009 and
charged with acting in a manner injurious to a child and with resisting arrest, for which,
in June 2010, he was ordered to attend a 12-week parenting course and to be
evaluated for alcohol abuse as conditions of a six-month accelerated discharge or
probation before judgment (SOR 2.a). The Government also alleged that in July 2010,
Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated. In February 2011, he
was convicted of the latter charge and placed on one year of conditional
discharge/probation. As part of his sentence, he was fined and ordered to complete a
Drinking Driver program (SOR 2.b). (FORM, Item 1)
Applicant denied the overall security concerns about finances and criminal
conduct, but admitted all of the underlying factual allegations in the SOR. (FORM, Item
2) In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I have made the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is 45 years old. Since July 2010, he has been employed by a defense
contractor in a position that requires a security clearance. He has held a variety of jobs
after being honorably discharged from the United States Navy in August 1993 following
seven years of enlisted service. Applicant held a security clearance from July 1986 until
his discharge. Applicant and his wife have been married since November 2009, and
 No children were listed in Applicant’s eQIP. It is inferred from events documented elsewhere in the record5
and pertaining to SOR 2.a that Applicant and his wife have at least one child under five years of age.
3
they have at least one child.  A previous marriage between July 2000 and October 20055
ended when his wife died. (FORM, Items 2 and 3)
In June 2009, Applicant was laid off from his job as a quality technician for a
defense contractor. After four months of unemployment, he found part-time work as a
project specialist in October 2009. He has been employed full time since April 2010.
(FORM, Items 3 and 4)
When he submitted his eQIP, Applicant disclosed several delinquent debts.
Duriing his background investigation, he was interviewed by a Government investigator
about past-due debts listed in a credit report produced on July 27, 2010. Applicant
acknowledged owing all of the past-due debts contained in the credit report, and he
claimed his debts arose because of his first wife’s untimely death. He also cited his
June 2009 lay-off and subsequent unemployment and underemployment as causes of
his financial problems. He incurred unpaid medical bills when he had no employer-
sponsored medical insurance, and he relied on credit cards to meet regular expenses.
His mortgage was about seven months in arrears when he was interviewed and he was
negotiating a mortgage modification with his lender. That account is now current.
(FORM, Items 2 - 8)
When he responded to the SOR, Applicant and his wife had begun the process
of filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. By November 2012, they had paid all of
the filing fees and attorney’s costs prerequisite to filing his petition. However, in
response to the February 2013 FORM, Applicant did not provide any information
showing his Chapter 13 petition actually has been filed or that he is making timely
payments under a wage earner’s plan. (Answer)
As part of his response to interrogatories from DOD adjudicators in August 2012,
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS). The PFS showed that he is
the sole income earner for his family and that he is covering all of his monthly expenses.
The PFS reflects a positive monthly cash flow of about $436. However, the listed
expenses do not include any of the past-due debts listed in the SOR. (FORM, Item 4)
On November 18, 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with acting in a
manner injurious to a child, and with resisting arrest. That evening, Applicant and his
wife had a few drinks and began to argue. His wife called the police who spoke to each
of them, but left without taking any other action. Later that night, she again called the
police because Applicant was trying to feed their infant child in the bedroom after
Applicant had been drinking. Applicant did not like being questioned by the police and
raised his voice. He was arrested, fingerprinted, and released. At a June 2010 hearing,
Applicant was ordered to complete a parenting course and was evaluated for alcohol
abuse. On completion of these requirements, Applicant’s charges were to be dismissed
in six months. (FORM, Item 4)
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 Directive, E3.1.14.8
 Directive, E3.1.15.9
4
In June 2010, Applicant was arrested after being stopped by police as he drove
home from a party where he and his wife had been drinking. Applicant admitted having
as many as six beers in a four-hour period. On February 22, 2011, Applicant was again
placed on probation, this time for one year. As a condition of having the charges
dismissed, Applicant was to complete a victim impact panel and drinking driver
program. He was also fined and ordered to install a vehicle interlock on his car. He has
never been evaluated as alcohol dependent, he has completed all of the court’s
requirements, and his driving privileges have been fully restored. (FORM, Items 2 and
4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls8
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  9
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).11
5
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such10
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.11
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Applicant accrued more than $40,000 in unpaid debt between 2008 and 2010.
One of the debts is being enforced by a civil judgment, and none of the debts have been
paid or otherwise resolved. These facts raise a security concern addressed, in relevant
part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, Applicant’s conduct requires application of the following AG ¶
19 disqualifying conditions:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Mitigation of the security concerns raised by the Government’s information is
available if Applicant can produce information sufficient to establish one of the following
pertinent AG ¶ 20 conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
6
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; or
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The debts at issue are still unresolved and arose before, during, and after his
unemployment in 2009. Although the passing of his first wife in 2005 was a tragic,
unforeseen circumstance, it has not been established that any of his debts were caused
by that event. Even if Applicant’s debts were beyond his control, he did not establish
that he has acted reasonably under the circumstances in the seven years since his first
wife died or in the three years since he was unemployed or underemployed. While
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection might be a suitable course of action here, Applicant
did not show that he is now actually repaying his debts through a filed bankruptcy
petition. Nor has he received counseling or other help to improve his finances. Finally,
he does not dispute any of the alleged debts. For all of the foregoing reasons, none of
the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns about his finances. 
Criminal Conduct
Applicant was arrested in November 2009 and July 2010. Both offenses were
disposed of through a conditional discharge program, which allowed for dismissal of the
charges on completion of certain court-ordered actions. This information raises a
security concern about criminal conduct that is expressed at AG ¶ 30, as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
More specifically, the record requires application of the following AG ¶ 31
disqualifying conditions:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated
rehabilitation program.
Applicant was only on probation from his first arrest for a month before he was arrested
in July 2010. It appears the court extended the probationary period and added
conditions which addressed his second offense. By contrast, Applicant has not repeated
his conduct in almost three years. Both incidents occurred after he had been drinking;
7
however, he was not evaluated as alcohol dependent and his use of alcohol does not
appear to be an ongoing concern. This information supports application of the following
AG ¶ 32 mitigating concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
On balance, I conclude Applicant will not repeat his past criminal conduct. The
record as a whole shows security concerns about his criminal conduct are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines F and J. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 45-year-
old employee of a defense contractor and an honorably discharged Navy veteran. In
2009 and 2010, he was arrested for alcohol-related offenses, but he has satisfied all of
the court’s probationary requirements. Alcohol consumption is not an ongoing security
concern here, and there have been no such incidents since 2010. However, despite this
positive information, Applicant has not overcome the Government’s concerns about his
finances. Available information does not support Applicant’s claims that his debts arose
from circumstances beyond his control, and he has not sufficiently acted to resolve his
debts. A fair and commonsense assessment of available information shows that doubts
remain about Applicant’s suitability because of his financial history. The Government’s
compelling interest in protecting its sensitive information requires that these doubts be
resolved against granting access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g : Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
