 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-04879 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding criminal conduct, but failed to 
mitigate the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption and personal conduct.  
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On an unspecified date, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on March 20, 
2012.2 On an unspecified date, the DOD issued him another set of interrogatories. It is 
unclear when he responded to the interrogatories because they are unsigned and 
undated.3 On September 20, 2012, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (SF 86, dated September 8, 2010). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 20, 2012). 
 
3
 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, undated). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct), G (Alcohol Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons 
why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 5, 2012. In a sworn statement, dated 
October 17, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On November 2, 2012, citing the 
Directive, Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural Guidance, ¶ E3.1.7., Department Counsel 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on November 14, 2012. The case was assigned 
to me on March 21, 2013, A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 28, 2013, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, by video teleconference, on April 8, 2013.  
 
During the hearing, six Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 6) were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits. The 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on April 12, 2013. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity, and he 
submitted 24 documents which were admitted into evidence as Applicant exhibits (AE A 
through AE X) without objection. The record closed on April 19, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR pertaining to criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) and alcohol consumption (¶¶ 
2.a. through 2.c.).  He denied the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct. 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain the secret security clearance which was granted to him in 2000.4 He has been 
gainfully employed by the same defense contractor since March 2005, and currently 
serves as a communications engineer.5 He was previously employed as an 
infrastructure installment technician. He served on active duty in an enlisted capacity 
                                                          
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 40-41. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
with the U.S. Air Force from May 2000 until he was honorably discharged in May 2004.6 
He was awarded the following awards and decorations: Air Force Training Ribbon, 
National Defense Service Medal, Air Force Outstanding Unit Award (with V for valor), 
Air Force Longevity Service Award, Air Force Good Conduct Medal, Air Force Overseas 
Long Tour Ribbon, Small Arms Expert Marksmanship Ribbon (Rifle), Basic Training 
Honor Graduate Ribbon, and Air Force Achievement Medal.7  
 
While on active duty, he was deployed on three occasions in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom (Afghanistan), Operation Shining Express (Liberia), and 
Operation Iraqi Freedom (Iraq).8 As a civilian employee, he has been involved in 
establishing and maintaining disaster communications during Hurricane Katrina, the 
earthquake in Haiti, the Asian tsunami, and the nuclear reactor disaster in Japan.9  
 
A 1996 high school graduate, Applicant attended a community college on a part-
time basis until 1999. In 2004, he received an associate of science degree from the 
community college of the Air Force.10 Applicant was married in July 2010.11 He has one 
daughter, born in 2011.12 
 
Criminal Conduct & Alcohol Consumption  
 
Applicant is an alcohol abuser who, on occasion, consumed alcohol to the point 
of intoxication and passing out.13 He was a frequent consumer of alcohol from shortly 
after he graduated from high school, initially drinking two or three beers at a time with 
friends, once a month, over a period of about two years. Commencing in 1998, his 
consumption decreased to one or two beers at a time, about three or four times per 
year. When he joined the Air Force, his consumption increased to three or four beers at 
a time each week, when not deployed. After leaving active duty, his consumption 
decreased to one or two beers at a time, three or four times per year.  In late 2005, 
Applicant’s consumption of beer at home virtually ceased, but he started occasionally 
going to a bar for two or three beers. From 2006 until December 2010, his consumption 
consisted of one to two beers once a month and three to four beers every other month, 
                                                          
6
 AE A (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated May 17, 2004). 
 
7
 AE A, supra note 6. 
 
8
 AE B (NATO Travel Order, dated October 18, 2001); AE C (Special Mission Travel Order, dated February 
13, 2003); AE D (Special Mission Travel Order, dated March 14, 2003); NATO Travel Order, dated February 13, 
2003); AE G (Enlisted Performance Report, dated February 7, 2002); AE I (Enlisted Performance Report, dated 
September 28, 2003); AE F (Description of Task Force Viking, undated). 
 
9
 Tr. at 54-57. 
 
10
 GE 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 30, 2010) (PSI 2010), at 2; Tr. at 50. 
 
11
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 27. 
 
12
 Tr. at 38. 
 
13
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 3. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
and at least as recently as February 2011, two to four beers every four to six weeks at a 
bar.14  
 
Applicant’s consumption of alcohol resulted in at least six incidents involving 
either military or law enforcement authorities. During the Lundi Gras festivities in 2000, 
Applicant consumed an unspecified amount of alcohol. He was arrested and charged 
with lewd and lascivious behavior, and taken to a temporary holding cell. He spent the 
night in jail, went to court, entered a plea of no contest, paid a $350 fine, and was 
released (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 2.c.).15 Applicant acknowledged consuming alcohol, but 
denied he was intoxicated.16 He initially denied knowing why he was arrested, and 
attributed the action to mistaken identity.17 He subsequently acknowledged he was 
arrested after he was unable to find a restroom and had urinated against the side of a 
building.18 
 
 During the winter or fall of 2001, while at a barracks party, Applicant consumed 
maybe two or three beers. A scuffle started between other individuals, and at some 
point, someone bumped into Applicant and knocked him down a flight of stairs, causing 
a shoulder injury and a cut forehead. When he arrived at the medical facility, blood was 
drawn from him and it registered an unspecified level of alcohol in his system.19 
Applicant initially denied being intoxicated,20 and eventually stated that he “wasn’t 
heavily intoxicated.”21 Because the incident involved alcohol, Applicant was directed to 
attend a one-day Alcohol Safety Action Program (ASAP) class (SOR ¶ 2.b.).22  
 
In January 2006, Applicant attended a party at a friend’s house that was 
eventually moved over to a bar where the party continued. Applicant admittedly had too 
much to drink and was intoxicated. Things got out of hand when Applicant started 
arguing with the staff at the bar, and Applicant was thrown out of the bar by the 
bouncers. He tried to locate his friends and started knocking on the back door of the 
bar. The bar staff called the police and, when he started arguing with the police, he was 
taken into custody and charged with disorderly while intoxicated. He spent the night in 
                                                          
14
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 3, 5; GE 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 4, 2011) (PSI 
2011), at 3.  
 
15
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 2; GE 4 (Report of Investigation, dated August 1, 2002. 
 
16
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 2. 
 
17
 GE 4 (Statement, dated August 1, 2002). 
 
18
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 2. 
 
19
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 2; Tr. at 105. 
 
20
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 2. 
 
21
 Tr. at 104. 
 
22
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 2; Tr. at 105-106. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
jail, eventually pleaded guilty, and paid a fine of maybe $300 or $400 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 
2.c.).23 
 
In May 2006, while working in another state, Applicant accompanied some 
coworkers to a bar where he consumed three or four beers. He was driving from the bar 
to his nearby hotel when he was stopped by the police for speeding and weaving at 
about 2:30 a.m. The police officer reported that Applicant emitted the strong odor of 
alcohol; had watery and bloodshot eyes; slurred and thick-tongued speech, and was 
wearing a shirt that was not tucked in. He administered Applicant a field sobriety test 
and two breathalyzer tests. The initial breathalyzer registered 0.186 and the second 
breathalyzer register 0.188. He was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI).24 Applicant denied to the police officer that the alcohol had 
affected his driving “to the slightest degree,” and claimed he had only consumed two 
pints of alcohol at the bar between the hours of 9 p.m. and 11 p.m. He denied having 
any alcohol between 11 p.m. and his being stopped.25 Applicant hired a local attorney 
for about $2,500, eventually entered a plea of guilty, and was fined about $500, and 
sentenced to two days in jail in his home state (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 2.c.).26 Applicant 
subsequently contended the anti-anxiety medication he was taking at the time may have 
contributed to his condition that night and said it was uncharacteristic for him to drink so 
much.27 
 
 In September 2006, at about 7:30 p.m., Applicant and a friend decided to drive 
30 miles to another town where they intended to have dinner and meet some friends. 
During an evening in which they completed dinner and visited a few bars, Applicant 
consumed three or four beers. On the way back home at about 4:30 a.m., they decided 
to have a late night breakfast at a fast food restaurant. When he entered the parking lot, 
Applicant drove his truck over a curb, getting stuck in the sand, and damaging the curb 
and a sprinkler. The police were called, and when they arrived, Applicant was very 
uncooperative. He furnished various inconsistent stories of what had happened and 
denied being the driver of the vehicle. He refused to participate in a field sobriety test, 
refused to take a breathalyzer test, refused to sign an acknowledgment of his Miranda 
Rights, and refused to answer questions. He was arrested and charged with refusal to 
submit to a lawful breath test, DUI, and operating a motor vehicle with expired tags (less 
than six months).28 He hired an attorney, pled no contest to the DUI, and was sentenced 
to one year unsupervised probation, fined approximately $1,200, 50 hours of community 
service, his driver’s license was suspended for six months (with a temporary business 
                                                          
23
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 2; Tr. at 93, 130. 
 
24
 GE 5 (DUI Report, dated May 13, 2006); GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 3-4; Tr. at 68-73. Applicant 
told the investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that his blood-alcohol level was 0.13 
percent. 
 
25
 GE 5, supra note 24, at 3. 
 
26
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 4. 
 
27
 Tr. at 78. 
 
28
 GE 6 (Arrest Report, various dates); GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 4-5; Tr. at 81-87. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
permit issued after 30 days), and ordered to attend a DUI education class (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. 
and 2.c.).29 His probation was terminated on January 4, 2008.30 
 
In February 2009, after a day of combat readiness training, Applicant went to a 
bar off base to watch the Super Bowl. He arrived near the 6:30 p.m. kickoff, and 
consumed a varying quantity of beer. He told the OPM investigator in 2011 that he had 
four or five beers while watching the game.31 He remained at the bar for a couple of 
hours after the game. He said he had “a few drinks” in his Answer to the SOR,32 and 
during the hearing, changed his estimate to “maybe a beer an hour.”33 In any event, he 
passed out while sitting at the bar, and when the emergency medical technicians (EMT) 
were called per bar policy, he was considered unresponsive, and the police were called. 
When the police awakened him, Applicant became very agitated because he knew he 
“wasn’t intoxicated” or “wasn’t that intoxicated.”34 He “expressed [his] disapproval in an 
unacceptable manner,”35 not otherwise described. He was arrested and charged with 
disorderly while intoxicated. After pleading guilty, he was fined about $400 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
and 2.c.).36  Applicant attributed his condition to a lack of sleep and to having taken the 
anti-anxiety medication. 
 
Applicant contends that marriage and fatherhood have changed him. He initially 
admitted consuming alcohol from 1996, at times to the point of intoxication, until at least 
February 2011, and to the point of passing out until February 2009.37 During the 
hearing, he acknowledged consuming four beers in one sitting soon after his wife 
became pregnant in February 2011 and before he promised her he would no longer 
consume alcohol.38 During his period of heavy alcohol consumption while at bars, 
Applicant would probably consume six or seven beers, or “more than that.”39 Applicant 
considers the consumption of four beers to be “pushing it” to heavy consumption.40 He 
would consider it unusual for him presently to drink four beers.41 Although he denied 
                                                          
29
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 5. 
 
30
 GE 2 (Case Details – Summary, undated). 
 
31
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 1. 
 
32
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
33
 Tr. at 99. 
 
34
 Tr. at 121. 
 
35
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1; Tr. at 129. 
 
36
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 1. 
 
37
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 3. 
  
38
 Tr. at 144; GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 3. 
 
39
 Tr. at 147-148. 
 
40
 Tr. at 144. 
 
41
 Tr. at 144. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
having an alcohol problem when his was interviewed in 2010,42 Applicant now concedes 
that he has an alcohol problem, and he needs to stay away from alcohol.43 He contends 
he has neither a taste nor a need for alcohol.44 He acknowledged his “irresponsible 
decision was to take the first drink,” and added: “I should have never taken the first 
drink.”45 Nevertheless, despite swearing off alcohol, he acknowledging consuming a 
friend’s home-brewed beer two weeks before the hearing and another beer about two 
weeks before that.46 Applicant contended his alcohol-related arrests were isolated 
incidents and not part of a pattern of alcohol abuse.47 
 
Other than the one day Air Force ASAP educational class and the DUI education 
class, Applicant never received any alcohol treatment or alcohol counseling.48 He 
acknowledged it might have been wise if he had gone to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 
but he simply swept the issue under the rug and wanted to ignore it.49 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 On September 8, 2010, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to 
certain questions pertaining to his police record. Question 22b. asked if, in the last 
seven years, he had been arrested by any police or other law enforcement authority; 
and Question 22e. asked if he had ever been charged with any offenses related to 
alcohol or drugs. Applicant answered “yes” to both questions and listed two such 
incidents: his May 2006 and September 2006 arrests. He certified that the responses 
were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge, but the responses to the 
above two questions were, in fact, false, for he had omitted the January 2006 and 
February 2009 arrests. He subsequently denied intending to falsify his responses, and 
explained that he had been busy at work and set aside very little time to complete the 
SF 86. He was more focused on the DUI incidents, which “weighed much heavier in 
[his] mind.”50 He contended the omissions were simple mistakes.51 
 
Two months later, while undergoing an interview conducted by OPM in 
connection with his security clearance application, Applicant again discussed the May 
2006 and September 2006 arrests. He denied having any other alcohol-related 
                                                          
42
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 6. 
 
43
 Tr. at 148. 
 
44
 Tr. at 149. 
 
45
 Tr. at 89. 
 
46
 Tr. at 126-127, 149. 
 
47
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 6. 
 
48
 Tr. at 140. 
 
49
 Tr. at 138-141. 
 
50
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 4; Tr. at 115, 118, 132. 
 
51
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 4. 
 
8 
                                      
 
incidents.52 Upon being asked a second time by the investigator if he was sure there 
were no other alcohol-related incidents, Applicant finally acknowledged that there was 
an incident where he was in an argument with a club bouncer (referring to the January 
2006 incident), but he denied he was arrested or charged with a crime. He also denied 
he had to pay a fine.53 He indicated he was under pressure to meet other obligations for 
that work day, and because he was anxious to conclude the interview, he forgot to bring 
up the two disorderly while intoxicated incidents of January 2006 and February 2009.54 
Both of Applicant’s responses to the investigator were false. On February 4, 2011, 
before being interviewed again by the OPM investigator, Applicant admitted the alcohol-
related incidents of 2000 and February 2009.55 Once again, Applicant contended the 
omissions were simple mistakes.56 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant’s enlisted performance ratings generally reflected an individual who 
was “absolutely superior in all areas” who should be immediately promoted. He was 
characterized as an exceptional performer, super achiever, and technical genius, who 
“does the job right the first time, every time,” and was recommended for promotion 
below-the-zone.57 His performance reviews from his current employer also reflect a 
commendable (periodically exceeds requirements of the job) to outstanding 
(consistently exceeds job requirements in all key areas) performance. His “attention to 
detail ensures that the task is done right the first time, every time.”58 Applicant’s former 
direct supervisor and coworkers have characterized him as hard-working, honest, 
trusted, very reliable, and organized.59 His project engineer described Applicant as a 
“dedicated worker with an attention to detail.”60 
 
  
                                                          
52
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 5. 
 
53
 GE 3 (PSI 2010), supra note 10, at 5. 
 
54
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 4-5. 
 
55
 GE 3 (PSI 2011), supra note 14, at 1. 
 
56
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 4. 
 
57
 AE G (Enlisted Performance Report, dated February 7, 2002); AE H (Enlisted Performance Report, dated 
September 27, 2002); AE I (Enlisted Performance Report, dated September 28, 2003).  
 
58
 AE K (Performance Review, dated September 17, 2012). See also, AE L (Performance Review, dated 
September 9, 2011); AE M (Performance Review, dated September 15, 2010); AE N (Performance Review, dated 
September 14, 2009); AE O (Performance Review, dated September 12, 2008); AE P (Performance Review, dated 
September 19, 2007); AE Q (Performance Review, dated December 13, 2006); AE X (Performance Review, dated 
December 9, 2005). 
 
59
 AE R (Character Reference, undated); AE S (Character Reference, undated); AE U (Character 
Reference, dated April 17, 2013); AE V (Character Reference, dated April 18, 2013). 
 
60
 AE T (Character Reference, dated April 17, 2013). 
 
9 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”61 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”62   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”63 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.64  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
61
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
62
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
63
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
64
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”65 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”66 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses is potentially disqualifying. 
Applicant’s history of criminal conduct consists of five arrests and convictions for 
alcohol-related incidents. AG ¶ 31(a) has been established.   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
In addition, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; 
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
                                                          
65
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
66
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
11 
                                      
 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) partially apply. Applicant’s criminal conduct commenced 
in 2000 and continued until February 2009, a little over four years ago. Following each 
incident, Applicant was involved in both the police and court systems. He spent brief 
periods in jail, paid fines, lost his driving privileges, did community service, attended 
education classes, and was placed on probation. During the first nine months in 2006, 
he was involved in three such incidents. No type of punishment seemed to work. 
Applicant argued that this is not a pattern of misconduct, but rather a series of similar 
isolated incidents. His argument is simply not reasonable, under the circumstances.  
 
Nevertheless, there is some evidence of successful rehabilitation which 
essentially started when Applicant got married and purportedly stopped driving when he 
decided to consume alcohol. There has been no further SOR-alleged criminal conduct 
during the past four-year period. A person should not be held forever accountable for 
misconduct from the past, without a clear indication of subsequent reform, remorse, or 
rehabilitation. Applicant has expressed remorse for his past criminal conduct and 
reformed his habits, and he has an outstanding employment record as both a member 
of the military and as an employee of a government contractor.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent is potentially disqualifying. In addition, habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, may apply under AG ¶ 22(c).  
AG ¶ 22(a) has been established by Applicant’s two DUI convictions, his two disorderly 
while intoxicated convictions, and his lewd behavior conviction; and AG ¶ 22(c) has 
been established, because Applicant repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment.  
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
 
12 
                                      
 
judgment. In addition, when the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues 
of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser), AG ¶ 23(b) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) minimally applies and AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. Applicant contends 
that marriage and fatherhood have changed him. He initially admitted consuming 
alcohol from 1996, at times to the point of intoxication, until at least February 2011, and 
to the point of passing out until February 2009. During the hearing, he acknowledged 
consuming four beers in one sitting soon after his wife became pregnant in February 
2011, and before he promised her he would no longer consume alcohol. He admitted 
that during his period of heavy alcohol consumption while at bars, Applicant would 
probably consume six or seven beers, or “more than that.” Applicant acknowledges the 
consumption of four beers to be “pushing it” to heavy consumption, and he would 
consider it unusual for him presently to drink four beers. Although he denied having an 
alcohol problem when he was interviewed in 2010, Applicant now concedes that he has 
an alcohol problem, and he needs to stay away from alcohol. He contends he has 
neither a taste nor a need for alcohol. He acknowledged his “irresponsible decision was 
to take the first drink,” and added: “I should have never taken the first drink.”  
 
Nevertheless, despite swearing off alcohol, and having neither a taste nor a need 
for alcohol, Applicant has not been abstinent. He acknowledged consuming a friend’s 
home-brewed beer two weeks before the hearing and another beer about two weeks 
before that. Applicant contended his alcohol-related arrests were isolated incidents and 
not part of a pattern of alcohol abuse. That position is consistent with my impression 
that Applicant has consistently minimized the significance of alcohol in his life, 
minimized the quantity of alcohol consumed, and essentially ignored his “irresponsible 
decision” to continue consuming alcohol even in a reduced quantity or frequency.  
Accordingly, it is likely that his alcohol abuse will recur and it does cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Furthermore, after careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on 
alcohol consumption, I conclude Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption after his 
alcohol-related convictions and minimizing his alcohol problem indicates he is unwilling 
or unable to curtail his alcohol consumption. As such, his conduct demonstrates a lack 
of judgment and/or a failure to control impulses which is inconsistent with the holder of a 
security clearance. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
13 
                                      
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
In addition, under AG ¶ 16(b), deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative, may raise 
security concerns.  
 On September 8, 2010, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to 
two questions pertaining to his police record. One question asked if, in the last seven 
years, he had been arrested by any police or other law enforcement authority; and the 
other question asked if he had ever been charged with any offenses related to alcohol 
or drugs. Applicant answered “yes” to both questions and listed only his May 2006 and 
September 2006 arrests. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, and 
correct” to the best of his knowledge, but the responses to the above two questions 
were, in fact, false, for he had omitted the January 2006 and February 2009 arrests. He 
subsequently denied intending to falsify his responses, and explained that he had been 
busy at work and set aside very little time to complete the SF 86. He was more focused 
on the DUI incidents, which “weighed much heavier in [his] mind.” He contended the 
omissions were simple mistakes.  
 
Two months later, while undergoing an interview conducted by OPM in 
connection with his security clearance application, Applicant again discussed the May 
2006 and September 2006 arrests. He denied having any other alcohol-related 
incidents. Upon being asked a second time by the investigator if he was sure there were 
no other alcohol-related incidents, Applicant finally acknowledged the January 2006 
incident, but he denied he was arrested or charged with a crime. He also denied he had 
to pay a fine. Once again, he indicated he was under pressure to meet other obligations 
for that work day, and because he was anxious to conclude the interview, he forgot to 
bring up the two disorderly while intoxicated incidents of January 2006 and February 
2009. Both of Applicant’s responses to the investigator were false. In February 2011, 
before being interviewed again by the OPM investigator, Applicant finally admitted the 
alcohol-related incidents of 2000 and February 2009. Once again, Applicant contended 
the omissions were simple mistakes. 
 
 He denied the false responses were deliberate or an attempt to falsify the 
material facts. His explanations regarding both his SF 86 and his OPM interview are at 
odds with the characterizations of him made by his character references: that “the task 
 
14 
                                      
 
is done right the first time, every time,” and that Applicant is a “dedicated worker with an 
attention to detail.” Applicant’s actions are, however, consistent with his pattern of denial 
and falsification regarding his relationship with the law enforcement authorities in 
denying he was intoxicated, minimizing the quantity of alcohol consumed, denying his 
behavior in 2000, denying he was driving in 2006, and denying the circumstances 
surrounding several of the incidents.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s educational background, military career, and 
current professional career, in analyzing his actions. Applicant is an intelligent, talented, 
and experienced individual, but his explanations, to be accepted, require that a 
substantial degree of unreasonableness be ignored. If Applicant had acknowledged the 
deliberate nature of his more recent actions and expressed that it was foolish on his part 
to have falsified his responses and concealed the truth, his actions might have been 
considered aberrant behavior out of character for him. However, Applicant clings to his 
explanation that the actions were merely mistakes. His position is unreasonable. AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 16(b) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, 
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Applicant omitted and concealed relevant 
facts from his September 2010 SF 86 and during his November 2010 OPM interview. In 
February 2011, before being interviewed again by the OPM investigator, Applicant 
finally admitted the remaining alcohol-related incidents. AG ¶ 17(a) minimally applies as 
to Applicant’s OPM interview, but AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
 
15 
                                      
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J, G, and E in my analysis below.      
 
There is substantial evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant 
has been gainfully employed by the same defense contractor since March 2005, and 
previously served on active duty with the U.S. Air Force from May 2000 until he was 
honorably discharged in May 2004. While on active duty, he was deployed on three 
occasions in support of Operation Enduring Freedom (Afghanistan), Operation Shining 
Express (Liberia), and Operation Iraqi Freedom (Iraq). As a civilian employee, he has 
been involved in establishing and maintaining disaster communications during 
Hurricane Katrina, the earthquake in Haiti, the Asian tsunami, and the nuclear reactor 
disaster in Japan. He is a respected member of his employer’s workforce. His rather 
cavalier attitude regarding alcohol resulted in at least six alcohol-related incidents 
involving either military or law enforcement authorities, but the most recent such 
incident occurred over four years ago. His alcohol consumption changed after he was 
married and became a father. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is an alcohol abuser who has two DUI convictions, two disorderly while 
intoxicated convictions, and a lewd behavior conviction, between 2000 and 2009.  He 
spent time in jail, paid fines, lost his driving privileges, did community service, attended 
education classes, and was placed on probation. Nevertheless, he continued to 
consume alcohol. Although he denied having an alcohol problem when he was 
interviewed in 2010, Applicant now concedes that he has an alcohol problem, and he 
needs to stay away from alcohol. He contends he has neither a taste nor a need for 
alcohol. He acknowledged his “irresponsible decision was to take the first drink,” and 
added: “I should have never taken the first drink.”  
 
Nevertheless, despite swearing off alcohol, and having neither a taste nor a need 
for alcohol, Applicant has not been abstinent. Applicant contended his alcohol-related 
arrests were isolated incidents and not part of a pattern of alcohol abuse. Applicant has 
consistently minimized the significance of alcohol in his life, minimized the quantity of 
alcohol consumed, and essentially ignored his “irresponsible decision” to continue 
consuming alcohol even in a reduced quantity or frequency. It is likely that his alcohol 
abuse will recur and it does cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.  
 
 Of equal significance is Applicant’s lack of candor. He was less than forthright in 
some of his answers to questions in his SF 86, as well during his OPM interview. He 
denied the false responses were deliberate or an attempt to deceive the government 
about the material facts. His explanations regarding both his SF 86 and his OPM 
interview are at odds with the characterizations of him made by his character 
references: that “the task is done right the first time, every time,” and that Applicant is a 
“dedicated worker with an attention to detail.” Applicant’s actions are, however, 
consistent with his pattern of denial and falsification regarding his relationship with the 
law enforcement authorities in denying he was intoxicated, minimizing the quantity of 
 
16 
                                      
 
alcohol consumed, denying his behavior in 2000, denying he was driving in 2006, and 
denying the circumstances surrounding several of the incidents.  
 
I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.67 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
the alcohol consumption and personal conduct security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 
2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against  Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against  Applicant 
   
  
                                                          
67
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
17 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
