1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-07162
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his finances. Despite
having the resources to do so, Applicant has not acted to resolve several longstanding
delinquencies. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 30, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his work as
an employee of a federal contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
to classified information.  On November 19, 2012, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement1
of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guideline  for financial considerations (Guideline F).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on February 12, 2013, and I convened a hearing on March 5,
2013. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on March 20, 2013.
Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and proffered four exhibits, which were
admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. He also presented his
daughter-in-law, his son, and his work supervisor as witnesses.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed approximately
$35,455 in past-due debts for 12 accounts specified in SOR 1.a - 1.l. Applicant denied,
with explanation, all of the allegations except for SOR 1.i, 1.j, and 1.l. (Answer)
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as facts. Having reviewed the pleadings,
transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
The creditors listed in SOR 1.a - 1.h, and 1.k, which Applicant denied, are
collection agencies. In denying those allegations, he stated that each referred to “an 8
year old debt [he] had but [that] was sold over and over again to debt buyers.” He also
stated in his response, “While I do feel a personal responsibility to pay the companies
that I incurred those debts to that is not possible, but I do not feel any responsibility to
pay companies I don’t even know simply because they say I don’t (sic).” I have inferred
from these statements that Applicant admits owing the original debts.
Applicant is 60 years old and employed as an electronics technician by a defense
contractor in a position that requires a security clearance. He was hired for that job in
April 2001 after being unemployed for the previous six months. Applicant served in the
U.S. Air Force from 1971 until retiring as a technical sergeant in 1991. He has held a
security clearance continuously and without incident since 2005.
Applicant’s wife, also a 20-year veteran of the Air Force, and to whom he was
married for 28 years, passed away in November 2000. Together they had two children,
now adults. Since about 2004, Applicant has provided financial support in various forms
to his children and his elderly parents. He paid for repairs to his son’s vehicle so his son
could continue to make his long commute to work. He paid for repairs to his parents’ air
conditioning. He also supported his daughter for several months after she lost her job,
 See Directive. 6.3.3
3
and he co-signed a student loan for her. The student loan became delinquent, as
alleged in SOR 1.i and 1.j. However, his daughter has been able to resolve the debts.
Applicant estimates he still gives her about $1,000 each year in response to unforeseen
expenses. (Answer; Gx. 1; Ax. B; Tr. 66)
Applicant claims he fell behind on his credit cards and other obligations because
he had been helping his children and his parents, and because his late wife had always
handled the finances. Credit reports indicate that his credit card delinquencies began
around 2004 or 2005. He avers that he was not fully aware of the scope of his debt until
he was asked to submit his eQIP in 2010, in which he disclosed most of the debts
alleged in the SOR. He discussed each of his delinquent debts when he was
interviewed by a Government investigator in October 2010. Also around this time, his
supervisor advised Applicant to take action to resolve his debts. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Gx. 3; Tr. 33 - 34, 68 - 71, 105)
Applicant has not taken any action to resolve his debts. His daughter resolved
the student loans alleged at SOR 1.i and 1.j. In 2008, his daughter-in-law, who is
married to Applicant’s son, resolved the home improvement store debt alleged at SOR
1.l. That account was shared by Applicant and his son, but had become delinquent and
was hindering his son’s ability to finance the purchase of their house. In 2010,
Applicant’s daughter-in-law also offered to help him contact his creditors, including
collection agencies, to try to resolve his debts. Applicant testified that, in 2010, he
thought he would likely lose his clearance because of his financial problems and, so,
had no incentive to try to resolve his debts. In hindsight, however, he realizes he should
have taken some of the offers he received from collection agencies to settle his debts
for less than he owed. (Answer; Ax. B; Tr. 56 - 61, 71 - 73, 78 - 86)
Applicant has been steadily employed by his current company since 2001. His
monthly income, including about $1,200 in monthly retired pay, is about $4,400. After
expenses, he estimates he has about $2,000 remaining each month. There is no
indication he is still using credit cards or accruing new debts he cannot pay. (Gx. 1; Tr.
62 - 65)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).6
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.6
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information supports all of the SOR allegations. It also shows that the
debts alleged at SOR 1.i, 1.j and 1.l have been resolved by his daughter and daughter-
in-law. However, Applicant still owes at least $18,159 for the other nine debts alleged.
5
Coupled with a lack of action to resolve his debts and an unwillingness to acknowledge
that he still owes debts that have been referred for collection or may have fallen from his
credit history over time, his financial problems raise a security concern about Applicant’s
finances, which is articulated, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), I conclude that Applicant
is simply unwilling to pay his past-due debts despite having the means and opportunity
to do so since they arose almost nine years ago. He did not articulate a plan to resolve
his debts or to improve his finances in any fashion. 
In response, Applicant submitted information that requires consideration of the
following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and not isolated. They continue through
the presence of significant unresolved debt that arose in 2004 or 2005. Even accepting,
which I do not, that the events causing his debts were unforeseen or beyond his control,
he has not acted reasonably after those events occurred. His refusal to recognize the
legitimacy of collection agencies’ claims to his debts shows his willingness to rationalize
his inaction in this regard, even after being advised by his supervisor in 2010 to do
something about his debts. None of the pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions apply,
6
and Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns established by adverse
information about his finances. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 60-year-old Air Force veteran
who has also been a reliable employee for his company since 2001. However, the
positive information in his background is insufficient to overcome the adverse
information about his finances. Applicant’s failure to respond to longstanding financial
problems undermines confidence in his judgment and reliability, and sustains doubts
about his suitability for continued access to classified information. Because protection of
the national interest is the primary concern in these matters, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.i, 1.j, 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h, 1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
