KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge’s findings and conclusions are sustainable. Applicant has not demonstrated
that the Judge ignored the whole-person factors in arriving at his decision.  Applicant merely
offers an alternative interpretation of the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-05726.a1
DATE: 05/07/2013
DATE: May 7, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-05726
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Joseph R. Price, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 16, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B
(Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 11, 2013, after the close of the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr.
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant was born in the United States in 1971, the son of two citizens
of Saudi Arabia.  The family returned to Saudi Arabia shortly thereafter, and Applicant was raised
and educated in Saudi Arabia.  Applicant has held Saudi passports and used them for travel during
the 2000s.  At the time of his security clearance application, Applicant surrendered his Saudi
passport to his company facility security officer, and it has since expired.  
Applicant married a Saudi citizen in Saudi Arabia and has two sons by her.  The sons derive
U.S. citizenship through him.  Applicant and his wife divorced, remarried, and divorced again.
While in the U.S., his wife became a U.S. citizen.  
In the 1990s, while in the U.S., Applicant entered a Saudi Arabian government-sponsored
scholarship program.  The program covered 100% of his undergraduate expenses and 80% of his
graduate school expenses.  Applicant estimates that he received about $150,000 in direct and indirect
support from the Saudi government.  The program technically required recipients to return to Saudi
Arabia for work, but the requirement is never enforced, owing to the high Saudi unemployment rate.
Applicant also receive medical insurance through the government-sponsored scholarship program
because he serves as the required male sponsor for his sister and stepsister, who are in the U.S.
attending college.  Applicant estimates that the Saudi-sponsored medical insurance has covered
about $25,000 of his medical expenses.  He would like to keep the coverage because it is free to him.
Applicant’s parents, step-parents, brother, step-siblings and half-siblings, and ex-mother-in-
law are resident citizens of Saudi Arabia.  His ex-wife and children are dual citizens of the U.S. and
Saudi Arabia.  His sister and half-sister are Saudi citizens living in the U.S.  Applicant’s contacts
with his stepparents and step-siblings are virtually non-existent.  While he asserts that he has little
actual contact with his mother or brother, his sense of family connection and obligation is such that
he would want to return to Saudi Arabia for either of their funerals, at a minimum.  
The United States and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional security in the
Middle East.  Despite generally good relations, however, the United States remains concerned about
human rights conditions in Saudi Arabia.  U.S.-Saudi relations were strained after the September
2001 terrorist attacks.  During 2003 and 2004, terrorists and suicide bombers kidnapped or killed
Americans and attacked the U.S. consulate.  A travel warning is in effect for Saudi Arabia due to
concerns about potential terrorist activity directed against U.S. citizens and interests.  Individuals
and organizations based in Saudi Arabia have been designated by the U.S. government as providing
financial and material support to Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups.  Saudi Arabia is not known
to target its ex-patriate citizens to obtain sensitive information.
 
The Judge concluded: Applicant received about $150,000 in education benefits from the
Saudi government while he was pursuing degrees in the U.S. He continues to receive Saudi
government education benefits while serving as a sponsor for his sister and half-sister.  He also
3
renewed his Saudi passport several times after returning to the U.S.  He used it several times in
preference to his U.S. passport to travel to Saudi Arabia.  This conduct raises security concerns
under the adjudication guideline for foreign preference, which he failed to mitigate.   Applicant’s
active exercise of dual citizenship after being born a U.S. citizen was done deliberately.  Although
he stated a willingness to forgo the medical benefits and to renounce his Saudi citizenship in the
past, he demonstrates a palpable reluctance to do so, and has taken no action to renounce his Saudi
citizenship.  Although he surrendered his passport and understands the potential consequences to
his clearance should he regain possession of it, that action is not enough to overcome the adverse
concerns raised by his other conduct.  Indeed, it seems likely he would renew his Saudi passport if
circumstances warranted.  Guideline C is resolved against Applicant.
The Government established that Applicant’s contacts with his family in Saudi Arabia
created a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Applicant has resided in the U.S. less than half his life, although most of his working life.  His
financial interests are all in the U.S.  However, his contacts with his mother and brother, both of
whom reside in Saudi Arabia, and ex-wife, who works for the Saudi embassy, remain problematic.
Whole-person considerations require no different result.  Applicant is talented, hardworking,
and possesses good character and integrity.  However, this finding does not preclude a finding that
Applicant’s facts and circumstances still pose a security risk.
Applicant argues that the Judge ignored the whole-person factors when concluding that
Applicant’s Saudi Arabian background and his receipt of health and education benefits from the
Saudi government disqualified him from holding a security clearance.  He asserts that the Judge
erred by concluding that he had not mitigated the concerns under Guidelines B and C.  He points
to evidence of his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties to the U.S., which he argues
make it obvious that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  Applicant
states that his decision to participate in the scholarship program in order to travel to and study in the
United States plainly reflects his preference for the United States.
When the whole record is considered, the Board concludes that the Judge’s findings and
conclusions under Guideline C are sustainable, notwithstanding the favorable evidence cited by
Applicant.  The record of Applicant actively exercising dual citizenship after being born a U.S.
citizen is extensive.  It includes longstanding and repeated use of a Saudi passport as an adult, use
of the Saudi passport in preference to his U.S. passport on several occasions, continued acceptance
of substantial monetary benefits from the Saudi government, and a reluctance to renounce his Saudi
citizenship.  Applicant argues that there is no basis for the Judge’s conclusion that he would renew
his Saudi passport if circumstances warranted.  The Board agrees that this particular conclusion is
not explained, is speculative, and is not supported by the evidence.  Nevertheless, despite this error,
the Judge’s overall analysis of the evidence under Guideline C is supported by the record.   
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
4
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Regarding Guideline C,  Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of
the record evidence.    
Under Guideline B, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s contacts with his mother and
brother, as well as his ex-wife, with whom he maintains contact, remain problematic.  The evidence
indicates that the amount of contact between Applicant and his mother and his brother is not
extensive.  The Judge does point out, however, the fact that Applicant feels a sense of obligation to
his relatives in Saudi Arabia such that he would return to that country to attend their funerals, at a
minimum.  The Judge concluded that this evidenced a sense of family connection or obligation that
created heightened risk and that Applicant failed to produce sufficient evidence to overcome the
Government’s security concerns.  These conclusions are sustainable.  Applicant’s assertion that he
has no meaningful contacts with Saudi Arabia is not supported by the record.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
5
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
