 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-09785 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 28, 2012, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2012, and DOHA received his 
answer on December 28, 2012. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
January 31, 2013. The case was assigned to me on February 8, 2013. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on February 15, 2013, scheduling the hearing for March 6, 2013. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received into evidence without objection, and 
he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until March 22, 2013, to afford Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE I through AE MM, 
which were received into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His answers are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old meteorological data specialist, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since March 1989. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, 
which is a requirement of his current position.  (Tr. 12-13, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1981. He served in the U.S. Army 
from July 1981 to July 1984, and was honorably discharged as a specialist 4 (pay 
grade E-4.) His Army military occupational specialty was 93E (meteorological 
observer). Applicant’s education beyond high school is limited to service schools while 
in the Army. (Tr. 13-15, GE 1, GE 5.) 
 
Applicant has been married since March 1988. His wife was diagnosed with 
mental illness in approximately 1994 and has been unable to work outside the home 
since then. Applicant has a 29-year-old stepdaughter, a 24-year-old daughter, a 22-
year-old son, and a 19-year-old daughter. At present, none of his children live with him 
nor are they dependent on him for support. (Tr. 15-17, GE 1, GE 5.) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In addition to the costs associated with his wife’s mental illness, Applicant 
experienced significant unplanned expenses in 2008 when his family was forced to 
leave their home following a severe insect infestation. He also paid the uncovered 
medical and related expenses associated with his older daughter’s two unplanned 
pregnancies and the unplanned pregnancy of his son’s girlfriend, and the legal bills 
following his younger daughter’s criminal conduct. Applicant and his wife moved to a 
two-bedroom apartment and his children no longer live with him. (SOR answer, Tr. 17-
23, 26-33, AE G.)  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges ten debts totalling $27,418. After Applicant was forced 
to abandon his home as a result of insect infestation, the mortgage holders cancelled 
the arrearages owed in the amounts of $40,832 and $18,002 and issued him Forms 
1099-Cs in 2010. Recognizing that he was in financial trouble, Applicant consulted a 
bankruptcy attorney in 2010. He “pushed” his attorney to take action and it was not 
until March 4, 2013 that Applicant’s attorney filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection. Applicant completed the mandatory financial counseling in conjunction with 
his bankruptcy filing. (Tr. 23-25, GE 5, AE A, AE I, AE L, AE HH, AE II, AE MM.) 
 
Applicant’s Schedule F -- Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims -- 
lists total liabilities of $66,460, which include his wife’s debts. All of Applicant’s SOR 
debts are listed on his Schedule F.  His Schedule I – Current Income Of Individual 
Debtor(s) -- reflects gross monthly income of $5,513 and net monthly income of 
$4,328. Applicant is current on his $840 monthly payments to the bankruptcy trustee.  
His budget reflects a modest lifestyle and reveals that he is living within his means. 
(Tr. 23-25, AE S, AE FF, AE GG, AE KK, AE LL.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted six reference letters – one is from his immediate supervisor 
and five are from his co-workers. These letters collectively support the notion that 
Applicant is a long-term, loyal, dedicated, trustworthy, and valued employee. 
Applicant’s employer strongly endorses Applicant for a security clearance. He also 
submitted a letter from his wife’s physician, who has been treating her for bipolar 
mood disorder. The physician advised that since June 2009, her condition has 
stabilized and provided a favorable prognosis. (AE B – AE H.)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because the combination of his 
wife’s mental illness and the problems with his children were circumstances beyond 
 
6 
 
 
his control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Even though he did not 
have the funds to remain current on his debts, he made efforts to mitigate his debts 
and took reasonable steps to resolve his debts.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant sought financial counseling, albeit 
mandatory, in conjunction with his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He has produced evidence 
that reflects he is living within his means and has taken substantial steps to regain 
financial responsibility. There are clear indications that his financial problems are 
resolved. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant sought the assistance of a bankruptcy attorney and is repaying 
his creditors through the structure provided under Chapter 13. Applicant’s mortgage 
debts have been cancelled and he was issued Forms 1099-C. Given his resources, 
Applicant has done all that can be reasonably expected of him. AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s military service and 28 years of service as a defense contractor 
employee weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive 
member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, 
and his SOR debts have been addressed. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Appellant was faced with some very challenging family situations that adversely 
impacted his financial status. He was forced to divert funds to care for his family and 
fell behind on his mortgage and day-to-day bills. Unable to recover, he sought 
professional help from a bankruptcy attorney and is now in a Chapter 13 repayment 
plan. His lenders have cancelled his mortgages and issued him Forms 1099-C. In 
short, his lenders have cleared him of further liability under the terms of his first and 
second mortgages. He is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His 
company fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. Due to 
 
8 
 
 
circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite Applicant’s 
recent financial setback, it is clear from his actions that he is on the road to a full 
financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s military service and 
his lengthy service as a defense contractor. I considered his years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, his financial recovery, and substantial steps he 
has taken to resolve his financial situation. I considered his potential for future service 
as a defense contractor, the mature and responsible manner in which he dealt with his 
adverse situation, his reference letters, and his testimony and demeanor. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
