 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07156 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan K. Hahn, Esq. 
 
 
May 9, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns related to foreign influence raised by his parents 
and sisters that reside in Israel. His request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2012, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 1, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on March 25, 
2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 29, 2013, scheduling the hearing for April 22, 2013. The hearing was 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled via video teleconference. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
called one witness. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 30, 2013. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Israel. Department Counsel provided a 4-page summary of the facts, 
supported by 11 Government documents pertaining to Israel, identified as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.b. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since 2005. He has had a security clearance 
since 2009. Applicant has been married to his wife since 2003. His wife is a U.S. born 
American citizen. They have two daughters who were both born in the United States 
and only possess U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s mother-in-law is also a native born U.S. 
citizen. (GE 1; Tr. 28, 48-51, 67-68, 78.) 
 
 Applicant was born in Israel. He lived in the United States with his parents from 
1980 to 1982, when his parents moved his family back to Israel. When he was 18 years 
old, he entered the Israeli Air Force. Military service is compulsory for all Israeli citizens. 
As a result, he served on active duty in the Israeli Air Force from 1990 to 1993. From 
1993 to 1995, he served in the Israeli Air Force Reserve. He achieved the rank of staff 
sergeant. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 40-43.) 
 
 In July 1996 after completing his compulsory military service obligation, Applicant 
moved to the United States to attend college. He completed both a Bachelor’s degree 
and a Master’s degree at the same U.S. university. Toward the end of his education, he 
decided to make the United States his permanent home. (GE 1; Tr. 44-46.) 
 
 After graduating with his Master’s degree, Applicant received a work 
authorization visa and applied for a green card. He applied to become a U.S. citizen as 
soon as was legally permissible. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in November 
2007. (GE 1; Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 From 2007 to October 2012, Applicant was a dual citizen of both Israel and the 
United States. Applicant applied for, and was granted, a formal waiver of his Israeli 
 
3 
 
citizenship in October 2012. Applicant never used his Israeli passport after becoming a 
U.S. citizen and it has been destroyed. He has not traveled to Israel after acquiring U.S. 
citizenship. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 36-37, 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of Israel, although they 
possess permanent resident status in the United States. Applicant’s father is 67 years 
old. From 1968 to 1972, Applicant’s father served in the Israeli Navy as a low ranking 
officer. After finishing his military service, he earned a Ph.D. in a scientific field and 
taught at one of Israel’s public universities. He retired from the university in 1996 and 
receives a pension from the university. After retirement, Applicant’s father became an 
independent consultant for an Israeli government contractor that evaluates commercial 
proposals for government issued grants. Applicant explained, “It’s kind of like a 
technology incubator . . .” Applicant‘s father is hired by the contractor to verify that the 
prospective grant winners are making true and appropriate claims. Applicant’s mother is 
65 years old. She was a master sergeant in the Israeli Defense Force prior to 1975, but 
has been a homemaker since her discharge from Israeli military service. Applicant 
communicated with his parents by email “once or twice a month.” They visit the United 
States twice a year for two weeks each time to visit. (GE 1; Tr. 51-61, 70-74, 82-84.) 
 
 Applicant has twin sisters that are citizens and residents of Israel. One is a 
medical doctor. She served in the Israeli Defense Force from 1992 to 1998, but has no 
further affiliation with the Israeli military. Applicant communicates with her on a monthly 
basis. His other sister is currently in the Israeli Defense Forces Reserve member and 
works as an “honorary lieutenant in an office that informs families that loved ones had 
been killed in action” on an “as needed basis.” Applicant communicates with her “once 
every few months.” (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 61-65, 74-75.) 
 
 He has not told any member of his family that he holds a security clearance. He 
does not maintain contact with any members of his extended family. (Tr. 51-53.) 
 
 Applicant is active in his community as a volunteer hobbyist. He owns a home in 
the United States valued at approximately $500,000. He testified his net worth was 
approximately $400,000. He has no financial assets in Israel. He intends to retire in the 
United States. He has voted in the United States on “every opportunity,” but has not 
voted in Israeli elections since he left Israel in 1996 (Tr. 50, 66, 79-81.) 
 
 The Chief Executive Officer and owner of the defense contractor that employs 
Applicant testified on Applicant’s behalf. He testified he has known Applicant since 2001 
in both a professional and personal capacity. He indicated that, “I have had no 
hesitation whatsoever as far as loyalty and dedication and commitment to the job and to 
his endeavors . . .” Applicant also presented character reference letters from colleagues 
that attested to his allegiance to the United States, personal integrity, trustworthiness 
and good judgment. All references recommended Applicant for a security clearance 
without reservations. (AE B; Tr. 27-39.)  
 
 
4 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Israel has become a major global leader in arms exports. Over the last two 
decades, the United States and Israel have periodically disagreed over Israeli sales of 
sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-parties, including the People’s Republic 
of China. 
 
There have been several cases of U.S. citizens convicted of selling or attempting 
to sell classified documents to Israeli embassy officials, or Israeli nationals subsequently 
indicted for espionage against the United States. There also have been instances of 
illegal export or attempted export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel. Israel 
was listed as one of the most active collectors of Industrial Espionage in a 2000 Report 
to Congress issued by the National Counterintelligence Center. Israeli military officers 
have been implicated in this type of technology collection in the United States. 
 
U.S. citizens visiting Israel have been subject to prolonged questioning and 
through searches by Israeli authorities upon entering or departing Israel. In some cases, 
Israeli authorities have denied U.S. citizens access to U.S. consular officers during the 
temporary immigration detention. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
5 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
6 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant has strong ties to his Israeli family members. He has frequent contact 
with his parents via email and he sees them in person for two weeks approximately 
every six month. His contacts with his sisters, although less frequent, are still significant. 
To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The 
heightened risk required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low 
standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having 
a family member living under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign 
nation. In this instance, a heightened risk is present because Applicant’s father and 
sister are supported, in part, by their work for the Israeli government. Further, the 
government of Israel has been known to target sensitive U.S. technologies and 
proprietary information. In this instance, a heightened risk is present. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
  Additionally, a risk is present in Applicant’s familial relations with his father and 
one sister. His father receives a pension from a public university in Israel and works for 
an Israeli contractor evaluating government grant recipients. One of his sisters is an 
honorary lieutenant in the Israeli Defense Force. Applicant’s ties with his father and 
sister could potentially create a conflict of interest between his obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and his desire to help his family members by 
providing that information. AG ¶ 7(b) is applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant maintains relationships with his parents and sisters, who are citizens 
and residents of Israel. His contact with his parents is the most frequent. The Appeal 
Board has held that there is a rebuttable presumption that ties with immediate family are 
 
7 
 
not casual.1 The evidence shows that Applicant maintains his relationship with his 
parents during the year through email and their semi-annual visits. He also keeps in 
regular contact with his sisters through email. While none of Applicant’s foreign family 
members are aware of his security clearance, given these facts, and Applicant's close 
ties to his foreign family members, I cannot confidently conclude that Applicant could 
not be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of foreign 
individuals and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (c) do not apply. 
 
However, Applicant has established deep and longstanding relationships in the 
United States. He spent a formative part of his youth in the U.S. and decided to move 
here after he completed his compulsory military service in Israel. He chose to stay in the 
United States after finishing his education. He became a U.S. citizen as soon as it was 
permissible. He has formally renounced his Israeli citizenship and destroyed his Israeli 
passport. He votes in U.S. elections. He is involved in his community through his 
hobbyist group. He owns property and has invested all of his retirement savings in the 
United States. He is married to an American citizen who has few ties to Israel. His 
children are solely U.S. citizens. Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is mitigating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002).   
 
8 
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
respected by his colleagues and his Chief Executive Officer. He performs well at his job. 
While he was born Israeli, he is an American by choice. As an adult, he elected to 
renounce his Israeli citizenship and destroy his Israeli passport that he held as a result 
of his birth in Israel. He has been residing in the United States for the past 17 years. He 
is entrenched in his community as demonstrated by his property, hobbies, and financial 
investments. His closest familial ties are with his wife, daughters, and mother-in-law, all 
of whom are American citizens. Aside from his extended family, he has severed all of 
his ties Israel. Applicant’s father does not work directly for the government of Israel, but 
instead for a government contractor. His sister’s honorary position with the Israeli 
military involves comforting bereaved families and involves little risk of compromising 
classified information. While he loves his parents and sisters, he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to his longstanding ties 
here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
