 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-05536 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 29, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines J and E. This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. In an undated response, 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 18, 2012, Department Counsel 
prepared the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 13.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded to Applicant a 
copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any objections and additional information 
within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the FORM on February 7, 2013, and did 
not submit any objections or additional matters within the allotted time period. The case 
was assigned to me on March 30, 2013. Items 1 through 13 are entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 23-year-old software engineer who works for a defense contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since September 2010. He graduated from high 
school in 2007, earned an associate’s degree in 2010, and is currently pursuing a 
bachelor’s degree. He has never been married and has no children. This is the first time 
that he is seeking a security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR listed four Guideline J allegations and three Guideline E allegations. In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted two Guideline J allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b), denied one of those allegations (SOR ¶ 1.c), and admitted and denied parts of the 
remaining allegation (SOR ¶ 1.d). He admitted all of the Guideline E allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
  
A police report reflected that Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana 
in State A on June 16, 2007. He was a juvenile at that time. On that occasion, a police 
officer stopped him while he was driving a vehicle that had an improperly displayed 
license plate. Two juvenile passengers were in the vehicle. Upon making the stop, the 
police officer noticed that Applicant had glossy, red eyes; was shaking slightly; and 
appeared very nervous. The police officer asked him to step out of the vehicle. The 
police officer asked Applicant if he had been drinking or had used any controlled 
substances. Applicant initially denied doing so. The police officer explained that if 
Applicant was honest that he would be able to simply go home and the officer would 
make a report of the found narcotics. When asked again, Applicant admitted that he had 
used marijuana and indicated marijuana was present in the vehicle. The police officer 
searched the vehicle and found a baggie of marijuana in the center console. Applicant 
admitted that the baggie of marijuana belonged to him. The police officer drove 
Applicant and the two passengers to their homes. In September 2007, law enforcement 
authorities informed Applicant that a warrant was issued for his arrest on the possession 
of marijuana charge. The warrant remained outstanding until April 2010, when Applicant 
pled guilty to that drug charge by mailing in his plea. In May 2010, he was sentenced to 
a fine and court costs totaling $1,083; had his driver’s license suspended for 30 days; 
                                                          
1 Items 5 and 13. 
2 Items 1 and 4. 
 
3 
 
and was placed on probation for 12 months. Among other restrictions, his probation 
prohibited him from consuming, possessing, or purchasing alcoholic beverages. He 
made monthly reports to his probation officer by telephone. At the end of the probation, 
Applicant’s probation officer reported that he complied with all conditions of his 
probation. His probation ended on May 18, 2011.3 
 
Three SOR allegations pertain to the incident described above. SOR ¶ 1.a set 
forth the charge, Applicant’s plea, and the sentence. SOR ¶ 2.a indicated that Applicant 
lied to the police officer during that incident by initially stating he had not used marijuana 
that day. SOR ¶ 2.b asserted that Applicant was informed of the issuance of an arrest 
warrant against him for the drug charge in September 2007, and the warrant remained 
outstanding until his arraignment in April 2010. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted each of these allegations without providing any comments or explanation.4 
 
 At about 1:30 a.m. on March 1, 2008, the police arrived at Applicant’s apartment 
in State B in response to a disturbance of the peace complaint. At that time, Applicant 
and the 18 other individuals in his apartment were less than 21 years old. Upon entering 
the apartment, the police discovered opened and unopened cans of beer. A search of 
the cupboard revealed two marijuana pipes with residue in them and several plastic 
containers that had inside what appeared to be marijuana residue. In a drawer was a 
leaf grinder that also had green leaf particles inside it. Applicant and his roommate 
informed the police that the drug paraphernalia was their property. One police officer 
noted that he could smell the odor of marijuana in one of the bedrooms. Applicant was 
charged with possession of drug paraphernalia and minor in possession of liquor. On 
March 26, 2008, he pled guilty to the amended charges of excessive noise and littering 
and was sentenced to a fine and court costs totaling $1,022. In his Answer to SOR ¶ 
1.b, Applicant admitted the original charges, his pleas to the amended charges, and the 
sentence arising from this incident.5 
 
 On May 2, 2008, the police arrived at Applicant’s apartment in State B after the 
landlord complained that the residents were selling drugs and that she observed a glass 
smoking pipe on a coffee table. In the apartment, the police found various items of drug 
paraphernalia including a marijuana roach, glass smoking pipe with residue, rolling 
papers, and a pill cutter. The Offense/Incident Report reflected that the charges were 
use or possession of drugs with the intent to use and possession of 35 grams or less of 
marijuana. However, the report did not indicate that Applicant was arrested for those 
charges or was summoned to appear in court for them. The disposition of those charges 
is unknown. In his Answer to the SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant denied the allegation setting forth 
those charges.6 
                                                          
3 Items 7 and 8.  
4 Items 1 and 4.  
5 Items 4, 9 and 10. 
6 Items 4 and 11. 
 
4 
 
 On August 7, 2010, the police cited Applicant for possession of an open 
container of an alcoholic beverage in a moving vehicle in State B. This citation was later 
amended to an equipment violation and Applicant was fined. In his Answer to SOR ¶ 
1.d, Applicant admitted that he was cited for an open container offense. This SOR 
allegation also asserted that he was cited for selling liquor to an intoxicated person, 
which he denied. There is no evidence in the FORM that Applicant was ever cited or 
charged for that latter offense.7 
 
In his e-QIP dated January 24, 2011, Applicant disclosed that he was fired from a 
job in August 2010 for inadequate job performance, but noted that he had a 
discrimination complaint pending against that employer. In the e-QIP, he also disclosed 
that he used marijuana about two to three times a month from September 2005 to July 
2007 and stopped using that substance before he obtained a job in 2007. In the police 
record section, he checked the “Yes” blocks for Section 22.a that asked whether he had 
any pending criminal proceedings against him and Section 22.e that asked whether he 
had ever been charged with any offense related to alcohol or drugs. In the comments 
for that section, he provided information about two offenses. First, he disclosed that he 
was charged in August 2010 with failure to appear in court for an earlier substance 
abuse charge and that later charge was dismissed when he contacted authorities to 
address the earlier charge. Second, he disclosed that he was charged with a 
possession of a controlled substance (marijuana) in July 2007 and that he was placed 
on probation from May 2010 to May 2011 for that offense. In responding to 
interrogatories in April 2012, he reiterated again that he stopped using marijuana in July 
2007.8 
 
SOR ¶ 2.c alleged that Applicant falsified his e-QIP by deliberately omitting 
information about his alcohol and drug charges arising from the March 2008, May 2008, 
and August 2010 incidents discussed above. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted SOR ¶ 2.c without providing any comments or explanation.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
7 Items 1 and 4.  
8 Items 5 and 6. 
9 Items 1 and 4. 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 for this guideline. 
Three of those disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;   
 
6 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
 Between June 2007 and August 2010, Applicant was charged on four separate 
occasions with alcohol- and drug-related offenses. In two of those incidents, he pled 
guilty to minor, amended charges. In one of those incidents, it appears that the local 
authorities did not pursue the charges. In April 2010, he pled guilty to a possession of 
marijuana offense and was sentenced to 12 months of probation. He was prohibited 
from possessing or consuming alcohol during his probation. While on probation in 
August 2010, he was cited for possession of an open container of alcohol in a motor 
vehicle, but was later found guilty of an equipment violation. The evidence is sufficient 
to establish the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under AG 
¶ 32 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has repeatedly engaged in criminal conduct. Some of the alleged 
misconduct occurred while he was a juvenile. His latest police citation was issued less 
than three years ago. His delay in resolving an outstanding arrest warrant is particularly 
troubling. He knew that warrant had been issued against him for a possession of 
marijuana offense in 2007, but he failed to take any action to resolve it until April 2010. 
Based on the evidence presented, I cannot find that Applicant has reformed and 
rehabilitated himself or that he is unlikely to engage in criminal conduct in the future. His 
criminal conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. AG 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics including that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined will all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics including that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not 
limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . .; (3) 
a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . .  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he lied to a police officer in 
2007, that he falsified his e-QIP in 2011, and that he failed to take action to resolve an 
outstanding arrest warrant for over two and half years. Based on his admissions, AG ¶¶ 
16(a) through 16(d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
 
8 
 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant engaged in repetitive and recent misconduct that raises serious 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has failed to 
present evidence that would mitigate such security concerns. None of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a young man who has been working for his current employer for 
about two and a half years. He has obtained an associate’s degree and is pursuing a 
bachelor’s degree. While the alleged misconduct could be characterized as youthful 
indiscretions, Applicant has failed to show that he has matured and will not engage in 
misconduct in the future. A recent example of his unreliability arises from his probation 
violation. In May 2010, he was placed on probation for 12 months in State A. He was 
prohibited from possessing or consuming alcohol while on probation and was required 
to make monthly reports to his probation officer. In August 2010, he was cited for 
possessing an open container of alcohol in a vehicle in State B. The abstract of 
Applicant’s probation report does not reflect that he advised the probation officer of his 
citation for that alcohol-related offense in State B. At the end of his probation, the 
probation officer reported that he had complied with all conditions of his probation. Such 
evidence raises questions about whether Applicant was forthcoming and honest with 
the probation officer. From the evidence presented, Applicant has failed to show that he 
has reformed and rehabilitated himself.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about his 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the criminal conduct and personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
    
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
