 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03926 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2012, the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and 
Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 28, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On February 6, 2013, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and it was received on February 22, 2013. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on April 
23, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with comments. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He is a high school graduate. He married in 1984 and 
has two grown children. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2003. He 
submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on October 28, 2010.  
 
 In September 1985, Applicant submitted a SCA, wherein he admitted a 1983 
disorderly conduct charge. In January 1986 Applicant submitted a sworn statement 
admitting to having been arrested and charged with possession of a controlled 
dangerous substance in 1976. He also discussed two other arrests. In this statement, 
he admitted to using marijuana in 1972 and continuing to use it until January 1986. He 
admitted to using cocaine on one occasion. He admitted to using amphetamines to stay 
awake on long drives and when he was working long hours at his job. He affirmatively 
stated, “I intend to use marijuana in the future at about the same rate as I am now using 
it as it is no danger to me or the security of my country.”1 Applicant indicated he 
purchased marijuana about once a week and used it frequently during 1986.2  
 
 On October 5, 1994, Applicant submitted a National Agency Questionnaire. He 
disclosed he had used marijuana in high school. He failed to disclose any other illegal 
drug use. He stated: “I used marijuana in high school years (pre-1974) when among 
other classmates. Never used again, no future intentions.”3 
 
 Applicant was granted a DOD confidential clearance in September 1985, while 
working at a federal government facility from August 1985 to May 1992.  
 
 In June 1995 Applicant provided a signed sworn statement. In it he admitted that 
he used marijuana from 1972 to 1984 on weekends. From 1984 to 1987, his marijuana 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
use continued, but was sporadic.4 In 1987, his marijuana use increased to two to three 
times per week until 1991. Since 1991, he used marijuana twice, the last time being in 
December 1993. In his sworn statement, he said: “I have no intentions to use marijuana 
in the future, as I have no need to use this drug. It is possible that under the right 
circumstances, it could happen, however, I seriously doubt that it would as I no longer 
associate with drug users and have not since 1991.”5 Applicant admitted that from 1974 
to 1984 he purchased marijuana monthly, used cocaine approximately 20 times 
between 1976 and 1983, and occasionally contributed money towards its purchase.  
 
 Applicant also admitted in his June 1995 sworn statement that he was not truthful 
in his 1986 sworn statement because he denied purchasing and selling marijuana, and 
he minimized his drug use. He also admitted he did not disclose the full extent of his 
marijuana use nor his cocaine use on his 1994 National Agency Questionnaire because 
he feared he would lose his job.6 
 
 Applicant signed a sworn statement on September 6, 1995. In it he admitted he 
had used marijuana once or twice a week since December 1993 and stated his last use 
of marijuana was in late August 1995. He also stated: “In the future, I will keep my use 
of marijuana to this level and I will avoid all other illegal drugs.”7 
 
 On July 29, 1996, a DOHA Administrative Judge denied Applicant’s security 
clearance due to his illegal drug use and his falsifications. The decision notes that 
Applicant admitted he continued to use marijuana until March 1996.8  
 
 In April 1999, Applicant completed an SCA. He disclosed that he had used 
marijuana from June 1974 to December 1997. He estimated he used it about 2,000 
times. He denied he used marijuana while holding a security clearance.9  
 
 In his February 2000 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant admitted he 
falsified his employment application to the federal contractor in 1994 by denying all 
illegal drug use.10  
 
                                                          
4 Item 8. 
 
5 Item 8 at 2. 
 
6 Item 8. 
 
7 Item 9. 
 
8 Items 10, 11 
 
9 Item 12. 
 
10 Item 14. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant admitted on his October 10, 2010, SCA that he used marijuana 
approximately 20 times between December 2003 and December 2009. He also 
disclosed that he had been granted a secret security clearance in August 2002.11  
 
 Applicant was interviewed on November 16, 2010. In his interview, he confirmed 
he used marijuana from December 2003 to December 2009. He also stated he had 
never purchased or sold illegal drugs and that no legal action had been taken against 
him for his drug use. Applicant told the investigator regarding his future drug use that he 
intended to continue using marijuana with friends if it is offered to him. He would not 
refuse marijuana if offered to him and he would only use it in moderation. Applicant also 
told the investigator that he continues to associate with friends who use illegal drugs 
and he has never had a positive drug test.12  
 
 Applicant’s April 2012 response to DOHA interrogatories adopted, with some 
minor corrections, the November 2010 OPM report of interview. He also stated in his 
response: “Marijuana is the only illegal drug I have used in the past.”13 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he states that since his family relocated to a 
new state in 1994-1995 there was significantly less frequency of visits from individuals 
where marijuana was a common social event. He stated it has been more than 35 years 
since he sold any illegal drug and the past circumstances involved him purchasing 
marijuana and splitting it with the people with whom he associated. He stated that while 
holding a confidential security clearance and a secret security clearance, he never 
compromised national security or disclosed classified information to any unauthorized 
person.14  
 
 Applicant clarified his statement as to potential future use of marijuana. He 
stated: “Whereas what is not included is that if/when in certain social events, and a 
trusted source would offer, for example a marijuana cigarette, I might take a puff and 
pass it on.” Applicant further clarified that he could also refuse the offer stating:” I have 
illegal drug testing at my job.” He stated he would refuse the marijuana if he felt that the 
marijuana had other substances in it.15  
 
 The record includes several instances where Applicant stated in the past that he 
did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future, but subsequently used it.  
 
 
                                                          
11 Item 17. 
 
12 Item 18. 
 
13 Item 18. Some of Applicant’s false statements and drug uses have not been alleged and are not 
considered for disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when analyzing the whole person.  
   
14 Item 2. 
 
15 Item 2. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (a) Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; (b) Drug abuse is the illegal use of 
a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and concluded the 
following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Applicant has used illegal drugs from 1972 to at least 2009. During some of that 
time he held a confidential clearance and from 2002 a secret security clearance. At 
different times, Applicant has made statements about his future intent to use marijuana 
and not to use drugs. In his most recent statement to a Government investigator, he 
indicated he would not refuse marijuana if it was being passed around by a trusted 
friend. Applicant has possessed, purchased, and sold illegal drugs. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following 
two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of marijuana use with virtually no commitment to 
stop using it. He has used it while holding a confidential clearance and a secret security 
clearance with no regard for the seriousness of his actions. There is no evidence that he 
will refrain from using marijuana in the future. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and concluded the following has been raised: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional or community standing. 
 
In his 1986 sworn statement, Applicant deliberately provided false information 
about his illegal drug use. He minimized his actual use and denied purchasing 
marijuana. He lied again in 1995 when he provided a sworn statement that he last used 
marijuana in 1991, when in fact he had continued to use marijuana at a later time. 
Applicant falsified his response in DOHA interrogatories when he stated his only illegal 
 
8 
 
 
drug use involved marijuana, when in fact he had used cocaine and amphetamines in 
the past. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has a long history of 
providing false information in sworn statements and to Government investigators. His 
statements and clarifications are not credible. His pattern of falsification is a serious 
security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He has used marijuana with varying degrees since high 
school. Under the right set of circumstances, he may use it again in the future. He has 
used marijuana while holding a security clearance. He is unfazed by the seriousness of 
his conduct and appears to lack an appreciation for the security concerns and being 
able to abide by the law. His lack of commitment to cease using illegal drugs even while 
holding a security clearance is disturbing. He has a long history of providing inconsistent 
and false information about his drug use in sworn documents and to Government 
investigators. Applicant was denied a security clearance in 1996 because of his drug 
involvement and personal conduct. It is obvious, he did not learn from the experience. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant 
    
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.d:  Against Applicant  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
