KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant’s several instances of false and/or minimizing statements provide a
reasonable basis for the Judge to have concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated a level of
rehabilitation commensurate with the requirements of the Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-02234.a1
DATE: 05/15/2013
DATE: May 15, 2013
In Re:
      ---------------------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-02234
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Robert E. Craven, Esq.  
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 31, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 26, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings were
erroneous; whether the Judge failed properly to apply the pertinent mitigating conditions; and
whether the overall adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
During the early 1990s, while Applicant was married to his previous wife, he exposed
himself to his nine-year-old niece and rubbed his genitals against her knee.  The child started crying
and complained to Applicant’s wife.  Applicant initially denied misconduct, but he stated that he
wanted to get help.  
Applicant pled guilty to lewd and lascivious conduct, a felony.  He was placed under the
supervision of the state department of corrections  for one year, followed by nine years of probation.
He was required to complete a sex offender program, perform 100 hours of public service, refrain
from contact with the victim, and to have no contact with persons under 18 without parental
supervision.  He was also required to abstain from drugs or alcohol as a condition of his sentence
and to attend narcotics anonymous (NA) and alcoholics anonymous (AA).  Applicant has completed
the requirements imposed by the court.  He advised that, during his sex offender counseling, he was
led to understand that he had repeated behavior that had been done to him over 20 years previously.
Applicant has complied with sex offender reporting requirements of the two states in which he has
resided since the offense.  He no longer has to report his offense in his current state of residence. 
Applicant made false statements on his security clearance application (SCA).  He stated that
he had been laid off from a job in November 2009.  In fact, Applicant had been terminated
involuntarily due to unsatisfactory duty performance.  He also denied currently having any debts
over 90 days delinquent, even though at the time he had two credit card accounts that fell within that
category.
During his security clearance interview, Applicant initially claimed he had been laid off in
2009 but later admitted that he had been fired.  Concerning his criminal offense, he stated that his
robe must have been opened when he walked past his niece, denying any contact with her.  He
claimed that he had pled nolo contendere on the advice of an attorney.  He eventually admitted that
he had knowingly exposed himself to the victim.  At the hearing, he acknowledged that he had not
been truthful when he denied having contact with his niece.  Concerning his debts, he claimed at the
hearing that he had been behind in payments only one month.  However, he also testified that about
11 months passed between the time he was first contacted by a settlement attorney and the time at
which he began making payments, which the Judge found to be inconsistent.  Applicant also testified
that he had forgotten about the delinquent debts when he completed his SCA.  
Applicant has not engaged in subsequent sexual misconduct.  He continues to attend NA and
AA.  He enjoys a good reputation for the quality of his work performance, and he has informed at
1Compare with Applicant’s testimony at the hearing: “Q: Had you had any alcohol that night?  A: Yes.  Q:  How
much alcohol had you had?  A: One bottle . . . A bottle of beer.  Q: A beer?  Okay. Were you intoxicated?  A: No.”  Tr.
at 54.  
least some of his fellow workers about his conviction.  He advised one person that he was “very
drunk” on the evening in question.1  Decision at 8.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Under Guideline J, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s conviction raised a security
concern.  In evaluating his case for mitigation, she acknowledged that over 20 years had elapsed
since the offense, which is indicative of rehabilitation.  However, she noted that he had variously
attributed his actions to alcohol as well as to his having been a victim of a similar offense.  The
Judge concluded that neither of these matters were sufficient to mitigate his intentional act with his
niece.  She also noted  his lack of candor regarding this event.  For example, Applicant led a friend
to believe that he was so impaired by alcohol that he did not know what he was doing.  Neither was
he candid with the investigator, initially denying any physical contact and claiming that his plea was
on the poor advice of his lawyer.  She stated that Applicant’s false statements about his conduct or
his efforts to minimize it impaired his efforts to demonstrate rehabilitation.
Regarding the Guideline E allegations of false statements, the Judge concluded that
Applicant’s initial false statement to the interviewer concerning the circumstances of his criminal
offense raised a security concern.  She concluded that Applicant’s omission from his SCA of his
delinquent debts and of the true reason for his job termination were deliberate.  Concerning the
former, she cited to evidence that Applicant was aware that he had not been making payments on
either of the delinquent credit cards within the 90 days preceding his completion of the SCA.  As
to the latter, she noted Applicant’s clearance interview, in which he admitted that he had been fired
and should have acknowledged that fact on his SCA.  Accordingly, she concluded that these
falsifications were deliberate and raised security concerns.  
In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, she noted that Applicant had not provided
truthful information until pressured by the interviewer.  She also noted that Applicant’s claim to
have shared his security-significant information with his spouse was not corroborated and that two
of his witnesses, with whom Applicant shared some of his past, knew little about the specific charge
of which Applicant was convicted.  This suggests the extent to which Applicant might still be
subject to exploitation or duress.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted that Applicant had
served the sentence imposed by the court and had not reoffended.  However, his false statements and
his failing to be immediately forthcoming about his security-significant conduct raised doubts about
his willingness to fulfill the fiduciary obligations that come with access to national security
information.  The positive aspects of Applicant’s record were not sufficient, in the Judge’s view, to
outweigh the concerns raised by his criminal conduct and his false statements.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he was terminated for cause from his prior
2In any event, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation concerning his deliberate false statement about the
circumstances underlying his conviction.  Response to SOR, dated Sep. 14, 2012, at 1.
3Applicant states that his “intent to perform the sexual misconduct is reasonably in question.”  Applicant Brief
at 4.  The doctrine of collateral estoppel applies in DOHA cases, which precludes Applicant from denying that he had
the mens rea necessary to effectuate the offense of which he was convicted.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06937 at 3
(App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2013).  We interpret the Brief as drawing our attention to evidence that might tend to mitigate the
offense without denying his guilt.  
employment.  He cites to evidence, such as his receipt of unemployment benefits, which he contends
is not consistent with his having been fired.  We examine a Judge’s findings to determine if they are
supported by substantial record evidence, which is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See also ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012).  In this
case, the Judge based her finding upon the interview summary contained in Government Exhibit
(GE) 2, Answers to Interrogatories.  Applicant acknowledged that the exhibit accurately represented
his answers to the interviewer.  Tr. at 71.  During this interview, though initially denying that he was
terminated for cause, Applicant admitted that “he was fired and would have stayed on the job if he
could have done so.”  Interview Summary at 1.  We conclude that the challenged finding is
supported by substantial record evidence.
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s findings that his false statements and omissions were
deliberate.  In analyzing an applicant’s intent, a Judge must consider the applicant’s statements in
light of the entire record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-04821 at 4 (App. Bd. May 21, 2012).  The
Judge’s treatment of Applicant’s intent, summarized above, evidences that she did so.  The Judge’s
findings about the deliberate nature of Applicant’s false statements and omissions are supported by
substantial record evidence.2
Applicant challenges the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions, citing to record
evidence which be believes demonstrates that he has met his burden of persuasion.  This evidence
includes his participation in rehabilitation programs; his compliance with all requirements of his
sentence and his satisfactory completion thereof; circumstances that influenced his sexual
misconduct, such as alcohol consumption and his own history as a victim of sexual assault;3 and the
time that had elapsed since the offense.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence
in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-09329 at 3 (App. Bd.  Mar. 18, 2013).  The Judge made
detailed findings about the evidence cited by Applicant and discussed it in the Analysis.  She paid
particular attention to evidence that Applicant had undergone various types of therapy and
counseling following his conviction and that over 20 years had elapsed without reoffense.  The
Directive provides that a lapse of time since the criminal behavior happened can mitigate concerns
under Guideline J.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 32(a).  However, a Judge must not apply the mitigating
conditions mechanically but in light of the evidence as a whole.  In this case, Applicant’s several
instances of false and/or minimizing statements provide a reasonable basis for the Judge to have
concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated a level of rehabilitation commensurate with the
requirements of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-05079 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2012),
in which an applicant’s failure to report security significant conduct vitiated his case for mitigation,
despite a lapse of several years since the conduct occurred.  Applicant has not rebutted the
4To the extent that Applicant is contending that the Judge should have accepted his version of events and his
explanations for his false statements, we note that we are required to defer to a Judge’s credibility determination.
Directive ¶ E3.32.1.  
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither has he demonstrated
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.4
Applicant’s brief cites to another Hearing Office case which, he contends, is similar to his own and
which supports his case for a clearance.  We give due consideration to this case.  However, it has
significant differences from Applicant’s.  In any event, Hearing Office decisions are not binding on
other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-04176 at 3 (App.
Bd. Dec. 18, 2012).  
In light of the above, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
