KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record.  The Appeal
Board has declined to hold that a debtor’s obligations are discharged by actions of the creditor,
such as sale of the debt or a charge off of the account.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-08274
DATE: 05/02/2013
DATE: May 2, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-08274
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
20, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On January 23, 2013, after the close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: (1) whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant has $120,000 in delinquent debt alleged in the SOR.  This is
comprised of four debts in the amount of $16,000, $8,730, $27,000 and $68,000.  After he was
unable to receive assistance from his creditors or a debt-to-wealth program, Applicant stopped
making payments on his debts in 2008.  Since 2008, Applicant has focused his efforts on catching
up on other financial obligations not listed in the SOR.  He has notified the four creditors listed in
the SOR that he plans to initiate lawsuits against them for alleged violations of the State’s Deceptive
Trade Practices Act.  His complaint is that the creditors failed to accurately report information to
the credit reporting bureaus.  To date, Applicant has not resolved any of the $120,000 in delinquent
debt.  Although he admits to incurring the debt, he believes that the debts are uncollectible under
the statutes of limitation for the two states involved.  Applicant currently lives modestly and within
his means with the help of a budget.  He is current on his recurring financial obligations.   
The Judge concluded: Applicant admitted each allegation in the SOR, without explanation.
However, in a post-hearing submission, he retracted his admissions and denies that he owes the four
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, claiming that these debts are now uncollectible because of the
statute of limitations.  Under the perception that he had been treated unfairly by his creditors,
Applicant decided not to repay his legitimate debts after he lost a home to foreclosure.  Instead, he
decided to rely on the statute of limitations.  The reliance on the statutes of limitation fails on two
grounds.  First, the assertion is not supported by the record.  Applicant did not submit any
information regarding the specific terms of the credit agreements, which would have provided a
reasoned determination as to which statute of limitation applied.  Second, security clearance
decisions are not controlled or limited by any statute of limitation, and reliance on the non-
collectability of a debt does nor constitute a good-faith effort to resolve that debt within the meaning
of the Directive.  The federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.
Applicant’s decision not to pay his debts reflects poorly on his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness,
and ability to protect classified information.  Applicant’s decision also shows an unwillingness to
take responsibility for his actions.  Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision.
Applicant argues that the Judge failed to consider evidence submitted by him in a post-
hearing submission.  He referenced the Judge’s mentioning of the operation of the statutes of
limitation and asserts that the statute of limitations argument was only a small part of what Applicant
raised in the post-hearing submission.  Applicant then goes into great detail as to why he does not
owe the debts alleged in the SOR.  The gravamen of his position as stated in the post-hearing
submission is that credit card receivables are typically sold into a secondary market, resulting in a
situation where the entities reporting the debts have been paid in full.  His position as stated in the
post-hearing submission was that he incurred the debts originally, and at one time they were owed,
but that they were no longer owed.  Applicant engages in very technical arguments as to why,
3
through the vagaries of the secondary market, the debts he owed no longer exist.  He states that the
Judge failed to consider this evidence.  
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he or she
specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).  The
Board finds no reason to believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the evidence or that she failed
to consider all the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2,
2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal and find no error in the
Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation.         
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  The
Board concludes that the Judge appropriately weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant
against the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and adequately discussed why the disqualifying
conduct established under Guideline F  was not mitigated.  
Contrary to Applicant’s assertions, the Judge found that Applicant’s SOR debts remain
outstanding and unsatisfied.  This finding is supported by the evidence.  The Board has previously
reviewed and declined to adopt arguments which rely on claims that a debtor’s obligations are
discharged as a result of actions by the creditor such as sale of the debt or a charge off of the
account.  See, ISCR Case No. 06-07554 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 08-07264 (App.
Bd. Oct. 15, 2009); and ISCR Case No. 09-01175 (App. Bd. May 11, 2010).   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
