 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12343 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 18, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 15, 2013, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s 
written case was submitted on March 27, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
 
2 
 
Applicant received the FORM on April 5, 2013. As of May 23, 2013, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2013. The Government exhibits 
(GE) included in the FORM are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old part-time employee of a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since July 2011. He is applying for a security clearance 
for the first time. He attended college for a period. He is married with two stepchildren, 
ages 20 and 15.1  
 
 Applicant has not had steady full-time employment since the company where he 
worked closed its operations in February 2009. He was unemployed from February 
2009 to June 2010. He has worked part-time for various employers since then. He also 
had medical bills related to his stepchild’s medical condition. He was unable to pay all 
his bills; a number of debts became delinquent; and two cars were repossessed.2 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts. All of the debts appear on at least one 
credit report. Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
(telecommunications company - $2,316), 1.c (deficiency on car loan - $9,871), and 1.h 
(medical - $7,629). He established that he paid the $28 debt to a collection company on 
behalf of a telecommunications company (SOR ¶ 1.f). He stated the remaining debts 
were disputed or “awaiting confirmation.”3  
 
 Applicant retained a credit protection company in February 2012 “for the purpose 
of improving [Applicant’s] credit profile and helping [Applicant] establish and or obtain 
new credit.” He paid the company $1,500, and in return the company agreed to provide 
credit counseling and dispute items on his credit report. The company sent dispute 
letters on Applicant’s behalf to nine creditors.4  
 
 Applicant contracted with a debt management company in February 2013 to 
assist him in resolving his debts. He enrolled the three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.h in the company’s debt resolution program (DRP). The three debts, with 
additional interest and fees, totaled $20,589. The estimated duration of the DRP is 34 
months. Applicant agreed to monthly payments of $451 to an escrow account. The 
escrow account holder charges a monthly fee of $9.85. The debt management company 
agreed to negotiate settlements with his creditors, and Applicant would use the 
accumulated funds in the escrow account to pay the settlements. Applicant agreed to 
pay the debt management company 23% “of the balance of each debt enrolled in the 
program,” for a total of $4,735 if all three debts are settled. Applicant did not respond to 
                                                          
1 GE 4, 7. 
 
2 GE 4, 7. 
 
3 GE 3-9. 
 
4 GE 7. 
 
 
3 
 
the FORM, so it is unknown if he made any of the $451 monthly payments to the 
escrow account.5 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $297 delinquent debt to a telecommunications 
company that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He admitted owing $2,312 (SOR ¶ 1.a) to a 
collection company on behalf of the same telecommunications company. I am unable to 
determine that the $297 delinquent debt represents a separate debt that is not included 
in the amount that was referred to the collection company.6 
 
 Applicant stated that he was “awaiting confirmation” of the $330 delinquent debt 
to a collection company that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. The debt is listed by Experian on 
the combined July 2011 credit report. The report indicates the original creditor was a 
telecommunications company and the debt became delinquent in 2008. The debt is also 
listed on the October 2012 Equifax credit report. The credit protection company 
disputed the debt on Applicant’s behalf. Applicant submitted a combined credit report 
obtained in December 2012. That report listed the debt as reported by Experian, 
TransUnion, and Equifax. The debt is not listed on the Equifax credit reports obtained in 
January 2013 and March 2013.7  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $649 debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
telecommunications company. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he was 
“awaiting confirmation” of the debt and that the collection company closed the account 
and transferred it to another collection company. The debt is listed by Experian on the 
combined July 2011 credit report. The credit protection company disputed the debt on 
Applicant’s behalf. The debt is not listed on any of the later credit reports.8 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $972 delinquent debt to a collection company that is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He stated that there was insufficient information to determine 
whether he owed the debt, and that the debt management company was unable to 
validate the debt as it is not on his credit report. The debt is listed by Experian on the 
combined July 2011 credit report. The report indicates the original creditor was a bank 
and the debt became delinquent in 2009. The credit protection company disputed the 
debt on Applicant’s behalf. The debt is not listed on any of the later credit reports.9 
 
 Applicant stated that he was “awaiting confirmation” of the $503 medical debt 
that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. The name of the creditor is not identified in the SOR. 
Applicant stated that there is a “lack of information on who it is owed to.” The debt is 
listed by TransUnion on the combined July 2011 credit report. The credit protection 
                                                          
5 GE 3. 
 
6 GE 3-9. 
 
7 GE 3, 5-9. 
 
8 GE 3, 5-9. 
 
9 GE 3, 5-9. 
 
4 
 
company disputed the debt on Applicant’s behalf. TransUnion responded that the debt 
was “deleted.”10 
 
 Applicant indicated that he would resolve his delinquent debts through the debt 
resolution program. However, he did not respond to the FORM, so there is no 
information as to how much, if any, progress he has made. The personal financial 
statement he submitted in December 2012 showed a net remainder of $176 after 
subtracting his monthly expenses and two car payments from his net monthly income. 
That figure does not include any payments toward his delinquent debts.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
10 GE 3, 5-9. 
 
11 GE 3, 7. 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment after his 
employer closed its operations in February 2009. He also had medical bills related to his 
stepchild’s medical condition. Applicant’s employment issues and his stepchild’s 
medical condition were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant paid the $28 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. There is no evidence that he 
made any payments toward any of his other debts. In February 2013, Applicant enrolled 
the three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.h in a debt resolution program, but he 
did not establish that he made any of the $451 monthly payments to the escrow 
account.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG 
¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second 
section is not. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to the $28 paid debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. It is 
not applicable to any of the other debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the disputed debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.i. I find that security concerns remain despite 
the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the factors that went into Applicant’s financial difficulties. However, 
the limited information in the record has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are 
sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
