 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 11-12721 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), and the exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised under the guidelines for financial considerations and personal conduct. 
His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). This action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
In his February 25, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the 
allegations under the financial considerations guideline, with explanations. He admitted 
he answered “No” to questions on his security clearance application regarding criminal 
charges, but denied intentionally concealing the information. Applicant also requested a 
decision without a hearing. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) prepared a written presentation of the Government’s case in a FORM 
dated March 14, 2013. On April 2, 2013, Applicant received the Government’s FORM, 
along with nine documents (Items 1 through 9). He was given 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. No response was received. The case was assigned to me on 
May 24, 2013, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years of age. He married in 1994 and divorced in 2004. No 
children were listed in his security clearance application. Applicant worked as an 
assembler from 1990 to 2005. He then left his job to attend college full time. In 
November 2006, he began his current position in information technology technical 
support. He earned an associate’s degree in 2007. He indicated on his security 
clearance application that he received a secret security clearance in 2006. (Items 7, 9) 
 
 In his 2011 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that within the 
previous seven years, he had filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition that was 
discharged; that he had “numerous credit cards” charged off; and that his wages were 
garnished to satisfy a student loan. In his security interview, he stated that his debts 
became delinquent in 2007, because he was unemployed while attending college. He 
did not believe that his debts were due to circumstances beyond his control. Schedule 
F of Applicant's 2007 bankruptcy petition shows his liabilities totaled $112,815. It lists 
one student loan, in the amount of $15,714. However, Applicant's credit report of 
October 2012 shows six student loans, which total $35,628. The creditors for one of 
the loans brought a suit against Applicant, and a judgment was filed in September 
2010 in the amount of $20,418. (Items 4, 5, 6, 7, 9) 
 
 Applicant's October 2012 credit report shows that he has numerous open 
accounts that are current. He stated in his Answer to the SOR that he has two credit 
cards with low limits “to ensure that I do not overspend” and he usually pays the 
balance each month. Applicant received financial counseling when he filed the 
bankruptcy petition. (Items 3, 5) 
 
 During his March 2011 security interview, Applicant stated that he planned to 
repay his student loans once he earned additional income. In his interrogatory 
response of December 2012, Applicant stated that he had made payment 
 
 
3 
arrangements for the student loans. He attached a bank account statement showing 
one payment of $160 on December 5, 2012, to “DF2 Student Loan.” Applicant also 
circled a December 3, 2012 payment of $169.29, but did not indicate whether this 
payment related to his student loan debts. He also attached his pay statements for 
September and October 2012, but they do not show any deductions related to student 
loan payments. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant again stated he is paying on the 
loans: “I am currently having payment [sic] made to the [government creditor] 
automatically from my checking account every month.” He also stated he is “. . . still 
trying to set the same thing up for [student loan creditor].” (Items 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant’s December 2012 personal financial statement (PFS) shows that he 
earns $2,662 net monthly income. His monthly expenses and debt payments total 
$1,992, leaving a monthly net remainder of $558. He did not list payments toward his 
student loan debts. (Item 6) 
 
 When Applicant completed his 2011 security clearance application, he answered 
“Yes” to a question that asked if he had ever been charged with an alcohol- or drug-
related offense, and disclosed a charge of Driving While Intoxicated in 1989. He 
explained that he served 45 days in a work-release program, and attended an in-patient 
alcohol rehabilitation program. He noted that he has been sober since 1992. Applicant 
also disclosed his 2007 bankruptcy, his wage garnishment, and his numerous credit 
card accounts that were charged off or in collection before the bankruptcy. (Items 1, 7) 
 
 However, Applicant did not disclose other information regarding his criminal 
history. In June 2005, Applicant’s friend became intoxicated at his home, and he 
“escorted her out.” She called the police and claimed he assaulted her. The file does not 
specifically state that Applicant was arrested. However, when asked in his interrogatory 
why he did not disclose his 2005 arrest, he stated that he did not know he had to list it 
because he did not assault the woman. Applicant was served with a summons to 
appear in court regarding a charge of second-degree assault. A plea hearing was held 
in October 2005, and Applicant's case was placed on the Stet docket, meaning no 
further action was taken, barring any future criminal activity. In February 2006, Applicant 
was again charged with second-degree assault. He stated in his interrogatory response 
that a female friend attacked him in his home, she “kept returning,” and he, his ex-wife, 
and his girlfriend all obtained protective orders against her. He did not provide evidence 
to support this claim. A summons was issued and served on Applicant in March 2006. 
The file does not indicate if Applicant was arrested. The charge was nol prossed in May 
2006. (Items 6, 8) 
 
 SOR allegations 2.a and 2.b state that Applicant deliberately falsified his 
response to Section 22, questions (a) and (b), on his 2011 security clearance 
application. The questions ask if, in the previous seven years, he received a summons 
to appear in court in a criminal proceeding, or had been arrested by any law 
enforcement official. In his interrogatory response, Applicant explained that, as to both 
the 2005 and 2006 charges, “I was unaware that I needed to provide this.” Applicant 
 
 
4 
stated that in both cases, the women attacked him, and he did not assault them. 
Because he was not at fault, he did not believe he had to report the charges. In his 2013 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant reiterated that he did not think false charges had to be 
disclosed, and “I was not trying to hide anything.” He added that “In retrospect I see I 
should have answered these questions differently . . . “ The SOR also alleges in ¶ 2.c 
that Applicant deliberately falsified his response to Section 23, question (f) of a security 
clearance application he completed in November 2006. However, that application is not 
included in the FORM. Without documentation to support the Government’s allegation, I 
find for the Applicant on ¶ 2.c. (Items 1, 3, 6, 7) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and policy in the AG.1 Decisions must also 
reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest2 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government must produce 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the 
applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a 
“right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.3 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as her or his own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4 
                                                 
1 Directive. 6.3. 
2 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
3 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
4 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . .  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. His numerous delinquencies led to 
filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in 2007, with liabilities of $112,815. It was 
successfully discharged in 2008. However, Applicant's student loan debts remain 
delinquent. As of the date of the SOR, these debts total more than $35,000. His history 
of financial delinquencies supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, I considered the following conditions that can potentially 
mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Although Applicant’s debts started to become delinquent in 2008, they are not in 
the distant past because the debts alleged in the SOR remain delinquent. His 
unresolved financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be 
 
 
 
 
6 
applied. Applicant admitted in his security interview that his delinquencies did not result 
from circumstances beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant states that he is making payments on hs student loan debts through 
automatic deduction from his checking account. He provided a document showing at 
least one payment made in December 2012. Although he stated in December 2012 
and February 2013 that he had made payment arrangements, he provided no evidence 
of a payment plan, or a track record of making consistent payments on his student 
loans, despite having a monthly net remainder of more than $500 that he could have 
used for this purpose. The record does not contain evidence of a good-faith effort to 
repay his loans, and Applicant's finances are not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
do not apply.  
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose facts 
related to his criminal history, implicating the following under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant failed to report on his 2011 security clearance application that he was 
arrested in 2005, and received a summons to appear on criminal charges in 2005 and 
2006. He knew he had been charged with assault within the seven-year period covered 
by the questions, but decided that he did not have to report the charges, because he 
believed he was not guilty of the offenses. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to Applicant's failure to 
disclose these facts in response to questions 22(a) and 22(b). As noted previously, I 
find for the Applicant on allegation 2.c, because the 2006 security clearance application 
to which it refers is not in evidence. 
 
Among the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, the following are relevant: 
 
 
 
7 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his criminal history because he did not think that he 
was required to list what he considered to be false charges. However, the questions do 
not refer to guilt; they state plainly that he must disclose whether he had been arrested, 
and whether he had received a summons to appear in court on a criminal charge. The 
Appeal Board has held that an applicant completing a security clearance application is 
bound by the plain language of the question.5 Applicant’s failure to be candid with the 
Government during his security clearance investigation is not minor. His actions reflect 
poorly on his reliability and judgment. In addition, there is no evidence that Applicant 
made efforts to change or correct the answers on his application during the security 
clearance process. AG ¶ 17(a) and (c) cannot be applied.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant is a mature, 54-year-old adult. He has accrued more than $35,000 in 
delinquent student loan debt. He was on notice that delinquent debts are a security 
concern when he completed his security clearance application in January 2011, and 
                                                 
5 ISCR Case No. 00-0713 AT 3 (Feb. 15, 2002). 
 
 
8 
again during his security interview in March 2011. Although applicants are not required 
to be debt free, they are expected to develop a plan to resolve their SOR debts, and 
provide evidence that they are implementing that plan.6 In 2011, Applicant mentioned 
payment arrangements, but he has provided no proof of such a plan. In 2013, he 
stated he is making payments from his checking account, but provided evidence of 
only one payment. Overall, the record contains scant evidence of a clear plan to 
resolve debts. 
 
 When Applicant completed his security clearance application in 2011, he failed 
to inform the government of a 2005 arrest, or his summons to criminal proceedings in 
2005 and 2006. Applicant stated he did not disclose them because they were not true, 
although the questions clearly did not ask about guilt. Applicant was a mature, 
educated adult when he completed the application, and was experienced with security 
clearance applications because he had completed one in 2006 when he was granted 
his first clearance. The Government must be able to rely on security clearance 
applicants to be candid and forthright during the clearance process. Doubts remain 
about Applicant's suitability to hold a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
6 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
