                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-10508
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
History of the Case
On November 30, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 31, 2012, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on March 1, 2013, and did not respond to the FORM. The case was
assigned to me on April 16,  2013.  
2
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated six delinquent debts
exceeding $132,000. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted one of the
allegations (creditor 1.a for $9,385) but denied the remaining allegations. He claimed he
was negotiating with creditor 1.a and will pay the debt before February 2013.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 69-year-old analyst for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegation covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant is adopted
as a relevant and material finding.  Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in February 1968 and has two adult children (one adopted)
from this marriage. (Item 3) He earned college credits and claims no degree or diploma.
(Item 3) Applicant enlisted in the Navy in July 1963 and served 18 years of active duty
before receiving an honorable discharge in October 1991. (Item 3) During his Navy
enlistment, he held a top secret security clearance. (Item 6)
Applicant’s finances
Following a corporate layoff in 1999/2000, Applicant relied on credit cards to
cover living expenses for himself and his son, who was underemployed at the time.
(Item 6) By 2008, Applicant’s credit card debts had escalated to unmanageable levels.
(Item 6) His credit reports document that he opened most of the listed credit card
accounts between September 2003 and February 2008. (Item 7) Altogether, he opened
some 22 consumer accounts between May 2001 and March 2011, inclusive of credit
cards, mortgage, and auto accounts. (Item 7)
To settle his credit card debts, Applicant engaged a credit settlement  company
in 2009. (Item 6)  By June 2012, he had settled and paid most of his listed creditors
holding delinquent credit balances. (Item 3) In September 2009, he settled and paid his
debt to creditor 1.b. (Item 3) It is not clear whether he paid this creditor the full amount
owing ($25,000), or a lesser amount. Applicant settled his listed $30,844 debt with
creditor 1.c in July 2011 for the reduced amount of $11,957. (Item 3) Although he
claims payment of the agreed amount, he provides no documented receipt of payment.
In July 2011, Applicant settled his $39,371 creditor 1.d debt for the reduced
amount of $16,000. (Item 3) His July 2011 acknowledgment letter from the creditor
confirmed receipt of Applicant’s liquidated payment of $16,000 in full payment of the
debt.  (Item 3) Applicant settled his $5,176 creditor 1.e debt in October 2011 for the
lesser amount of $4,496 and documented his payment of the debt for the agreed
amount. (Item 3) And in June 2012, Applicant settled his debt with creditor 1.f in full and
documented payment to the creditor in an unspecified amount. (Item 3) How much
Applicant paid creditor 1.f to settle his debt is unclear from the creditor’s
correspondence.
3
Applicant’s debt with creditor 1.a for $9,385 is unpaid and unresolved.  Applicant
claimed in his answer to be working with the creditor to settle the debt. His creditor 1.a
debt remains unresolved.
Unclear from Applicant’s summary of his OPM interview is how he acquired the
funds to satisfy the creditors listed in the SOR.  Possibilities include funds from  savings
and retirement accounts, funds from family members in Japan, or funds from other
undisclosed sources. His credit reports reflect mortgages on different properties, but
none of recent creation. (Items 7 and 8) Altogether, Applicant documents detailed
payments to four of his listed creditors in excess of $20,000. Payments on three of his
settled debts were not specified or detailed.                             
Applicant’s financial status cannot be readily determined from available
documentation. His furnished personal financial statement reports net monthly income
of $4,999 (inclusive of his spouse’s earnings), monthly expenses of $1,945, and
monthly debt payments of $3,044. (Item 6). This leaves him with a net monthly
remainder of just $10. (Item 6) He shows assets totaling $108,000, which comprise his
bank savings ($90,000), stocks/bonds ($3,000), and a car/boat ($15,000). He reported
$402,000 in real estate mortgages on property worth about $300,000. (Item 6)
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
4
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. (AG, ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
5
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s listed delinquent debts, his failure
to document payment of several of the listed debts, and where and how he obtained the
funds to satisfy the five creditors he settled with.
Following his layoff in 1999/2000, Applicant was unemployed for some
unspecified period. With his available funds he sustained himself and aided his son
(also unemployed).  By 2008, though, he had fallen far behind with his creditors and
accumulated delinquencies with six of his listed creditors.  Records show he settled five
of his listed debts with funds from unidentified sources, and satisfied two of the debts
with documented payments. This leaves one debt unresolved, two debts claimed to be
settled, but undocumented as to the payment amounts, and one debt settled, but not
documented as to payment. 
Applicant’s accumulation of credit card debt delinquencies and his past inability
to identify his payment sources raise some potential security concerns about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in managing his finances. His actions warrant
the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines DC ¶
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting
financial obligations;” and DC ¶ 19(h), “unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or
standard of living, increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject’s known legal sources of income.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in
financial cases.
While potentially extenuating, Applicant’s periods of unemployment in 1999/2000
are too dated to have any material bearing on his current financial difficulties with his
debts. As a result, none of the mitigating conditions covering potential extenuating
circumstances have any application to Applicant’s situation.
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence shows that unfortunate economic
circumstances in the 1999/2000 time frame played some initial role in Applicant’s
6
inability to keep up with his consumer debts. Less clear is how these periods of
unemployment contributed to his delinquent debt accumulations in 2008. His
submissions document his settling most of his listed debts. Still unresolved are his listed
debt with creditor 1.a, his payments to three of his five settled debts (i.e., creditors 1.b,
1.c, and 1.f), and his  payment sources. Overall, he demonstrates progress in stabilizing
his finances with his settlement initiatives and documented payments to two of his listed
creditors. His efforts to date are insufficient, however, to meet mitigation requirements
imposed by the AGs governing his finances.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.f:       Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
