 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-15184 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 18, 2011. On 
September 4, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines B and E. DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 7, 2012; answered it on September 
27, 2012; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on April 1, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on April 5, 
 
2 
 
2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 16, 2013, scheduling the hearing for May 2, 2013. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through M, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on May 10, 2013. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Israel. The request is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. I have 
taken administrative notice of the facts listed below.  
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy with a diversified, technologically advanced 
economy. Almost half of Israel’s exports are high technology, including electronic and 
biomedical equipment. The U.S. is Israel’s largest trading partner.  
 
Israel has been identified as a major practitioner of industrial espionage against 
U.S. companies. There have been instances of illegal export, or attempted illegal 
export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to Israel. Israel has become a major 
global leader in arms exports, and the United States and Israel have periodically 
disagreed over Israeli sales of sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third-party 
countries, including China. 
 
The U.S. and Israel have close cultural, historic, and political ties. They 
participate in joint military planning and training, and have collaborated on military 
research and weapons development. Commitment to Israel’s security has been a 
cornerstone of U.S. Middle East policy since Israel’s creation in 1948.  
 
Israel generally respects the rights of its citizens. When human rights violations 
have occurred, they have involved Palestinian detainees or Arab-Israelis. Terrorist 
suicide bombings are a continuing threat in Israel, and U.S. citizens in Israel are 
advised to be cautious.  
 
 Israel considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship or have a claim to 
dual nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other legal purposes. U.S. 
citizens visiting Israel have been subjected to prolonged questioning and thorough 
searches by Israeli authorities upon entry or departure.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 
2.a, and 2.c. He denied SOR ¶ 2.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old senior principal network engineer for a defense 
contractor. He earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science in 1983. He was 
employed by another defense contractor from May 1983 to July 2011. He has worked 
for his current employer since August 2011. (Tr. 35.) He has held a security clearance 
for about 25 years. (Tr. 7.) 
 
 Applicant married his current spouse in August 1986. They have two daughters, 
ages 24 and 25. Applicant and his spouse are native-born U.S. citizens. Applicant’s 
parents and his spouse’s parents are citizens and residents of the United States. 
Applicant and his spouse have no property or financial interests in Israel.  
 
Before Applicant and his spouse married, his spouse’s sister, a native-born U.S. 
citizen, became a citizen of Israel after marrying an Israeli. Her husband subsequently 
became a dual U.S.-Israeli citizen. His spouse’s sister and her husband have three 
adult children: a daughter who is a dual U.S.-Israeli citizen and resides in Israel, and 
two sons, who are dual U.S.-Israeli citizens living and working in the United States. His 
spouse’s sister and her husband visit family members in the United States two to four 
times a year. His spouse’s sister and her husband are both employed by Israeli 
universities. She is a university librarian, and her husband is a university provost. 
Applicant and his spouse receive email from his spouse’s sister about once a week. 
Applicant described his relationship with his wife’s sister and her husband as “not a 
warm relationship,” but civil. (Tr. 38-48; GX 3 at 5.)  
 
 In January 2005, Applicant violated a company security policy by failing to 
properly lock a secure area. The policy was to lock the door, hold a company badge to 
the badge reader next to the door, spin the door lock, and notify security by telephone to 
set the alarm. On one occasion, Applicant forgot to spin the lock, and a security guard 
noticed during the night that the lock had not been spun. No one had entered the area, 
and the alarm had not been triggered. Applicant was counseled and given remedial 
training. He did not remember whether he was verbally reprimanded. (GX 3 at 4.) 
 
 In February 2011, Applicant violated a company security policy regarding the 
changing of cryptographic keying material. He was required to change the encryption 
key every three months. The procedure requires that encryption keys be changed on 
both ends of the network. On February 1, 2011, Applicant changed the encryption key 
at his employer’s end of the network and telephoned his counterpart at the other end of 
the network. His counterpart informed him that the key should not have been changed 
until March 1, 2011. Applicant contacted his communication security (COMSEC) 
custodian and reported that he had mistakenly installed the key a month early. The key 
is a paper tape stored in a canister. Once the tape is pulled out of the canister, it cannot 
be put back because of the design of the canister. (Tr. 66.) After consulting with the 
COMSEC custodian, he removed the new key, locked it in a safe, and reinstalled the 
old key in the encryptor. On March 1, 2011, the new key was reinstalled and the old key 
was destroyed. No data was transmitted improperly because Applicant’s counterpart did 
not change the other key. (GX 3 at 3-4.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s COMSEC manager had no recollection of the incident. When 
Applicant’s current security investigation commenced, she contacted her superiors in 
the intelligence community and determined that the mistaken attempt to change the key 
a month early was not a reportable COMSEC incident. Consequently, no security 
investigation or disciplinary action was initiated. (GX 5.) Applicant disclosed the incident 
in his August 2011 security clearance application. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b 
because it alleged that he actually used the new key before the prescribed date of use. 
The new key was prematurely loaded and then removed, but it was not used before its 
prescribed use date. (Tr. 70.) 
 
 Applicant began an outside business activity in the 1980s. It was a data back-up 
service for small businesses that he operated as a sole proprietorship. He worked in the 
evenings and notified his customers that he was not available during normal business 
hours. (Tr. 34.) He formally organized and incorporated his business on April 14, 2011. 
(AX B.) 
 
 Applicant acquired access to a proxy server in December 2010 or January 2011, 
to enable him to bypass his employer’s restriction on access to web-based email and to 
have access to his personal email, using his company’s unclassified computer. (GX 6 at 
2; Tr. 49.) At that time, he was the lead member of the staff, responsible for 
understanding “the bigger picture of how things were configured and how things should 
work.” He also was responsible for mentoring junior members of the team. (Tr. 85-86.) 
Initially, he used the proxy only for his personal email with family and friends, but then 
he started using it to communicate with clients of his data back-up service during normal 
business hours. He did not install or modify any programs or equipment on his company 
computer. (Tr. 56.) 
 
 Applicant knew that his use of a proxy server violated his employer’s rules 
regarding use of a company computer. He knew that the purpose of preventing access 
to web-based email systems was to reduce the risk of introducing malware into the the 
company’s information technology (IT) systems. However, because of his skill and 
experience, he was confident that he could recognize threats to the company’s IT 
systems and that the risk of introducing malware was “extremely low.” (Tr. 108-09.) 
 
 On April 21, 2011, a cyber-intelligence analyst conducting an investigation 
unrelated to Applicant discovered that several employees, including Applicant, were 
using proxy servers to circumvent the employer’s filtering system and gain access to 
unauthorized Internet sites. (GX 6 at 14.) The computer incident response team 
monitored Applicant’s computer for two weeks and identified 36 hours of suspected 
non-work activity on his computer. Applicant was interviewed on June 10, 2011, and he 
admitted using a proxy server to access his personal email accounts, running an 
outside business during the workday, and charging government contracts for time spent 
 
5 
 
on personal business.1 Investigators determined that Applicant was multi-tasking during 
some of the 36 hours of suspected non-work activity. They concluded that, during the 
two-week period when Applicant’s computer use was monitored, he billed 16.9 hours of 
personal use, worth about $1,076, to government contracts. (GX 6 at 5-6.)  
 
 On July 19, 2011, Applicant was given a termination notice for mischarging his 
time, misusing company computer assets, and violating his employer’s security policies 
by using a proxy server to gain unfiltered access to the Internet from his company 
computer. (GX 6 at 53). He was given an opportunity to resign in lieu of termination, and 
on July 29, 2011, he resigned. (GX 6 at 4, 13.) 
 
 Applicant testified that resigning was a devastating experience. His father had 
worked for the same employer, his brother still works there, all his friends work there, 
and he had worked there for all of his adult life. He testified, “I think the hardest thing 
that I’ve ever had to do in my life is to go home without a job and explain what 
happened to my family.” (Tr. 74.) When asked why he deliberately violated his 
employer’s security rules, he said: 
 
I find it very difficult to understand how I could have rationalized doing 
what I was doing at that point. There is nothing that I can say that could 
possibly make that right. Looking back on it, I know that it was wrong for 
me to do that. I was in a position of responsibility. I had a top secret 
security clearance. I was in a position of trust. And to violate that and to do 
all of those things is not anything about who I was or who I continue to be. 
I cannot explain what was going through my head. I improperly 
rationalized in my head that what I was doing was not that bad. And I just 
fail to understand how I could have made the rationalization.  
 
(Tr. 75-76.) 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of a forensic examiner and consultant in 
computer investigations and data forensics. The witness testified that all of Applicant’s 
activity involving use of a proxy server was processed on his own external server, and 
his employer’s IT network merely provided the access port to the proxy service. The 
witness also testified that accessing personal email through a proxy server would not 
have altered, manipulated, or damaged the employer’s network in any way. The witness 
opined that Applicant did not compromise or increase the vulnerability of his employer’s 
IT system. (Tr. 117-24; AX A.) 
  
 Applicant testified that he uses his violation of his former employer’s restrictions 
on Internet access as a “learning tool” in his new job, to make sure that those kinds of 
security violations do not happen. He has used his expertise to improve his new 
                                                          
1 Portions of the report of investigation by Applicant’s former employer reflect that his use of the proxy 
server was detected in April 2010, e.g., GX 6 at 14. However, the remainder of the report of investigation 
and Applicant’s testimony at the hearing established that the events occurred in 2011. 
 
6 
 
employer’s firewall and content filters to make sure that proxy servers cannot be used 
by company computers. He has also persuaded his new employer to install kiosk 
computers in the cafeteria to enable employees to access their web-based email 
accounts without compromising the company’s IT systems. (Tr. 76-77.) 
 
 Applicant’s duties at his new job are virtually the same as his previous job. His 
current employer is a subcontractor to his former employer, and he works closely with 
some of his former colleagues on defense contracts. (Tr. 78.) 
 
 Applicant testified that the reason for his job change is not generally known at his 
new place of employment. However, he has disclosed it to his human resources 
department, his manager, and his facility security officer (FSO). (Tr. 80.) 
 
 Applicant has continued to operate his personal business, but he testified that he 
is no longer looking for new business. He is still the sole member and sole employee of 
the company. (Tr. 112-13; AX B.) 
 
 The record does not reflect any actions by Applicant’s former employer to revoke 
his clearance. The current review of Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance was 
triggered by his application to continue his clearance after being hired by his current 
employer. (Tr. 7.) 
 
 Applicant’s current FSO has known him since August 2011 and has daily contact 
with him. The FSO has found Applicant to be extremely knowledgeable, trustworthy, 
loyal, and cognizant of the need to protect information. He believes that Applicant’s prior 
conduct was a “one-time incident” and that Applicant has learned from that experience. 
The FSO recommends that Applicant be granted a security clearance. (AX C.) 
 
 An information system architect, who has known Applicant for 15 years as a 
supervisor, colleague, and friend, supports Applicant’s application. He states that 
Applicant has demonstrated commitment to national security, commitment to 
information security, compliance with security policies and procedures, and 
trustworthiness and reliability as an employee, colleague, team leader, and in his 
personal relationships. He states that he is “at a loss to explain” Applicant’s bypassing 
of corporate security controls because it is inconsistent with the “model of [Applicant’s] 
behavior” that he has observed over the years. He regards the security violations in 
January 2005 and February 2011 as minor incidents, “within the normal range of 
incidents for people who have worked with classified networks for years.” (AX D.) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor, who has known him for more than 20 years, 
describes him as extremely dependable, reliable, security-conscious, hardworking, and 
efficient. He regards Applicant’s circumvention of his company’s Internet restrictions as 
a one-time incident, for which he is “incredibly remorseful.” (AX F.) 
 
 A former colleague describes Applicant as very reliable, committed, and 
trustworthy. (AX G.) Applicant’s family physician considers him to be kind, caring, and 
 
7 
 
thoughtful. (AX E.) His former COMSEC manager strongly supports his application for a 
clearance. (AX H.) 
 
 The president of the company by whom Applicant was formerly employed wrote 
a letter of recommendation for Applicant. He described Applicant as an “outstanding 
employee” who “made a lasting and positive impact upon the programs and customers 
he supported.” (AX I.) At the hearing, Applicant testified that the president of the 
company wrote this letter after Applicant’s father, who had been a senior executive of 
the company, asked him to write it. (Tr. 102-03.) 
 
 Throughout his career, Applicant has received numerous awards, 
commendations, and demonstrations of appreciation for his performance of duty. (AX J; 
AX M.) He was rated as a fully successful employee for two years between October 
2007 and September 2009, and as an outstanding employee for the period from 
October 2002 to September 2003. His most recent performance appraisal from his 
current employer rated him as exceeding expectations, one level below the top rating of 
“exceptional” on a five-level scale. (AX K.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
8 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s brother-in-law, sister-in-law, and one niece are 
dual U.S.-Israeli citizens residing in Israel (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), and his two nephews 
are dual U.S.-Israeli citizens residing in the United States (SOR ¶ 1.c). The security 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
9 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant in this 
case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 
01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the 
person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002).   
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
 
10 
 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant’s foreign family ties were created when his wife’s sister, a native-born 
U.S. citizen, married an Israeli citizen, moved to Israel, and became a dual U.S.-Israeli 
citizen. Their three children are all dual U.S.-Israeli citizens, and the two boys have 
chosen to live and work in the United States. Although Applicant’s ties to Israel are 
somewhat tenuous, the low threshold for “heightened risk” is met by the possibility that 
his wife’s sister and her husband might seek to influence Applicant through his spouse. 
Thus, I conclude that there is sufficient evidence to raise AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) and create 
the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has virtually no contact with his brother-in-law. His contacts with his 
sister-in-law are infrequent, but he has not rebutted the presumption that he has 
feelings of obligation to her. Applicant’s sister-in-law could only exercise pressure or 
influence on him with the help of Applicant’s wife, a circumstance that makes it unlikely 
that he would be confronted with a conflict of interest. Even assuming arguendo that a 
conflict of interest arose, I am satisfied that Applicant’s deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States would cause him to resolve any conflict 
of interest in favor of the United States. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are 
established.  
 
 
11 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that, in July 2011, Applicant resigned from his employment in 
lieu of termination for using a proxy server to improperly gain access to his personal 
email and for mischarging labor hours (SOR ¶ 2.a); that he violated a security 
procedure in February 2011 by prematurely using cryptographic keying material (SOR ¶ 
2.b); and that he failed to properly secure a closed area in January 2005 (SOR ¶ 2.c). 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” 
 Applicant’s deliberate circumvention of his employer’s rules restricting access to 
web-based email on company computers and his use of his employer’s time and 
resources to operate a private business establish the following disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline2 and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations; [and] (4) evidence of significant misuse of 
Government or other employer’s time or resources; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
                                                          
2 Arguably, Applicant’s conduct could have been alleged under Guideline K, ¶ 34(g) (“any failure to 
comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive information”) or under Guideline M, ¶ 
40(e) (“unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system”). However, the Appeal 
Board has declined to apply the words, “not explicitly covered under any other guideline,” as a limitation 
on the scope of Guideline E. ISCR Case No. 06-20964, 2008 WL 2002589 at *5 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008). 
 
12 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant’s 
use of a proxy server to access his personal email account and his use of company time 
and resources to operate a private business were serious breaches of trust. He spent 
about 36 hours during a two-week period engaged fully or partially in personal business. 
He spent the equivalent of two full days, about 20% of his work time, operating his 
private business, and he billed that time to a government contract. He was in a 
leadership mission and entrusted with protecting the integrity of his employer’s IT 
systems. When he discovered that content filtering system was vulnerable, he 
deliberately exploited it instead of fixing it. His conduct occurred frequently over a period 
of about four months, and it did not happen under unique circumstances making it 
unlikely to recur.  
Applicant’s use of the proxy server was recent. Although it ended about two 
years ago, it ended because he was caught in the act, not because he chose to stop. 
He has worked for his new employer for only about nine months, during which he has 
been under pressure to prove himself and keep his security clearance. Under the 
circumstances, I conclude that his misconduct has not been mitigated by the passage of 
time without recurrence. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is not established for the 
conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
On the other hand, the security violations in January 2005 and February 2011 
were inadvertent, isolated violations. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is established for the 
conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b and 2.c.  
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant has 
acknowledged his behavior and he has ensured that his new employer’s content filters 
will detect and block use of proxy servers. However, he continues to operate his private 
business, and the temptation and opportunity to use his employer’s time and resources 
to run his private business still exists. While he is unlikely to resume use of a proxy 
server, I am not convinced that he is unlikely to use his employer’s time and resources 
 
13 
 
for personal purposes in the future. On the other hand, the violations alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
2.b and 2.c were inadvertent, isolated incidents, and they are unlikely to recur. Thus, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 17(d) is established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is not established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant has 
disclosed the reasons for leaving his previous employment to his human resources 
department, his manager, and his FSO, but he has not disclosed those reasons to his 
colleagues. On the other hand, the violations alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c were 
inadvertent, isolated incidents of a nature described by one of Applicant’s character 
witnesses as “within the normal range of incident for people who have worked with 
classified networks for years.” As such, these two incidents do not make Applicant 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(e) is 
established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was a highly respected employee and held a security clearance for 
many years. He betrayed his employer’s trust by exploiting the vulnerability of his 
employer’s IT system for personal benefit. His misuse of his employer’s time and 
resources continued until it was detected by cyber-intelligence analysts. He was 
embarrassed and remorseful at the hearing, but that embarrassment and remorse was 
attributable in part to the consequences of his conduct, not its inherent wrongfulness. 
While admitting that he breached his employer’s trust, he attempted to downplay the 
potential harm to his employer’s IT system. He believed that he could outwit anyone’s 
effort to introduce malware into his company’s IT system, but he was unable to outwit 
 
14 
 
his company’s cyber-intelligence analysts, who uncovered his misconduct. He has not 
worked for his new employer long enough to demonstrate his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
E, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to decide close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family ties, but he has not mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
