 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-10539 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 16, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On October 25, 2012, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 28, 2012. Applicant 
admitted the allegations in the SOR. Applicant requested his case be decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On February 18, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant on February 19, 2013. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
February 26, 2013. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on March 19, 2013, within 
the 30 day time allowed that would have expired on March 28, 2013. The Department 
Counsel had no objection to the Response. I received the case assignment on April 25, 
2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. (Items 3, 4)  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is not married. Applicant works for a defense 
contractor and has for 10 years. He maintains equipment owned by the U.S. 
government. From 2001 to 2003, Applicant cohabitated with his girlfriend; however their 
relationship terminated in 2003. Applicant currently resides with another woman and her 
three children in a rented home in his new state of residence. (Item 5, FORM 
Response) 
 
 During the time Applicant lived with the first woman, she purchased clothing on 
credit using Applicant’s credit card. When the relationship terminated in 2003, Applicant 
attempted for two years to pay the credit card debts. He employed a debt consolidation 
company, paying them $1,000 monthly for a short time in 2005 to attempt to resolve his 
delinquent debts. Then Applicant decided to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2005. He 
discharged about $80,000 of unsecured debt on August 15, 2005. Applicant did not 
submit information from his bankruptcy to verify that the debts did result from his 
girlfriend’s purchases. (Items 6-11) 
 
 In September 2007 Applicant purchased a home in the state in which he formerly 
lived. The sale price was $255,000. His monthly mortgage payments were $1,800. 
Applicant intended to improve the home and then sell it. He claims homes in that area 
were worth about $350,000. Applicant moved to another state in November 2010 when 
he transferred with his company. He put the house on the sale market at that time. The 
housing market in Applicant’s former city of residence collapsed and the house 
allegedly is now worth $120,000. This house was for sale for $114,000 because 
Applicant could not continue to pay the mortgage, and his rent on an apartment in his 
new state of residence. He sought permission to have a “short sale” of the property to 
remove this debt from his financial record. As of June 2011 Applicant owed $251,176.45 
on the mortgage. The File contains an October 2011 purchase agreement for 
Applicant’s house in the amount of $85,000. In October 2012 the house was auctioned 
for sale at an undisclosed price in the File, though there is a document showing a 
purchaser paid $3,800 for the property. (Items 6-11) 
 
 Applicant admitted to the government investigator in June 2011 that he never 
sought nor received credit or financial counseling. His personal financial statement 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
submitted on September 12, 2012, showed Applicant has $107 remaining each month 
as discretionary income from his employment. His statement shows five debts on which 
he pays $860 monthly. Applicant also owns a 1999 Chevrolet Corvette worth about 
$11,000. (Items 6-11) 
 
 Applicant submitted a copy of a letter from his corporate chief executive officer 
congratulating him on 10 years of service. He also included a copy of a customer 
satisfaction award he received in October 2012. (FORM Response) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2005 to the present, Applicant accumulated several delinquent credit card 
debts that were not paid. Those credit card debts totaled about $80,000. Applicant filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 when he thought it would be easier to resolve his debts 
through that method than pay a debt consolidation company $1,000 monthly to pay the 
debts. Applicant also had a house he purchased in 2007 for $255,000 which he could 
not afford after he moved. The house went into foreclosure in 2011 and was sold at 
auction in 2012 for an amount which is not disclosed exactly in the File, though it may 
have been for $3,800. Totaling all of his unpaid financial obligations, Applicant did not 
repay about $335,000 he borrowed from banks and credit card companies. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two mitigating conditions might have partial 
applicability: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy seven years ago on $80,000 worth of credit 
card debt as he asserted in his government background investigation. These debts 
allegedly arose from a former girlfriend charging her clothing purchases to credit cards 
on which Applicant’s name appeared. The Chapter 7 bankruptcy was seven years ago. 
The debts were not infrequent when they accumulated. Bankruptcy is a legally 
permissible method to resolve delinquent debts. But it also means Applicant did not pay 
his delinquent debts. 
 
 Two years after his bankruptcy discharge Applicant incurred a debt of $255,000 
when he purchased a house with no or little down payment based on his description of 
the transaction to the government investigator. Applicant could not afford his house and 
it was sold at auction in 2012 for a minimal amount of money compared to the original 
purchase price. The mortgage was in foreclosure before the auction sale in 2012. That 
debt is recent.  
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement shows he continues to have debts on 
which he is currently paying. These debts exceed $10,000. Applicant’s pattern of 
indebtedness and failure to pay casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) would apply if the business downturn were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to sell his house before or after his corporate 
transfer in 2010 and affected his ability to earn an income. Applicant must also show he 
acted responsibly under the economic circumstances at the time.  
 
Applicant had no control over the housing market in 2009 or 2010. However, 
before that downturn occurred he purchased a house that was too expensive for him to 
afford. His personal financial statement shows a current income in September 2012 of 
about $84,000, with a net income of about $50,000. He might have afforded a home 
valued at $150,000 to $200,000 or less on those salaries, based on a standard of a 
purchase price of 2.5 times his annual income, either gross or net income. He then 
extended his credit even more by not making a down payment that exceeded 1% of the 
purchase price based on the information he told the government investigator. Therefore, 
he was financially overextended. 
 
 The final sale price of the home may have been $3,800 or the contracted sale 
price in 2011 of $85,000, but Applicant did not submit a detailed history of the property 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
sale. He did not disclose how much money, if any, he continues to owe his mortgage 
lender because the house sold for less than the $255,000 he paid for it in 2007.  
 
Applicant failed to prove AG ¶ 20(b) applied because he did not submit sufficient 
evidence that he acted responsibly when he incurred these debts nor in resolving his 
delinquent debt after 2010 when the mortgage debt accumulated. He failed to meet his 
burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Furthermore, the downturn in business conditions under this guideline applies to 
his income producing position, not the general overall national economic environment. 
For all these reasons, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any good-faith action to resolve his delinquent 
debts. This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
based on the magnitude of his financial obligation. Applicant displayed a lack of good 
judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued lack of appropriate 
judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts during the past 
seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
