 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13359 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 12, 2013, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. On March 26, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
it was received on April 2, 2013. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She married in 1999, separated in 2011, and divorced 
in 2012. She has three children, ages 15, 13, and 11. She has worked for her present 
employer, a federal contractor, since May 2011. She has been steadily employed since 
2002.1  
 
 There are 18 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, including judgments, a 
charged-off car loan, consumer credit, medical bills, and phone bills, totaling 
approximately $22,000. Applicant’s debts also include a mortgage on a house 
foreclosed in 2008, in the amount of $204,000. Applicant accumulated the delinquent 
debts while she was married. She attributed her financial problems to the fact she was 
unable to manage her money because her then-husband was managing it, and she was 
uninformed about their finances. She indicated they were unable to pay all of their debts 
due to low income and the state of the economy. They incurred medical bills due to her 
and her children’s health issues. The family’s home was foreclosed in 2008.  
 
Applicant’s divorce was final in November 2012, and she indicated that she had 
reached a point where she could begin to pay off her debts. Applicant did not provide 
any evidence regarding whether her divorce order apportioned any of the marital debts. 
Applicant indicated that she has learned to budget more effectively and she and her 
fiancé, who live together, share a checking account from which they pay their bills. She 
has had no financial counseling. 
 
In Applicant’s answers to interrogatories, which she signed on December 12, 
2012, she stated the judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d were paid, but she did 
not provide supporting documents. She also indicated that she had not paid or made 
payment arrangements on any of the other SOR debts.2 She stated in her answer to the 
SOR for all allegations except SOR ¶ 1.o, “I admit but my debt consolidation company is 
handling.”3 Applicant did not provide a copy of the debt consolidation contract, a list of 
the creditors included in the contract, or what payments have been made. She provided 
a one-page document that lists two creditors noted as “active creditors.” It indicates that 
one more payment is required to one creditor, but provides no further account or 
transaction details. SOR ¶ 1.o alleges a collection account debt owed to the same 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Item 6. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
creditor in the amount of $1,140. Applicant did not provide specific information about 
this account in either her answer or interrogatories, so nothing specific is known about 
her arrangements with the creditor or the debt consolidation company.4 She indicated in 
her answer to SOR ¶ 1.o that the debt alleged was “one payment away from being paid 
off.” No other information was provided. I find this debt is likely the same one alleged in 
the SOR.5  
 
 During Applicant’s interview with a government investigator in September 2011, 
she indicated she intended to resolve her financial issues following the interview, but 
ultimately did not.6 
 
 As of December 2012, Applicant reported a current net remainder of $196.63 per 
month in her budget. She did not show any monies allocated to repay any of the debts 
listed in the SOR. She did not provide information about an established plan to repay 
her creditors. Applicant did not provide information about whether she receives child 
support payments or what amount her fiancé contributes to household expenses.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
4 The other debt listed on the one-page document included with Applicant’s answer does not appear to be 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
7 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. The 
following under AG & 19 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has 17 delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,000 dating from at 
least 2008 and a mortgage foreclosure debt. She is unable or unwilling to pay her 
delinquent debts. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has been employed full-time for the past 11 years. Her delinquent 
debts were incurred during her marriage. Her husband managed their finances, and she 
was not fully informed about their finances. They were unable to pay their bills due to 
low income and the state of the economy. Applicant and her children also had medical 
issues during this time. These may be conditions that were beyond Applicant’s control. 
To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under 
the circumstances. Applicant failed to provide evidence of what her and her husband’s 
joint income was during this time and whether she had health insurance. There is no 
evidence she contacted her creditors and made arrangements with them to satisfy her 
debts. She failed to provide supporting documents to the assertions she made that the 
judgments alleged are paid and that all of her delinquent debts are being handled by a 
debt consolidation company.  
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that she made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. Her finances are not yet under 
control. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they 
are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.o, but not to the 
other debts. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. She experienced financial problems during her 
marriage. She has numerous delinquent debts that are unresolved. Applicant has failed 
to meet her burden of persuasion. There is insufficient evidence to conclude her 
finances will not be a recurring issue. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.r:  Against Applicant  
    
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
