 
1 
 
 
• ``                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10038 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 27, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 16, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 29, 
2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled by video teleconference on May 14, 2013. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, and he offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on May 21, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing ¶¶ 1.s and 1.w. 
There was no objection and the motion was granted.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He graduated from high school in 1989. He married in 
2001. He has three stepchildren ages 20, 19, and 16, and one child, age 13, with his 
wife. All of the children live at home. The eldest is out of school and does not contribute 
to the household income. His wife worked for periods of time, but then had difficulty 
finding a job due to a medical condition. Applicant worked for a federal contractor from 
February 2009 until January 2013, when he was laid off when his security clearance 
was suspended.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling approximately $21,016 dating from 
at least 2007. Applicant attributes his financial problems to periods of unemployment. 
He had a two-month period of unemployment sometime in 2003. He worked from 2005 
to 2008 and was laid off for periods of 45 days, 21 days, and 7 days. He had a period of 
unemployment from November 2008 to February 2009, when he began working for his 
current employer. He has moved a couple of times to places where he was able to get a 
job. Applicant received unemployment benefits during the periods he was unemployed. 
He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 2013. The petition was dismissed because he 
could not afford the bankruptcy filing fees.3  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on May 5 and 16, 2011, 
about his delinquent debts. He was not familiar with many of the debts and others he 
questioned. He told the investigator he was going to look into the status and validity of 
the delinquent debts and after looking into the debts he intended to resolve some of 
them.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. 14-15. 
 
2 Tr. 27-34. 
 
3 Tr. 29, 36-37, 39-53. 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts, but stated he believed he paid the 
judgment in SOR ¶ 1.q ($1,508). He stated he had been making payments on the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($717), 1.i ($668), and 1.p ($8,533). He thought the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p 
and 1.q received payments through garnishment. He did not provide supporting 
documents for any of the above debts. He has not made any other payments on any of 
the remaining SOR debts. He stated he contacted some creditors. He admitted there 
are some alleged debts that he is unfamiliar with and acknowledged they are likely from 
his wife. He has not researched the debts that he is unfamiliar with to determine their 
validity. Applicant does not have sufficient income to pay his delinquent debts. He 
stated he attempted to consolidate his delinquent debts, but did not provide supporting 
documents or proof of payments on any of the debts. He hopes to set up payment plans 
if he can retain his job.5  
  
 Applicant provided character letters that describe him as having an outstanding 
work ethic and attention to detail. He willingly works long hours. He is respected and 
admired. He is considered to be highly professional, trustworthy, and an upstanding 
citizen.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 53-68; GE 4, 5, 6. 
 
6 AE B, C.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has 21 delinquent debts dating from 2007 that he is unable or unwilling 
to pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and unresolved. Applicant attributed his history of financial problems to periods of 
unemployment. His unemployment was beyond his control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has 
been employed since 2009 and has made minimal effort to resolve even the smallest 
$20 debt. He was made aware that his finances were a security concern when he was 
questioned about his delinquent debts during his background interview. He failed to 
provide evidence that he has acted responsibly addressing his delinquent debts. I find 
AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant is not in a stable financial position, and his financial problems are not 
under control. He did not provide evidence he has received financial counseling. I find 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He stated that he believed some debts were paid, but did 
not have proof to substantiate their payment. He stated that he was unfamiliar with 
some of the debts, but did not provide evidence of what actions he took to substantiate 
the validity of the debts. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because he has not initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because 
Applicant did not provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of disputed or 
questionable debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He has delinquent debts dating back to at least 2007 
that remain unresolved. He has had periods of unemployment, but has been steadily 
employed since 2009. He failed to provide evidence to show progress he has made in 
resolving his debts. Applicant’s finances are a security concern, and he has not met his 
burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.s:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph   1.t-1.v:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.w:   Withdrawn 
   
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
