 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-11493 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 25, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On December 5, 2012, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility issued to Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant requested his case be decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On February 11, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant on February 11, 2013. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
February 13, 2013. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day 
time allowed that would have expired on March 15, 2013. I received the case 
assignment on April 18, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. He admitted 
the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. (Item 4)  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and works for a defense contractor. He is married and 
does not have any children according to his e-QIP. (Item 5) 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $31,643. He admits owing three 
debts totaling $18,695. Applicant denies the remaining three debts totaling $12,948 
because he allegedly paid one debt and the other two were “charged off” by the 
creditor. (Items 1 and 4) 
 
 The three debts Applicant admits owing are for a cell telephone service in the 
amount of $558, a credit card with a balance of $12,000, and a loan account for $6,137. 
These debts date from 2009. Applicant did not submit any documents to show he has 
paid or made any effort to repay the debts. They are enumerated in the two credit 
reports in the file. They are unresolved. (Items 1, 4, 6-8) 
 
 The three delinquent debts Applicant denies owing are two credit cards owed to 
the same bank in the amounts of $5,451 and $4,961. The accounts were opened in 
2005 and the accounts were reported as past due in 2011. The third account for $2,536 
is for windows in Applicant’s home. He claims the debt is paid; however, there are no 
documents to verify that it is. The window company obtained a judgment against 
Applicant in 2006 for that amount. The February 7, 2013 credit report in the file lists the 
judgment as unpaid. The same debts appear on the April 30, 2011 credit report. (Items 
1, 4, 6-8)  
 
 Applicant has been employed by the same company since March 2008. He 
retired from active military service in 2007. (Item 5) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations are 
set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Of these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2009 to the present, Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts totaling 
$31,643 that remain unpaid or unresolved.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition applies: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The debts arose in recent time and show a pattern of neglect, which casts doubt 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant has 
been gainfully employed in the military or a defense contractor since 1987 except for a 
period of time in 2007 after he retired from military service. He had his retirement 
income. That time of unemployment did not significantly affect his ability to pay his 
debts. Applicant did not show the circumstances of his finances were beyond his 
control. He did not demonstrate he acted responsibly during that time period. AG ¶ 20 
(a) and (b) do not apply.  
 
Applicant did not submit any evidence that he received any financial counseling. 
There is no document in the file from Applicant showing the financial problem is under 
control. Nor is there any information that the debts are being paid in an orderly manner. 
Applicant denies two debts because the creditor used an accounting procedure of 
“charging off” to remove them from its books after it sold them to a collector. Applicant 
did not pay those credit card debts. Nor did he present evidence that he paid the 2006 
judgment against him for his house windows. He has not shown any attempt to pay any 
of the debts that he admits he owes. Applicant did not demonstrate any good-faith effort 
to pay his delinquent debts since 2007. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (c) and (d) do not apply 
 
Applicant has not shown any legitimate basis to dispute any of the six debts. 
There is no relevant basis to consider the final mitigating condition that affluence shown 
by Applicant is from a legal source of income because that condition is not relevant. AG 
¶ 20 (e) and (f) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past five years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                  
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
