 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )                       ISCR Case No. 11-11241                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                            ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns regarding 
financial considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 10, 2011. On January 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 28, 2013, Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR. He 
elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on March 18, 2013. A 
notice of hearing was issued on March 20, 2013, and I convened a hearing, as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled, on April 10, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, which were marked Ex. 
1 through 7 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified and did not 
submit any documents. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until 
close of business April 24, 2013, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional 
information for the record. Applicant timely provided 15 documents. I marked the 
documents as Ex. A through Ex. O and admitted them to the record without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 18, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 
1.c., and 1.i.). He denied SOR allegations at ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., and 
1.k. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. I also make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old, married, and the father of a five-year-old child. He is 
employed by a government contractor as a security analyst. He was awarded an interim 
security clearance in 2009. (Ex. 1; Tr. 14-16, 26, 29.) 
 
 Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in economics in 2005, and he has been 
steadily employed since that time. His wife is employed full time as a veterinarian’s 
assistant. Applicant testified that his wife’s employment is recent. Before she was 
employed, Applicant paid all household and living expenses. Applicant’s child attends a 
private school with monthly tuition and fees of approximately $700. Applicant testified 
that his grandmother has been helping him financially with the child’s education 
expenses. (Ex. 1; Tr. 27-32, 86-87.) 
 
 The SOR alleges eleven delinquent debts totaling approximately $14,403. In 
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated he had an agreement with a debt 
resolution law firm to resolve the debts alleged on the SOR. At his hearing, he stated he 
hired the firm after he received DOHA’s interrogatories in October 2012. He reported 
that he worked with the firm for six or seven months thereafter, but he no longer had a 
relationship with the firm at the time of his hearing. (Ex. 3; Tr. 41-45.) 
 
 Applicant admitted a $577 debt to a communications provider, alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.a. He stated that he had an agreement with the creditor to make monthly payments of 
$124 until the debt is satisfied. He asserted that his first payment under the agreement 
was due two days after his hearing. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant stated that 
he was making bi-weekly payments of $125.91 on the debt, and he anticipated that the 
debt would be resolved on May 27, 2013. The debt is in the process of being resolved. 
(Ex. A; Ex. B; Tr. 38-38-41.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied a $143 debt to a credit card 
company, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. He stated: “I have not had any calls [from the creditor] 
 
3 
 
 
pertaining to this debt.” When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about the debt in June 2011, Applicant denied 
knowledge of the debt and stated he would contact the creditor to request that the debt 
be removed from his credit report. At his hearing, he acknowledged he had not 
contacted the creditor, and he denied owing the debt. In a post-hearing submission, 
Applicant provided documentation showing that the creditor acknowledged payment in 
full of $142.83 on April 24, 2013. The debt has been resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; 
Ex. A; Ex. C; Tr.46-49.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a $321 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c., 
and he stated: “I will pay this off by the end of February.” At his hearing, Applicant 
admitted that he had not yet paid the debt. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant 
stated that he had paid the creditor $45.66 on April 19, 2013. He further stated that he 
would make payments of $100 to the creditor on May 10, 2013, May 24, 2013, and June 
7, 2013. The debt is in the process of being resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. A; Ex. D; Tr. 
49.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant owed a creditor a $623 debt in 
collection status. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt and stated: “I 
have had no contact with [the creditor] relating to this debt.” At his hearing, Applicant 
stated that the creditor had garnished his wages to satisfy the debt. In a post-hearing 
submission, he provided documentation showing that his employer had garnished his 
wages in February 2013 to satisfy the debt. The debt has been resolved. (Answer to 
SOR; Ex. A; Ex. E; Tr. 49-50.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant is responsible for a $9,430 debt in 
charged-off status. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt and stated that 
he had satisfied the debt “in 4-5 payments going on a year ago.” At his hearing, 
Applicant explained that his automobile had been demolished in an accident, and 
because his insurance had lapsed, he was responsible for paying the creditor directly. 
He stated that he had paid the creditor six payments of $1,400 each. In a post-hearing 
submission, he submitted an order of satisfaction, dated December 5, 2011, 
corroborating payment to the creditor. The debt has been resolved. (Answer to SOR; 
Ex. A; Ex. F; Tr. 52-54.)   
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.f. that Applicant owed a communications company a 
$211 debt in collection status. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt and 
stated: “I have no debt owed to [the creditor] besides my current monthly bill.” In his 
June 2011 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant denied the debt and told the 
investigator he would contact the credit bureau and have the debt removed from his 
credit report. At his hearing, Applicant stated he did not believe he had a debt because 
his current account with the creditor was not affected. In a post-hearing submission, 
Applicant provided a letter, dated April 19, 2013, from a collection company acting for 
the creditor, which acknowledged payment of the debt. The debt has been resolved. 
(Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; Ex. A; Ex. G; Tr. 54-55.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.g. that Applicant owed a creditor a $25 debt which had 
not been satisfied. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt and stated: “I 
have no correspondence with [the creditor] regarding a debt owed to them.” In his June 
2011 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant admitted the debt and told the 
investigator he did not have enough money to pay it. At his hearing, Applicant again 
denied any correspondence from the creditor identifying the debt. He stated that he had 
not contacted the creditor because he had been busy with family matters. In a post-
hearing submission, Applicant indicated he had satisfied the debt but had not yet 
received verification of payment from the creditor. The debt may be in the process of 
being resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; Ex. A; Ex. H; Tr. 55-57.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that Applicant owes a $120 debt, in collection status, 
to a creditor, and the debt remains unpaid. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 
the debt and stated that he had not received correspondence from the creditor 
regarding the debt. In his June 2011 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant 
admitted the debt but stated he had no money to pay it. At his hearing, Applicant 
acknowledged that he understood that even if a creditor does not write a letter and 
request payment, a debtor cannot conclude that he does not owe a debt. In a post-
hearing submission, Applicant stated he had paid the debt but had not yet received 
verification of payment from the creditor. The debt may be in the process of being 
resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; Ex. A; Ex. H; Tr. 57-58.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.i. that Applicant is responsible for a medical debt of $96, 
which was identified on his credit report of May 18, 2011. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the debt. At his hearing, he did not know if he had paid the debt. As 
a post-hearing submission, he provided a copy of his credit report which did not list the 
debt. The debt has not been resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. A; Ex. J; Tr. 57-58.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.j. that Applicant owes $2,800 to a local government for 
16 delinquent accounts. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation and 
stated: “I have no idea what this debt is for.” At his hearing, he admitted being stopped 
for traffic violations within the jurisdiction of the local government. He stated he had not 
contacted the local government to determine the nature of the accounts. At a post-
hearing submission, Applicant submitted a ledger showing he owed 15 tickets for traffic 
violations. The total amount owed was $2,550. He also reported that as a non-resident 
of the jurisdiction, he was not permitted to make installment payments on the debt. 
Applicant acknowledged that the debt remained unsatisfied. The debt has not been 
resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. A;  Ex. H; Ex. I; Tr. 58-59.)      
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.k. that Applicant owes a creditor a delinquent debt of $57 
which has not been satisfied. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt. 
When Applicant was interviewed by the OPM investigator in June 2011, he 
acknowledged the debt but stated it had been paid in full. At his hearing, Applicant 
admitted he had not been in contact with the creditor about the debt. In a post-hearing 
submission, Applicant provided documentation establishing that he owed no debt to the 
creditor. The debt has been resolved. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 2; Ex. A; Ex. K; Tr. 60-61.)     
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant attributed some of his financial problems to procrastination and lack of 
diligence. As a post-hearing submission, he provided a personal financial statement 
dated April 23, 2013. He reported that his net monthly income is $3,900. His wife’s net 
monthly income is $2,000. He also reported that his grandmother gives him $600 every 
other month to help pay his child’s school tuition and fees.1 (Ex. L; Tr. 56-57, 64.) 
 
 Applicant reported the following fixed monthly living expenses: rent, $1,550; 
groceries, $400; clothing, $200; utilities, $300; car expense, $800, life and other 
insurance, $166; medical expenses, $60; child’s education, $700; and miscellaneous, 
$600. Each month he also has a debt payment of $456 on an automobile purchase 
loan. At his hearing, Applicant reported that he also pays $400 a month on his student 
loan debt, but he did not list that debt on his financial statement. He also reported that 
his wife will soon begin to pay $400 a month on her student loan debt, but he did not list 
that obligation on his financial statement. Applicant’s current debt and monthly living 
expenses, including his and his wife’s student loan debt payments, total $6,032. His 
monthly net remainder is approximately $168. (Ex. L; Tr. 80-82.) 
  
 Applicant did not report any bank savings on his financial statement. He reported 
he had approximately $15,000 in his 401(k) account. He filed his 2012 federal income 
tax return and received a refund of $2,200. He stated that he used some of his tax 
refund to pay his student loans. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he and his wife 
have not participated in financial credit counseling. However, in a post-hearing 
submission, he stated that he was working with a financial advisor. He also provided 
documentation establishing that he purchased a life insurance policy paying a death 
benefit of approximately $1.5 million. (Ex. A; Ex. M; Ex. N; Tr. 82-83, 86-87.) 
  
                                                  Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
                                            
1 Because Applicant pays $700 each month for his child’s school tuition and fees and is assisted every 
other month by his grandmother who pays $600 toward the child’s tuition and fees, Applicant’s average 
total net monthly income is $6,200 and not $6,500, as reported on his financial statement. (Ex. L.) 
 
6 
 
 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
7 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) 
 
 Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or 
“the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant has been steadily employed since graduating from college in 2005. His  
financial delinquencies occurred in the past and continue to the present time. He did not 
address most of his delinquencies until after his security clearance hearing. 
  
 Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties, which he attributed to lack of 
diligence and procrastination. To his credit, he provided documentation establishing that 
he paid the $9,430 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. However, the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. 
was resolved by garnishment and not by Applicant’s own action. By setting up payment 
plans for most of his debts after his hearing, Applicant essentially made promises to pay 
his delinquent debts at some future time. In determining an individual’s security 
 
8 
 
 
worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might 
resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999). 
 Moreover, Applicant’s post-hearing actions to address his delinquencies reflect a 
lack of good faith in resolving his obligations to his creditors. DOHA’s Appeal Board has 
explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option . . . in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 Before his hearing, Applicant was inattentive to his financial responsibilities. By 
his own admission, he procrastinated and avoided his obligations to his creditors. When 
he was interviewed by an OPM investigator in June 2011, he asserted he would contact 
his creditors and address his debts. He failed to do so. After his hearing, he took steps 
to contact his creditors and address his delinquent debts. His last-minute efforts only 
when faced with the possible denial of his security clearance reflect a lack of good faith.   
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement and his testimony suggest he allocates 
nearly all of his monthly income to current expenses and debts and has little money left 
over to pay his long-term financial delinquencies or to address unforeseen financial 
emergencies. Five of the debts alleged on the SOR are for amounts of less than $150. 
Three of those debts are for amounts of less than $100, and yet Applicant failed to 
address those delinquencies, suggesting that after he meets his basic living expenses, 
he has few remaining financial resources. 
   
 The record is ambiguous about Applicant’s exposure to financial credit 
counseling. At his hearing, he denied that he and his wife had had received credit 
counseling. In a post-hearing submission, however, he provided a statement from a 
financial advisor. Applicant’s current financial situation raises security concerns about 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Because Applicant resolved the large delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. in 
2011, I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part to his case. However, Applicant does not 
 
9 
 
 
appear to have the financial resources to resolve his remaining debts and meet his 
monthly living expenses. After carefully weighing the facts of Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 30 
years. His financial problems began several years ago and are ongoing. Despite a 
steady income since graduating from college in 2005, he has failed to budget his 
income to meet his ongoing obligations and to satisfy his delinquent debts. His last-
minute efforts to establish payment plans for his delinquent debts raise concerns about 
his judgment, maturity, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:            Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:            For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:            Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.-1.f.:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g.-1.j.:     Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.k.:             For Applicant 
 
                                    Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
