 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ADP Case No. 11-11972 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns arising from her financial issues. Since 
2006, she has accumulated about $38,000 of delinquent debt and has yet to put her 
financial house in order. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) recommending that Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an automated data 
processing (ADP) position, generally referred to as a public trust position, be denied due 
to concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Consideration). This action was taken 
under  Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).1 Applicant 
timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her eligibility (Answer). 
                                                          
1 Pursuant to a Memorandum from the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for 
Counterintelligence and Security, dated November 19, 2004 (Memorandum), the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to utilize the provisions of the Directive, to include Enclosure 2, 
the adjudicative guidelines, to resolve contractor cases forwarded to it for a trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On February 11, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case and the next day a notice 
of hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for March 7, 2013. At hearing, 
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A through F were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called her cousin as a 
witness, and was granted additional time to submit documents post-hearing. She did not 
submit any documents post-hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 15, 2013, and the record closed on March 21, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, case file, exhibits, and transcript, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, 44, is single and has three children, ages 19, 20, and 24. Her two 
elder children live with her and she financially supports them. She has suffered from a 
number of medical issues since at least 2010, which have caused her to miss time from 
work. She was unemployed from May 2009 to May 2010, but has been working full time 
since May 2010 and has been with her current employer since about December 2010.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems date back to 2006, when she purchased a home. 
She now recognizes that she did not qualify for the mortgage she received to purchase 
the home. She fell behind on her monthly mortgage payments and other financial 
obligations. She admits the 18 debts listed in the SOR, totaling approximately $38,000. 
At hearing, she claimed two of the debts (SOR 1.n and 1.o, totaling $335) were 
duplicates with others alleged in the SOR, but did not submit documentation at hearing 
or post-hearing to substantiate her claim. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. at 34-55, 64-74) 
 
Applicant explained that her financial problems were caused by poor money 
management. She has not received financial counseling, but has finally started to take 
steps to manage her finances, though she was late on her utilities and other bills at the 
time of the hearing. She recently satisfied her overdue federal taxes from 2009, when 
the IRS intercepted her 2012 tax refund. (Tr. at 56-65, 73-74) 
 
Applicant did not list any of her delinquent debts on her application for public trust 
position. During her subsequent background interview, she told the investigator that she 
did not list her delinquent debts because she had written letters to the credit reporting 
agencies disputing the debts in an attempt to have the debts wiped off her credit report 
and avoid paying the debts.2 (Gx. 1 at 7; Gx 2, Subject Interview at 5). As of the close of 
the record, the SOR debts remained unresolved.  
 
Applicant’s cousin testified that she has known Applicant for a majority of her life 
and knows her to be a good mother, who is dedicated to her family and church. She 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s recently paid tax obligation, non-SOR delinquent bills, failure to list her debts on her 
application, and statement to the investigator were not alleged in the SOR and are only being considered 
in addressing her case in mitigation and overall credibility.  
 
 
3 
 
 
also stated that Applicant is a good person, who is loyal, dependable, and a hard 
worker. Applicant’s recent performance reports corroborate that she is a good worker.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.3  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, an administrative 
judge must apply the provisions of the Directive, to include the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG or guidelines).4 In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and 
reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. While an applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. An applicant has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility for a public trust position.5 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve any doubt in favor of national security.6  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
3 Memorandum; Directive, § 3.2. Cf. Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended, ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, C6.1.1.1. 
 
4 Directive, Enclosure 2. See also, Memorandum from the Office of the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, directing that the adjudicative guidelines be applied to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and DoD Regulation 5200.2-R. 
 
5 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14 – E3.1.15. 
 
6 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of approximately $38,000 in delinquent debt since 2006 
raises this concern. It also establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts, and 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because a trustworthiness adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.7 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
concern by establishing one or more of the conditions listed under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant’s financial problems 
are in part due to medical issues and a period of unemployment, her debts are primarily 
due to her inability to manage her finances. Furthermore, she has not acted responsibly 
in relation to her delinquent debts since regaining full-time employment in May 2010. As 
of the close of the record, Applicant’s delinquent debts remained unresolved and she 
did not submit documentation to substantiate her dispute regarding the relatively two 
minor debts she claimed were duplicates of other SOR debts. Even if I were to give 
Applicant credit for these two debts, her financial situation is still far from under control, 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
5 
 
 
as evidenced by her accumulation of additional delinquent debt not alleged in the SOR. 
Moreover, Applicant’s statement during her background interview that she disputed the 
debts appearing on her credit report as a way to avoid paying them leaves me to 
question her reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant’s finances remain a concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine factors listed 
at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I have considered and given due weight to all the favorable and 
extenuating factors in this case, including Applicant’s dedication to her family and her 
good work performance. However, she has yet to take control of her finances and get a 
handle on the significant amount of delinquent debt that she has accumulated since 
2006. In the end, Applicant’s financial situation outweighs the favorable whole-person 
factors and other favorable evidence present in this case. Applicant finances raises 
doubts about her eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.r:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
