1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-10725
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has a history
of financial problems that is ongoing. In addition, he has a history of multiple criminal
offenses during 1992–2009. He did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate the
security concerns. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On December 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue access to classified
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which may be identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 The seventh item alleged, in SOR ¶ 2.c, that Applicant’s driver’s license was suspended due to failure to4
satisfy a civil judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. This is not criminal conduct; it is a result or consequence of a
properly alleged matter under Guideline F. A result or consequence of any particular act or omission does not
have independent security significance. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 2.c is decided for Applicant.   
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.17. 5
2
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the1
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations
and Guideline E for personal conduct. 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2013. Neither Applicant nor
Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the
written record.2
On or about March 11, 2013, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant3
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it March 21, 2013. He did not
reply to the FORM within the 30-day period allowed under the Directive. The case was
assigned to me May 8, 2013.  
Ruling on Procedure 
Citing Guideline E for personal conduct, SOR ¶ 2 alleged six incidents of criminal
conduct during the period 1992–2009.  These matters are more properly adjudicated4
under Guideline J, which specifically concerns criminal conduct. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 2 is
amended sua sponte by changing the relevant security guideline from Guideline E to
Guideline J, because doing so renders SOR ¶ 2 in conformity with the evidence.5
  
This amendment is without notice to Applicant, but it is also without prejudicial
harm to him. As noted below, he admitted the six incidents of criminal conduct and
those facts remain unchanged. Moreover, the six incidents of criminal conduct were
discussed at length in Department Counsel’s brief. Indeed, Department Counsel labeled
Applicant as a “drug dealer” during the period 1993–1999, which is a term of art usually
 Department Counsel’s Brief at 7. 6
 Exhibit 5. 7
 Exhibits 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. 8
 Exhibit 6 at 15; Exhibit 11 at 3.9
3
reserved for the criminal courts.  Given these circumstances, Applicant would hardly be6
surprised to see that his extensive and well-documented record of criminal conduct is, in
fact, being reviewed and analyzed as criminal conduct. Finally, amending the SOR in
this way is consistent with a central principle of the Directive—which is making
commonsense decisions.  
 Findings of Fact
Applicant admits the SOR allegations under both Guidelines F and J except for
four delinquent debts, in which he claims full or partial payment. His admissions are
accepted and adopted and incorporated as findings of fact. In addition, the following
findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked as an
insulator for a shipbuilding company since 2006. Before that, he worked as a meat
packer for a month or so in 2006; he worked as a tiler for a few months in 2006; he
worked an assembly-line job during for about three months in 2006; and he worked in a
warehouse during 2004–2006. He is seeking a security clearance for the first time, and
he completed a security clearance application in April 2011.7
Applicant has a history of financial problems that is ongoing. It includes $11,000
in back taxes owed to the IRS, two unpaid civil judgments, a child support arrearage,
and nine collection or charged-off accounts. Altogether, nearly $26,000 of delinquent
debt is set forth in the SOR, and these matters are established by the available
documentary evidence.  8
Although Applicant claims full or partial payment of four debts, he has not
provided reliable documentary evidence that he has paid, settled, entered into
repayment agreements, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent debts set
forth in the SOR. He did not provide documentary information when responding to
written interrogatories about the financial matters or in his answer to the SOR. And he
did not take advantage of the opportunity to reply to the FORM. 
In addition to his history of financial problems, Applicant has a history of serious
criminal conduct. Beginning in 1992, Applicant was arrested and charged with the felony
offense of abduction.  His arrest stemmed from a woman’s report that he, his twin9
brother, and their friends pulled the woman into a car and drove away. The charge was
dismissed when the accuser failed to appear in court.
 Exhibit 6. 10
 Exhibit 6 at 15. 11
 Exhibits 11 and 12. 12
 Exhibit 13. 13
 Exhibit 14. 14
 Exhibit 14. 15
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to16
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
During the period 1993–1999, Applicant was involved with the buying and selling
of marijuana on a daily basis; he also used marijuana frequently.  It was during this10
period in 1995 that he was arrested and charged with possession of stolen property (a
firearm), a misdemeanor offense. He appeared in court a few months later and the court
dismissed the charge.11
He was arrested for a third time in 2000 and charged with multiple offenses: (1)
three counts of assault and battery on a law officer; (2) two counts of possession of
cocaine; (3) possession of marijuana; and (4) driving under revocation or suspension.12
He was held in jail for about four months until he posted bond and was released. 
About ten days after his release in February 2001, he was stopped by the police
for a traffic violation. The result of the stop was his fourth arrest, again for multiple
offenses: (1) possession of a Schedule II controlled substance (cocaine); (2) eluding
police; (3) obstruction of justice; and (4) driving under revocation or suspension. After
seven or eight months in jail, Applicant entered into a plea bargain wherein he agreed to
plead guilty to possession of a Schedule II controlled substance, a felony offense, and
was sentenced to five years of incarceration, suspended.  He was placed in a first-13
offenders program for two years and placed on supervised probation for one year. He
also received drug treatment during this time.
He was arrested for a fifth and sixth time in 2005 and 2009, respectively, for
driving on a suspended or revoked license. In 2005, he was sentenced to 90 days in jail
with 80 days suspended.  As of December 2012, he was past due in paying the fine14
and costs for the 2005 offense.  15
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As16
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
 484 U.S. at 531.17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 24
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).25
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.26
5
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt17
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An18
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  19
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting20
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An21
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate22
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme23
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.24
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.25
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it26
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 27
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant28
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  29
 AG ¶ 19(a).  30
 AG ¶ 19(c). 31
 AG ¶¶ 20(a)–(f). 32
6
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant27
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline28
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  29
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. His unfavorable financial history indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations.  The30 31
facts are more than sufficient to establish these disqualifying conditions.  
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  Based on the32
evidence before me, none of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to fully mitigate the
security concern. Applicant has presented scant evidence to mitigate his history of
financial problems. The evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has
established a plan and taken actions to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the
security concern. 
 AG ¶¶  30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).33
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).34
7
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the security concern is that criminal33
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.
Applicant admits the six incidents of criminal conduct resulting in arrests,
charges, and convictions. These matters, and the surrounding facts and circumstances,
establish two disqualifying conditions under Guideline J as follows:
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted. 
Guideline J also contains certain conditions that may mitigate security concerns.
Based on the evidence before me, none of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to fully
mitigate the security concern. With that said, Applicant receives credit for his steady
employment for a shipbuilding company since 2006. That is some evidence of reform
and rehabilitation, and it suggests a favorable trend. Nevertheless, the evidence in
disqualification is more persuasive. The evidence shows Applicant has a history of
criminal conduct involving multiple arrests, charges, and convictions over a period of
many years. His history of criminal conduct is both substantial and significant, and it
cannot be mitigated or explained away by the passage of time since his last offense. 
Taken together, Applicant’s history of financial problems and criminal conduct
raise serious doubt about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan
and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve that doubt in favor of protecting national
security. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered
if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also
gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Having done so, I conclude that34
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.m: Against Applicant
8
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.d–2.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
