 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-12597 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant cosigned student loans and a lease for his daughter. Because of 
medical problems, his wife stopped working and he lost the ability to repay the debts 
when his daughter defaulted on her financial obligations. He assumed responsibility for 
the debts, established payment plans for two of the debts, and intends to pay the third 
debt in turn. He has a viable plan to resolve his financial problems, is in control of his 
finances, and established his financial responsibility. Eligibility to hold a position of trust 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for a position of trust 
(Application) on July 21, 2011. On November 21, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
December 10, 2012, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 The DoD acted under Executive Order 12968, Access to Classified Information (August 2, 
1995), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 15, 2013, 
scheduling a hearing for February 12, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) 1 through 12. AE 
12 was received after the hearing. All exhibits were received without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 21, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make 
the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old facility manager employed by a government contractor. 
He is a high school graduate, and completed some college courses around 1977. 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps in October 1976, and retired in August 1998 
with the rank of master sergeant (E-8). His service was characterized as honorable. He 
receives approximately $2,027 per month in retired pay. Applicant married his wife in 
1983, and they have two daughters, ages 28 and 24. His younger daughter lives with 
Applicant and depends on him for her support.  
 
Applicant has been working in the same position, albeit for different government 
contractors during the last 13 years. Applicant was granted access to classified 
information at the secret level in 2000. (GE 1) There is no evidence to show that he has 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Outside of the 
security concerns alleged in the current SOR, there is no evidence that Applicant had 
any other security issues of concern.  
 
In his July 2011 SCA, Applicant disclosed he had financial problems. He 
revealed that he had cosigned two student loans and a lease for his daughter that were 
now delinquent and had been turned over to collection agencies. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c) 
 
Applicant explained that around 2007-2008 his family income included his salary, 
his wife’s salary (she was working full-time), and his retired pay. At that time, Applicant 
was financially able to help his daughter with her college expenses. To that effect, he 
cosigned three of his daughter’s student loans and a lease. In about December 2009-
2010, Applicant’s wife stopped working due to medical problems, and he became the 
family’s sole provider. 
 
With the loss of his wife’s income, Applicant was unable to continue paying his 
daughter’s college expenses, his family’s day-to-day living expenses, and his debts. In 
2010, Applicant pulled his daughter out of college because he did not want to incur 
                                                                                                                                            
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
additional expenses he could not afford. He also sold his daughter’s car to reduce his 
debt. Applicant contacted the creditors and tried to establish payment plans, but they 
refused to accept the small payments he could afford. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a originated as a result of Applicant’s daughter 
breaking her apartment lease two months early. Applicant tried to establish a $200 a 
month payment plan, but the creditor denied his request. In November 2012, Applicant 
established a payment plan and agreed to pay $400 a month. He made the $400 
payments in November 2012 and February 2013. Applicant anticipates paying off this 
debt in July 2013. (Tr. 56)  
 
Applicant took money out of his 401(k) retirement plan to pay some of his 
delinquent obligations. He then acquired a debt to the IRS for the early withdrawal of his 
401(k) funds. He established a $400 a month payment plan with the IRS, and the debt 
was satisfied in December 2012. He then started paying the debt to the creditor alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b (student loan). Applicant made payments in December 2012 ($200), 
January 2013 ($400), and February 2013 ($400). (Tr. 43-44) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is for one of his daughter’s student loans. 
Applicant contacted the creditor, but he is not making payments on this loan because he 
cannot afford to do so. He plans to pay the other two SOR debts first, and then address 
this debt. 
 
Applicant’s daughter is not currently contributing in the payment of her student 
loans. Although she is working, she is not making enough money to pay her student 
loans. In addition to the two alleged student loans, Applicant cosigned a third loan that 
as of the hearing date was being deferred. Applicant agreed to start paying $250 a 
month starting in March 2013. 
 
Applicant takes his job and his obligations to the Government seriously. He 
acknowledged responsibility for his daughter’s delinquent debts. He believes that his 
financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control – his wife’s 
inability to work and the resulting reduction of the family’s income. Applicant is aware 
that he needs to improve his financial situation. He would like to resolve his debts, but it 
will take time to do so. He promised that as long as he is employed he will continue his 
efforts to resolve his debts. Although his daughter is not making much money, she 
intends to contribute paying her debts to expedite the payment of the debts.  
 
Applicant’s credit reports showed he has been financially responsible. Except for 
the debts alleged in the SOR, his credit reports do not indicate a history of financial 
difficulties, or that Applicant has been living beyond his financial means. The only 
apparent inconsistency is that in June 2010, Applicant purchased a brand new luxury 
car for his wife. Applicant’s 2012 net monthly earnings were approximately $6,800, 
including his $2,037 per month retired pay he receives from the Marine Corps. He has 
the financial ability to resolve his debts, although he cannot pay all the debts at the 
same time.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant presented favorable testimony from three witnesses – his direct 
supervisor, the company general manager, and a coworker. By all accounts, he is 
considered to be honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. His references have 
the utmost respect for his abilities, and lauded his knowledge and judgment. Applicant 
has been up-front with his supervisors about his financial problems.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for a public trust position. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, 
by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing suitability for a 
public trust position. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive information. The 
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive and classified information enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[Access to sensitive information] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination 
of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the 
applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for 
issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
In 2007-2008, Applicant cosigned two student loans and a lease for his daughter. 
She defaulted on her debts because of her lack of income and Applicant has been 
called to honor the debts. Because of wife’s inability to work, Applicant was unable to 
make payments on these debts until recently. Two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are not the result of his financial irresponsibility. He 
tried to help his daughter with her college expenses and cosigned several of her student 
 
6 
 
 
loans and a lease. She defaulted on these obligations and he assumed responsibility for 
the debts. At the time Applicant cosigned these financial obligations, he had sufficient 
income to assume the debts.  
 
 Because of medical problems, his wife stopped working. After losing his wife’s 
income, Applicant realized he could not continue assisting his daughter with her college 
expenses and withdrew her from college. He sold her car to reduce his debt, and 
withdrew money from his 401(k) retirement fund to pay debts. He contacted his 
creditors and established payment plans with two of the creditors alleged in the SOR. 
He intends to pay the third creditor after paying the first two creditors. Applicant’s wife’s 
inability to work is a circumstance beyond his control that contributed to or aggravated 
his financial problems. I find that he has been responsible in his efforts to pay his SOR 
debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies because Applicant’s debt is current and unresolved. 
However, because his financial problems are due to circumstances beyond his control, 
and he has taken responsible action to address his debts (contacted creditors and 
established payment plans), it does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies in part. Applicant did not participate in financial counseling. 
However, Applicant receives credit because he continued his contact with the creditors 
and has established viable payment plans. I find that there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved. Applicant’s actions so far established his ability 
and willingness to resolve his delinquent debts. On balance, the evidence available is 
sufficient to establish that Applicant has a track record of financial responsibility, and 
that he has a viable plan to resolve his financial problems. AG ¶¶ 20(d) applies. The 
remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable to the facts of this case (AG ¶¶ 20(e) 
and 20(f)). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant honorably served 22 years in the Marine Corps. He has worked 13 
years for government contractors while possessing a security clearance. Except for the 
current trustworthiness concerns, there is no evidence of any problems or concerns 
while he possessed a security clearance. By all accounts, he is considered to be 
honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. His references have the utmost respect 
for Applicant’s abilities, and lauded his knowledge, and judgment. 
Applicant acknowledged responsibility for the debts he cosigned for his daughter. 
His financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control – his wife’s 
inability to work and the resulting reduction of the family’s income. His credit reports 
 
7 
 
 
showed his delinquent debts are not the result of his financial irresponsibility. 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his delinquent 
debt, and he is in the process of getting control of his financial situation. I find 
Applicant’s current financial situation does not raise trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant eligibility for a position of trust to Applicant. 
Eligibility for a position of trust is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
