 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-13533 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 14, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86)(e-QIP). On September 26, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption), H (Drug Involvement), E (Personal Conduct), and  
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 4, 2012. He answered 
the SOR in writing on November 20, 2012, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the 
request on November 26, 2012. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
January 14, 2013, and I received the case assignment on January 17, 2013. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on February 14, 2013, and I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on March 6, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, 
without objection. Applicant submitted additional exhibits on March 26, 2013, and they 
were admitted without objection. They were marked as Exhibits D to F. 
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 20, 2013. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c. He denied the allegations in Paragraphs 2 and 3. He 
admitted Subparagraph 4.a, denied Subparagraphs 4.b through 4.f, and 4.h, while 
partially admitting and partially denying Subparagraph 4.g. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 41 years old, divorced, and has one child. He works for a defense 
contractor. He currently holds a security clearance or had one until recently. (Tr. 20-22; 
Exhibit 1) 
 
 In August 1989, Applicant was arrested for driving while under the influence. He 
spent 12 hours in jail, lost his driving privileges for nine months, and paid a $450 fine. 
Applicant was 18 years old and the incident occurred on a college campus when 
Applicant and a friend were driving around yelling at the female students. (Tr. 39, 40; 
Exhibits 2, 3; Answer) 
 
 Applicant was arrested about six years ago, in 2006, for having an open 
container of alcohol in the passenger compartment of his vehicle. He took a 
breathalyzer test and passed it. Applicant recalls that ticket being dismissed. (Tr. 40, 41) 
 
 Applicant was arrested on January 14, 2011 on a charge of speeding (five miles 
over the speed limit), operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs (DUI), failure to produce a valid insurance card, and possession of a controlled 
substance. Applicant refused a blood test to determine the alcohol content in his blood. 
Breath and urine tests were not requested. A search of Applicant by the arresting officer 
found a Tylenol bottle containing four Xanax tablets, two and a half Hydrocodone 
tablets, and four and half Oxycodone tablets. All charges except the DUI, the insurance 
card failure and the three counts of possession of a controlled substance were 
dismissed. Applicant was found guilty of the remaining charges and fined $750 and 
ordered to undergo a DUI assessment and attend DUI education. (Tr. 24-39; Exhibits 1, 
3, E, F; Answer) 
 
Applicant completed the DUI assessment and education requirements between 
March and May 2011. The initial interview on March 10, 2011 includes a comment from 
the licensed clinical social worker who also is a certified alcohol dependency counselor 
 
3 
 
 
that Applicant lacks symptoms “that fits DSM IV criteria for Drug or Alcohol Abuse.” The 
counselor recommended Applicant attend a 90-day outpatient treatment program. The 
assessment on each subsequent report was that Applicant was making progress and 
met his treatment goals. (Tr. 24, 25; Exhibit F) 
 
Applicant drinks very seldom now. He consumes beer about once a month. He 
has not been intoxicated in his recent memory. Applicant has not been told by any 
alcohol counselor to stop drinking. (Tr. 23, 24) 
 
 Applicant fell off a building several years ago and injured himself. He has 
recurring pain and takes the 10 mg. Hydrocodone (a.k.a. Lortabs) tablets every day to 
relieve his pain. He takes one tablet every six hours for a total of four tablets per day. 
He has a prescription from his physician for that medication. The other narcotic 
substances Applicant had in the Tylenol bottle belonged to a handicapped friend of his 
who dropped his medications in Applicant’s car one day when Applicant gave him a ride 
to a hobby store. Applicant later found the few remaining Xanax and Oxycodone tablets 
in his car and placed them in the Tylenol bottle until he could return them to his friend. 
The arrest for DUI occurred before Applicant could accomplish that task. His friend 
submitted a written notarized statement dated March 26, 2013 admitting he did spill the 
medications in Applicant’s car. Applicant’s violation was that he had the prescription 
medications in a bottle other than the original container. Now he carries his daily dosage 
of three pain killers in a proper container with his name on it and labeled for the 
medication. (Tr. 24-39, 58, 59; Exhibits 1, 3, E)  
 
 Applicant admitted he drank alcohol from 1989 to 2011. His arrests are evidence 
also of his past intoxications. Applicant states that he drinks occasionally now and 
consumes only beer with a shot of whiskey at some times. He claimed he has not been 
intoxicated in more than a year. (Tr. 23; Answer with attachments) 
 
 Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling $148,821. Two of those debts, 
Subparagraph 4.c for $113,596 and Subparagraph 4.h for $32,489 were owed on farm 
property owned by Applicant’s father who had the same name as Applicant. (Tr. 46-63; 
Exhibits 4-7, B) 
 
 The debt for $291 in Subparagraph 4.a is owed by Applicant and not his father, 
as a subsequent document from Applicant showed. He will pay the debt within the next 
two weeks from March 26, 2013 or he will pay it with an installment plan to remove it 
from his credit record. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 46; Exhibits 4-7, D) 
 
 The debt for $519 in Subparagraph 4.b is a telephone bill owed by Applicant. He 
claims he does not owe it, and the account is closed by the creditor. It has not been 
removed from Applicant’s credit record. Applicant attached a letter from the creditor to 
his Answer showing the account is closed by their office. The letter is dated December 
1, 2010. (Tr. 47, 48; Exhibits 4-7; Answer and attachment) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The $113,596 judgment against Applicant in Subparagraph 4.c is not owed by 
Applicant. It pertains to the farm owned by his father who is now deceased. The 
judgment and lien filing sheet included as a government exhibit shows a different social 
security number than Applicant’s as the debtor. It also shows Applicant’s stepmother as 
a judgment debtor. The latest credit report shows a zero balance on Applicant’s record 
for this debt. This debt is not owed by Applicant. (Tr. 48, 49, 53; Exhibits 6, 7; Answer) 
 
 Subparagraph 4.d contains a debt for a medical account in the amount of $196. 
The debt dates from 2008. Applicant suspects it resulted from his fall from the roof and 
this debt remains from what the Workers Compensation System did not pay. It appears 
on the credit report from 2009 but not on the March 2013 credit report. This debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 50; Exhibits 4, 6, 7; Answer)  
 
 Subparagraph 4.e alleges Applicant owes $70 on a medical account. His Answer 
contains an attachment showing the debt was paid in October 2010. This debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 51; Exhibits 4-7; Answer and attachments) 
 
 Subparagraph 4.f contains a debt for $1,378 which is owed to NCO Financial. It 
arose in 2008. It is a duplicate of the debt listed in Subparagraph 4.b. This debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 51; Exhibits 4-7; Answer with attachments) 
 
 Subparagraph 4.g has a debt listed for $282 owed to a medical provider. It 
originated in 2008. This debt was paid by an insurance company. It does not appear on 
Applicant’s latest credit reports. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 51, 52; Exhibits 4-7; Answer 
with attachments) 
 
 The last debt listed in the SOR is Subparagraph 4.h in the amount of $32,489. 
Applicant asserts the debt belonged to his father. He does not know if his father paid the 
debt before he died. This obligation does not appear on Applicant’s credit reports. The 
signature on the Answer and that on the Agreed Judgment documents from 2002 
Applicant submitted are not the same signature. This debt is not Applicant’s. (Tr. 53, 54; 
Exhibits 4, 5, 7, A, B; Answer with attachments)          
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
 
5 
 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One condition applies: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
Applicant had two DUI arrests, one in 1989 and another in 2011. These incidents 
occurred away from Applicant’s work site. 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
conditions might apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
  
 Applicant denied in his Answer that he consumed alcohol to excess and to the 
point of intoxication between 1989 and 2011. He admitted being a social drinker. The 
evaluation program in which he engaged in 2011 after his DUI arrest concluded he had 
no symptoms of being an alcohol abuser or having any dependency. His progress was 
good throughout the three-month program. 
 
 Applicant’s first DUI occurred 22 years ago when he was 18 years old and driving 
around a college campus. The next event occurred in 2011. Therefore, much time has 
passed between these infrequent events. They do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant successfully completed his outpatient counseling program in 2011. 
There were no treatment recommendations or any type of prognosis, favorable or 
unfavorable, from the licensed clinical social worker after Applicant completed the 
program. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply on the facts except that no problem requiring 
aftercare was signified by the evaluator.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One applies based on the facts presented in Applicant’s case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
8 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s drug involvement arose because his arrest in 2011 found certain 
named prescription medications in a Tylenol bottle, not their original containers, and for 
which Applicant did not have prescriptions. He was found in possession of medications 
for which he did not have a prescription. Therefore, AG ¶ 25(c) applies.  
 
 Applicant did not use illegal drugs. He does not have a diagnosis of drug abuse 
or dependency from any licensed medical professional. Applicant does not have any 
disqualifying conditions under this security concern. Therefore, AG ¶ 25(d), (e), and (f) 
do not apply. The disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 25 (a), (b), (g), and (h) do not apply 
based on the facts of the case. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One of them 
applies: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
The mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), which states, “behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness or 
good judgment” applies. Applicant explained the few pills beyond the Hydrocodone pain 
killers he used and for which he had a prescription belonged to a handicapped friend 
who dropped them in Applicant’s car several days before the arrest. Applicant intended 
 
9 
 
 
to return them to the friend but had not yet accomplished that task. The friend submitted 
a written and notarized statement verifying these assertions.  
 
 Also considered it the fact that Applicant carried his friend’s spilled medications 
and his daily dosage of three pain killers in the Tylenol bottle because it was more 
convenient than carrying the large bottle of his medications. He has now obtained and 
uses a proper container, labeled with his name and the prescription, to transport his 
pain killers. Applicant has remediated the violation.  
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or administrative 
termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two conditions might apply: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
 
10 
 
 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies because there are security concerns under the Alcohol 
Consumption and the Drug Involvement guidelines. He also has several delinquent 
debts that he did not address as quickly as he should have. Considered as a whole they 
raise questions about Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, lack of candor, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Furthermore, AG ¶ 16(e) applies because Applicant’s actions involving alcohol 
and the medication drugs create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
within his professional and personal community that may arise. The recent DUI and the 
possession of someone else’s prescribed medications raise serious questions as to 
Applicant’s motivations.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. There are 
three mitigating factors that apply: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol incidents occurred 22 years apart. This behavior is infrequent. 
The first situation occurred when Applicant was 18 years old and acting out on a college 
campus. Applicant’s 2011 arrest was an isolated incident and most of the charges were 
dismissed. His alcohol evaluation in the DUI program in 2011 showed he was neither an 
alcohol abuser nor dependent. It happened under unique circumstances, particularly 
regarding the prescription medications belonging to his friend and it is not likely to recur. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 17(c) is applicable.  
 
 Applicant explained the incident in 2011 and in 1989 at the hearing. He was 
truthful and credible. His friend to whom the prescription medications belonged 
submitted a signed and notarized statement explaining his ownership of the medications 
and the true nature of the incident that coincided with Applicant’s explanation. He 
 
11 
 
 
testified he changed his container holding his painkiller medications and will not allow 
himself to be placed in a similar position in the future now that he understands the legal 
requirements. Such behavior will not recur. AG ¶ 17(d) applies. 
 
 Applicant has taken positive steps to eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
duress, manipulation, or duress. He does not have an alcohol problem as shown in the 
evaluation. He drinks infrequently. The possession of the prescribed medications was 
explained very clearly by Applicant and his friend. His current pattern of behavior as he 
discussed at the hearing, such as doing his work, resting at home, and paying his 
delinquent debts or resolving them in other ways, show he has a positive attitude toward 
work and has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate any vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(e) appears based on the total factors 
involved in Applicant’s case.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s earlier credit records showed he accumulated $148,821 in delinquent 
debt from 2007 to the present time that apparently was unpaid.  Applicant has eight 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy  of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and  provides 
 
12 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the  dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant paid the $291 in Subparagraph 4.a in April 2013. The accounts in 
Subparagraphs 4.b ($519) and 4.f ($1,378) are duplicates and the account is closed. 
The creditor submitted a letter to that effect dated December 2010.  
 
The debts in Subparagraphs 4.d ($196) and 4.g ($282) were paid by the state 
workers compensation system and Applicant’s medical insurance, respectively. They 
are resolved. 
 
The debts in Subparagraphs 4.c ($113,596) and 4.h ($32,489) belong to his 
deceased father or the decedent’s estate and are not Applicant’s debts. He has a 
legitimate and reasonable basis to dispute these debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay his 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies because the two largest debts were discovered 
not to be owed by Applicant, but by his late father who had the same name and a 
different social security number and signature.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible and honest 
individual who explained his history in a direct and persuasive manner. He lives a 
simple life and works hard for his income. His DUI actions were voluntary and he 
admitted them. He followed the court order and successfully completed the DUI 
 
13 
 
 
assessment. He did everything asked of him. His drug involvement is not an issue as 
described in the guideline. Applicant resolved each of the eight delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR. This man is not a security threat to his employer or the nation. He is 
trustworthy and reliable based on his personal history.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption, drug involvement, personal conduct, and financial considerations issues. I 
conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a-4.h:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
