 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11762 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines E and F. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 In an undated answer to the SOR Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 5, 2013. I 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled on April 22, 2013, by video teleconference. 
Applicant was located at Fort Gordon, Georgia. Department Counsel and I were located 
at DOHA headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through G. The record was held open until April 29, 2013, to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He submitted AE H. There was no 
objection, and it was admitted.1  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 1, 
2013.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing paragraph 2.b. 
There was no objection and the motion was granted.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations in paragraph 1 and denied the allegations 
in paragraph 2. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He served in the Air Force from 1988 to 2008, retiring 
honorably in the pay grade of E-6.3 Applicant married in 1994 and has three children, 
ages 17, 14 and 10. He has an associate’s degree. Applicant has worked for a federal 
contractor since he retired in 2008. Applicant first held a security clearance in 1989. It 
was suspended in 2001 and reinstated in approximately 2006.4 
 
 Applicant admitted he has had financial problems in the past. In 1998, he sought 
financial counseling because he had difficulty managing his finances when his wife lived 
in the United States while he was stationed overseas. The cost of managing two 
households proved to be burdensome. He has used credit counseling services in the 
past to help him manage his finances.5  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his wife’s inability to work due to 
health problems. At various times during their marriage she was able to work, but only 
part-time. Recently, she was diagnosed with a more serious illness and is unable to 
work. This loss of income has impacted their finances.6  
                                                          
1 HE I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 12. 
 
3 AE C. 
 
4 Tr. 27. 
 
5 Tr.28-30. 
 
6 Tr. 30. 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2001, an investigation was being conducted regarding Applicant’s travel 
voucher. He received an Article 15 Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) Nonjudicial 
Punishment and his security clearance was suspended. He was provided with a letter 
dated September 4, 2001, that stated:  
 
You are hereby notified that a security determination has been made to 
suspend your access to classified information/unescorted entry into 
restricted areas. This action is being taken due to an ongoing investigation 
that you falsified an official record.7  
 
Applicant’s security clearance was later revoked on October 17, 2001. He was 
formally debriefed from sensitive compartment information access on October 10, 2001. 
He turned in his restricted access badge, and his access to all classified information 
was terminated. The reason for the revocation was due to a falsification of an official 
record.8   
 
Applicant was aware that his security clearance was suspended and later 
revoked. Applicant failed to disclose this information in the security clearance 
application (SCA) he completed on February 3, 2011. Section 25: 1.b. of the SCA asks: 
“To your knowledge, have you EVER had a clearance or access authorization denied, 
suspended, or revoked . . .” Applicant answered “no.” Applicant explained that because 
his nonjudicial punishment sentence was remitted after the period of suspension 
elapsed without further misconduct, he believed that the suspension reinstatement also 
applied to his security clearance. This explanation does not address why he did not 
disclose his security clearance was suspended and later revoked. It is irrelevant if it was 
ever reinstated. He acknowledged at his hearing that he knew his security clearance 
was suspended, but he was still working in the same location and was being escorted. 
He stated he was confused. He stated he “failed to check the block,” and he was not 
trying to hide anything. He stated that he made a mistake. His explanations were not 
credible.9  
 
Applicant has a history of financial difficulties. In 1997, he got behind on credit 
card payments. He consulted his supervisor who referred him to credit counseling. His 
debts were consolidated and he paid them through an allotment. He resolved those 
debts.  
 
In 1997, Applicant did not have enough money to purchase an airline ticket so he 
could return to his duty station overseas. He misused his government credit card to 
purchase the ticket. He also made numerous unauthorized automatic teller withdrawals 
                                                          
7 AE F. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. 30-37, 41-59. 
 
 
4 
 
 
for cash. He received nonjudicial punishment for his actions. (SOR ¶ 1.n) He repaid the 
amount he owed.10 
 
Applicant has numerous debts alleged in the SOR. He was interviewed by a 
Government investigator on March 10, 2010, and was aware his finances and 
delinquent debts were a security concern. Applicant stated he attempted to contact a 
credit consolidation company in July 2011, but they just took his money and did not 
apply it to his delinquent debts. He believes he paid three months. He discontinued their 
services. The company kept its fees, but returned the money he provided to pay his 
debts. He attempted to work with another company, but learned it did not have a 
consolidation program. In November 2012, he made an agreement with a consumer 
credit company to consolidate his debts.11  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($211) is a collection account for telephone service. 
Applicant incurred this debt in 2001. He stated he believed it was paid until he reviewed 
his credit bureau report. It is not listed on his consolidated debt agreement.12 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,616) is for braces and surgery for Applicant’s 
daughter. This debt was incurred in 2007. Applicant was aware of the debt and was 
receiving bills, but did not pay them. He stated he is attempting to find where the 
account is located. It is not resolved.13 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($994) is not paid and not enrolled in Applicant’s 
consolidated debt agreement. He stated he did not recognize the debt. He stated he 
was making calls to find out who the creditor is. The debt is not resolved.14 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,492) is for a computer Applicant purchased in 2007. 
He has received demands for payment in the past. A notation on the debt consolidation 
agreement states “need statement.” Applicant explained that the consolidation company 
is investigating the debt to see who the current creditor is. The debt is not resolved.15 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,119) is a loan Applicant received in 2007. The creditor 
wants full payment. Applicant was unable to pay the amount requested. It is listed on his 
debt consolidation agreement, but no payments have been made to it.16 
                                                          
10 Tr. 88-90; GE 2, 4. 
 
11 Tr. 37, 81-84. 
 
12 Tr. 60-61; GE 6, 7; AE G. 
 
13 Tr. 61-63. 
 
14 Tr. 63-64. 
 
15 Tr. 65; AE G. 
 
16 Tr. 65-66; AE G. 
 
5 
 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,300) is an education loan that was to be paid through 
the GI Bill. He incurred the debt in 2009. Because Applicant failed the class, he is 
responsible for payment. It is included in the debt consolidation agreement. It appears 
he has paid two payments of $50. The debt was incurred in 2009.17 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h ($1,916 and $800) are included in the debt 
consolidation plan. He has made two $60 payments.18 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j ($471 and $434) are for unpaid parking fines. 
Applicant stated he believes he has paid the fines. They increased when they were not 
paid. They are enrolled in the debt consolidation plan, and he has made two $30 
payments.19 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($2,042) is a credit card debt. It is included in the debt 
consolidation plan, but no payments have been made at this time.20 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($525) is for cable equipment that was not returned. 
Applicant stated he returned the equipment. He did not provide documentary proof that 
the debt is resolved.21 
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($220) is for jewelry he purchased for his wife. Applicant 
stated he thought he paid it. It is enrolled in the debt consolidation plan. He has made 
two $20 payments. The current balance is $120.22  
 
 Applicant has had two cars repossessed in the past. He believes he owes one 
creditor about $7,000 and another about $1,000.23 
 
 Applicant’s gross military retirement pay is about $1,321 a month. His personal 
financial statement was based on a salary of $63,000. He received two raises since he 
completed it. He estimated he is now earning about $71,000 annually. He estimated 
that he had $558 remaining after paying his bills, including the $410 he pays to the debt 
consolidation plan. Applicant admitted that for the past three years he has received 
federal income tax refunds of about $2,400 annually. He did not use any of the refunds 
                                                          
17 Tr. 66-68; AE G. 
 
18 Tr. 68-69; AE G. 
 
19 Tr. 69-70; AE G. 
 
20 Tr. 70 76-77, AE G. 
 
21 Tr. 77-79. 
 
22 Tr. 79-80. 
 
23 Tr. 70-76. Applicant’s car repossessions are not considered for disqualifying purposes but are 
considered when analyzing the “whole person” and Applicant’s credibility. 
 
6 
 
 
to pay his delinquent debts. He hopes to have all of his debts paid off in two and half 
years.24 
 
 Applicant provided character statements. They state that Applicant is a person of 
high integrity. He is a leader, and a great friend, father, and husband. He practices good 
sportsmanship and is dependable. He exhibits good judgment, is dedicated and 
trustworthy.25  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
24 Tr. 38-39, 84-88. 
 
25 Tr. 40; AE A, H. 
 
7 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to 
satisfy. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
8 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Even when he was on active duty 
and his wife was working, he had difficulty paying his bills. He does not have a grasp on 
managing his money and paying his creditors. Some of his delinquent debts are 
included in his consolidation program, others are not. AG ¶ 20(a) is not established 
because his behavior is recent because his numerous delinquent debts are still being 
resolved, and based on his past financial history future financial problems are likely to 
recur.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his wife’s medical issues and her 
inability to work. His wife’s inability to work is a condition that is beyond his control. In 
order for AG ¶ 20(b) to fully apply, Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has not established that he has acted responsibly. Applicant 
has a significant history of not paying his bills. While in the military, he had delinquent 
debts and paid them through a consolidation program. This should have been a wake-
up call to him about being fiscally responsible and budgeting his resources. Instead, he 
again experienced financial problems. Applicant incurred some of his delinquent debts 
before his wife was unable to work full-time. Some of his debts date back to 2007. He 
has been aware that his finances were a security concern since at least 2010. His 
recent consolidation plan does not address all of his delinquent debts. Applicant has not 
provided sufficient evidence to conclude he has acted responsibly in addressing his 
delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.   
 
 Applicant is participating in a debt consolidation plan and has likely received 
some financial counseling. All of his delinquent debts are not included in the plan. He is 
not making payments on some debts at this time. Until he gets a firm grasp on 
managing his finances and has a significant track record of paying off his delinquent 
debts and paying his current expenses on time, I cannot conclude there are clear 
indications his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. I find AG ¶ 
20(c) partially applies.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant is making payments through the debt consolidation plan to some 
creditors, but he has not made payments or resolved other debts. I find AG ¶ 20(d) 
partially applies. Applicant failed to provide documented proof of the basis of his dispute 
with certain creditors, so AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his security clearance application that 
his security clearance had been suspended and later revoked in 2001. Applicant’s 
actions were intentional. His explanations were not credible. I find AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
10 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. 
Applicant was aware his security clearance had been suspended and later revoked. He 
deliberately failed to disclose this information. His explanation was disingenuous. 
Whether he believed his security clearance suspension was somehow tied to his 
nonjudicial punishment and later vacated, the question was clear that he was required 
to disclose the suspension. He did not promptly make a good-faith effort to correct his 
omission. His omissions are not minor, but rather are serious. There is no evidence to 
suggest that there were unique circumstances surrounding his omissions. His actions 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s actions to 
somehow rationalize why he did not disclose this important information cause me to 
conclude that his behavior may recur and that he has not taken positive steps to reduce 
or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant 
intentionally concealed negative information about prior security clearance status.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
11 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He retired honorably from the military. Applicant has a 
history of financial problems. He is addressing some of his delinquent debts through a 
debt consolidation program, but has not established a track record of fiscal 
responsibility. Applicant failed to disclose on his SCA that at one time, his security 
clearance was suspended and later revoked. His failure and then rationalization for not 
disclosing information he was clearly required to disclose is a serious security concern. 
He has not met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.j:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph   1.m:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph   1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Withdrawn 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
