1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-12585
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan K. Hahn, Esquire
May 7, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on June 28, 2011.  On December 18, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 21, 2012.  He
answered the SOR in writing on January 2, 2013, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on February 8, 2013, and I received
the case assignment that same day.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 19,
2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 11, 2013.  The Government
offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 7, which were received without objection.  Applicant
testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through J, which were
2
received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on April
22, 2013.  The record closed on April 22, 2013.  Based upon a review of the pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in
Subparagraph 1.a., with explanation.  He also provided additional information to support
his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.a.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to a medical provided in the amount of
about $20,709.  (GX 6 at page.)  Applicant denies the amount of this claimed debt;
which he has formally appealed with the insurance company, and it does not appear on
the Government’s most recent April 2013 credit report.  (AppXs F, J, and GX 7.)
Applicant was involved in a motorcycle accident in April of 2006.  (TR at page 33
line 17 to page 34 line 11.)  He was hospitalized; and a result, should have been
covered by his health insurance.  (Id, TR at page 34 lines 16~20, at page 35 line 10 to
page 36 line 17, and AppX I.)  Applicant has submitted documentation showing that his
emergency room expenses were, in fact, paid by his health insurance.  (TR at page 43
line 19 to page 46 line 13, and AppXs B and C.)  However, when the hospital submitted
a bill for additional expenses; for some inexplicable reason, his health insurance
provider stated, in error, “that this ins[urance was] termed [terminated] on 01/01/06.”
(TR at page 48 line 19 to page 51 line 17, and AppX D.)
Applicant was unaware of this outstanding claim until 2010, when he “went to
purchase a truck.”  (TR at page 41 lines 4~22.)  The hospital resubmitted its claim to his
health insurance company in December of 2012.  However, it was denied; not because
he was not covered, but because “this claim is past timely filing period.”  (TR at page 51
line 18 to page 52 line 15.)  As noted above, Applicant has formally appealed this
improper denial of medical care coverage, and is willing to pay any deductible amount
he may owe.  (TR at page 55 lines 9~14, and AppX G.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
3
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
4
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
I find no Disqualifying Conditions that are applicable here.  Under Subparagraph
19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Applicant is willing to pay what deductible medical expenses he may owe.  Similarly
under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns.  Applicant has no such history, and appears to be the victim of the
malfeasance of his health insurance company.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The administrative judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Those who know Applicant speak most
highly of him as evidenced by 13 letters of recommendation.  (AppX H.)  The record
evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns arising from his Financial Considerations.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
