 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12170 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Carl A. Morgan, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 15, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 31, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 22, 
2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 9, 2013, by video teleconference. 
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through L, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
May 15, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing subparagraphs 
1.a and 1.b. There was no objection and the motion was granted.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the remaining two SOR allegations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has a bachelor’s degree and is working on a 
master’s degree. He married in 2005. He and his wife separated the latter part of 2007, 
and they divorced in February 2008. There are no children from the marriage. Applicant 
has an 18-year-old child from a previous relationship. He has worked for his current 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2001. He has held a secret security clearance 
since 2001.2 
 
 When Applicant married his wife, she was attending school. They began 
experiencing financial difficulties due to his wife’s spending money beyond their means. 
She managed the finances during their marriage. Applicant was unaware that she was 
not paying some of their bills until he began getting calls from creditors that the 
payments were past due. His wife would then pay the delinquent payments. During their 
marriage, Applicant’s wife held a job for only a few weeks.3  
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a boat in 2006 or 2007. At the time, they could 
afford it. His wife continued to spend money beyond their income, and their financial 
situation became strained. It reached its breaking point in late 2007, and they divorced 
as a consequence of it in 2008. As part of their divorce settlement, Applicant’s wife 
agreed to take possession of the boat and continue making the payments on the loan. 
She failed to make the payments. Applicant took possession of the boat. He then hired 
an attorney in 2009 to help him resolve the financial issues he was experiencing due to 
his wife’s failure to make payments on the boat and issues with her student loans. 
Applicant eventually reached a settlement agreement with the creditor and paid the 
settlement to resolve the boat debt and a credit card debt with the same creditor. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 11-14. 
 
2 Tr. 24, 38, 42-44. 
 
3 Tr. 26-27. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant explained as his marriage was dissolving he was trying to maintain payments 
on his expenses and got behind on paying this credit card.4 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are student loans. Applicant denied that these 
loans belonged to him. He was unaware the loans existed until after he was divorced. 
He never gave his wife permission to sign his name, electronically, physically, or as a 
cosigner to any student loan. He began receiving letters from creditors about his wife’s 
unpaid student loans. He contacted the creditors to alert them his ex-wife used his 
name without his consent. When the creditors did not respond, he hired an attorney. He 
testified that his wife forged his name on loan documents and fraudulently obligated him 
to the loans. A civil complaint was filed against him on a different student loan not 
alleged in the SOR, and he successfully had the complaint dismissed. Another creditor 
removed his name from a different student loan because they concluded that he did not 
authorize the loan.   
 
Regarding the SOR debts, Applicant received letters from the student loan 
creditors advising him the debts were delinquent. He sent the creditors affidavits 
attesting that he did not sign the loan contracts, and his ex-wife fraudulently signed his 
name, committing forgery. Applicant’s attorney has been helping him resolve the 
fraudulent student loans. Applicant also filed a report with the police for identity theft. 
Applicant intends to continue disputing the debts and resolve them with the creditors. If 
he is unsuccessful, he intends to dispute them in court. If the court determines he is 
responsible for the student loans of his ex-wife, he will abide by the court’s order. These 
debts are being resolved.5 
 
Applicant has no other delinquent debts. He pays his bills on time. He has 
approximately $25,000 in savings and $150,000 in a retirement account. He lives within 
his means. He did not have financial problems before he married and has not had them 
since his divorce, except those created by his ex-wife. I found Applicant’s testimony 
credible.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 25-29, 40-41; GE 2; AE C, D, F, I. These two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, were withdrawn 
by the Government. They are not considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when 
analyzing the “whole person” and for credibility purposes.  
 
5 Tr. 25, 29-35; AE G, H, J, K, L.  
 
6 Tr. 25, 39-40, 44-48. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that the alleged delinquent debts are not his debts. He 
has been proactive in attempting to resolve the issues associated with his ex-wife 
forging his name to obtain student loans. He has been working with an attorney, and as 
a result some student loan creditors have cleared him of responsibility acknowledging 
that the debts did not belong to him. He is actively working to remove his name from the 
remaining debts that are alleged in the SOR. Applicant does not have a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations. He lives within his means. He is willing and able to 
satisfy debts he is responsible for. He is not responsible for the alleged debts. I find 
none of the above disqualifying conditions apply. Therefore, an analysis of mitigating 
conditions is not necessary because he has refuted the SOR allegations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He does not have a history of financial problems. His 
ex-wife forged his name to obtain her student loans. Applicant was unaware that she 
fraudulently obligated him. She also failed to make payments on a boat loan that she 
agreed to as part of their property settlement. Applicant later resolved that debt by 
taking possession of the boat and paying a settlement with the creditor. He does not 
intend to pay his ex-wife’s student loans and his attorney is actively working to remove 
Applicant’s name from the student loans. If the issue must be resolved in court, 
Applicant will abide by the court’s ruling. Applicant’s testimony was credible and he has 
been aggressively working to resolve these matters. He lives within his means and has 
become more conscientious about managing his own finances. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
