                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------                   )            ISCR Case No. 12-01034
      )
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
  Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement security concerns, but mitigated personal
conduct concerns.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 29, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether his clearance
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended, DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 21, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2013, and was scheduled for hearing on May 6,
2013, by video teleconference. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose
of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the Government's
case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-6); Applicant relied on one  witness (himself) and one
exhibit (AE A). The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 10, 2013.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly: (a) used marijuana, with varying frequency,
from approximately 1977 to at least September 2010; (b) continued to use marijuana after
he was granted a security clearance in July 2009; (c) continued to use marijuana after he
was granted access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in March 2009; (d)
continued to use marijuana after he was granted a top secret (TS) clearance in July 2008;
and (f) continued to use marijuana after he was granted a secret  clearance in September
2004. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) used marijuana while holding security
clearances between 1977 and at least September 2010, and (b) omitted his use of
marijuana when completing his security clearance application (e-QIP) in July 2003. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations covering his
drug activities and SF-86 omissions. He provided no explanations. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old systems technologist for a defense contractor. He seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in June 1987 and divorced his spouse in October 1989. (GE 1)
He has no children from this marriage. Since 1998, he has cohabited with his girlfriend.
(GE 4; Tr. 30) Applicant earned a diploma from a technical vocational institute in April
1995. (GE 1) He claims no military experience.
Applicant’s drug history
Applicant was introduced to marijuana in 1977 during his first year in college. (GE
5) He tried cocaine a few times in the early 80s and never used it again. He continued
smoking marijuana for another 15 years, sometimes at parties or while hiking with friends.
It relaxed him in his younger years. (GE 5) When he purchased it, he did so with friends
for sharing purposes. (GE 5) By 1992-1993, Applicant had ceased using marijuana. 
3
Applicant resumed his use of marijuana while on vacation with his girlfriend in
Jamaica in 2000. (GEs 4 and 5; Tr. 31-34)  He used it socially with his friends over a four-
day period approximately eight times. Applicant continued using marijuana after he had
been granted a secret security clearance by DOD in September 2004.  His girlfriend does
not use marijuana, but was probably aware of his using it on his Jamaica trip. (Tr. 30-32)
Applicant continued to use marijuana after he was granted an interim TS security
clearance by DOD in July 2008, and he continued using marijuana after he was granted a
TS security clearance by DOD in November 2008.  He continued to use marijuana after he
was granted access to SCI in March 2009. (GE 4) In August 2009, he used marijuana in
social situations over a four-day period. (GE 4; Tr. 34-35)  On these occasions, he often
smoked the substance using a pipe, taking two puffs each time with his friends. He
attributed mid-life crisis issues to his continuing use of marijuana. (GE 4) He described his
use as “just old friends getting together and behaving like we were younger.” (GE 5) 
In September 2010, Applicant was on a canoeing and hiking trip with old friends
when he smoked marijuana over 10 times over a four-day period. (GE 4; Tr. 35-36)
Before this trip, he had received no briefing or training on DOD requirements of self-
reporting. (Tr. 37-38) He expressed shame and remorse for his actions and poor judgment
and understands the potential repercussions of his behavior.  He has not used marijuana
since his last use in September 2010 (GEs 1, 4, and 5; Tr. 41), and has restricted his
contact with those friends who use drugs. (Tr. 43-44) However, he has never received
drug counseling or subjected to random drug testing by his employer.         
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
In completing his security clearance application (e-QIP) in July 2003, Applicant
intentionally omitted his prior use of marijuana in 2000. (GE 3) He repeated his omissions
when completing his July 2008 e-QIP. (GE 2) Not until he completed a third e-QIP in
March 2011 did he disclose his past marijuana activity. (GE 1) He attributed his past
omissions to embarrassment and immaturity. (GE 5) 
After admitting using marijuana in his 2011 e-QIP, Applicant was notified that his
security clearance was suspended. (GE 4) He accepted full responsibility for his actions
and recognized “what a stupid and irresponsible thing this was to do.” (GE 4) 
When interviewed in January 2012 by an agent from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM), Applicant disclosed his lengthy history of marijuana usage.  In this
interviewe he expressed profound remorse for his errors of judgment. (GE 4)  
Endorsements 
Applicant is well regarded by his supervisor. He did not furnish personnel
evaluations or evidence of civic contributions.  (AE A)
4
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
concerns are pertinent herein:
5
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness,
both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.  AG ¶ 24.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
A decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made
only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national
interest. Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995). As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be
6
clearly consistent with the national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with
the Applicant.
Analysis
Applicant is a well-regarded systems technologist who presents with a
considerable history of drug involvement. Principal security issues in this case center
on Applicant’s drug involvement and his omitting his drug use in security applications
he completed in 2003 and 2008. 
Drug concerns
Over a 33-year period between 1977 and September 2010), Applicant used
marijuana regularly in social settings with friends and contacts. Use of illegal drugs,
(inclusive of marijuana) is proscribed by both state law and federal law (see 21 U.S.C.
§ 802, et seq.). Some of his marijuana use occurred while he possessed a security
clearance.
Applicant’s admissions to using illegal drugs raise initial security concerns over
risks of recurrence as well as  judgment issues. On the strength of the evidence
presented, three disqualifying conditions of the AGs for drug abuse are applicable: DC
¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation,
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug
paraphernalia,” DC ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security
clearance.”
Applicant’s recurrent use of marijuana over a 33-year period raises questions
over the strength of his abstinence commitments. Because of the recency and
recurrent nature of his marijuana usage (inclusive of periods when he possessed a
security clearance), Applicant’s involvement with the drug cannot be considered fully
mitigated. Too little time has elapsed since Applicant’s last use in September 2010
(less than three years) to absolve him of security concerns over risks of recurrence. 
Applicant has made noticeable gains in his efforts to mitigate his past drug
activities. Still, his recurrent use of marijuana over a significant period of time (over 33
years) has been followed by a relatively brief period of self-imposed abstinence, and
has not been accompanied by any cognizable counseling or programmatic
rehabilitation. Considering the regularity and recurrent nature of his marijuana use over
a lengthy  period of time, many of the mitigating conditions for drug involvement are not
available to Applicant.
To his credit, Applicant has ceased contact with friends who use drugs since his
last use of marijuana in September 2010. His efforts warrant the application of  MC ¶
26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts,” and MC ¶ 26(b)(2),
7
“changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used,” to the merits of his
situation.  
More recently, Applicant has exhibited candor about his marijuana usage and
his past associations with friends and contacts involved in drug activities. Applicant’s
assurances that he no longer uses illegal drugs are encouraging. He has a lengthy
history of recurrent drug use after significant periods of abstinence. Under these
circumstances, more time is needed to facilitate safe predictions that he is not a
recurrence risk. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of his overall honesty, trustworthiness, and understanding of DOD
policy constraints on the use of illegal substances. He lacks enough positive
reinforcements, however, to facilitate safe predictions he is at no risk of recurrence. 
Considering the record as a whole, at this time there is insufficient probative
evidence of sustainable mitigation to safely predict he will refrain from illegal drug use
in the foreseeable future. Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances
surrounding Applicant’s drug activities over a 33-year period, he does not mitigate
security concerns with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.f of the SOR.
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns are raised as well over Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness under Guideline E as the result of his recurrent use of illegal drugs
while holding a security clearance and his omissions of his marijuana use in the e-QIPs
he completed in 2003 and 2008. By omitting his marijuana usage, Applicant failed to
furnish materially important background information about his illegal use of drug that
was needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his security
clearance applications. 
To be sure, questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal
conduct guideline. (AG ¶ 15)  The same concerns that attach to Applicant’s repeated
drug involvement apply with equal force to the judgment concerns associated with his
drug activities under the personal conduct guideline and essentially duplicate one
another. 
For the reasons stated, Applicant’s drug-related activities do not warrant any
independent cognizance under the personal conduct guideline. See ISCR Case No.
06-20964, at 6 (April 10, 2008).  Subparagraph 2.a, accordingly, is resolved favorably
to Applicant. 
8
Twice, Applicant omitted his past marijuana usage when completing his security
applications: once in 2003 and once again in 2008. His e-QIP omissions invite
application of DC ¶¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” and 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”
Applicant fully disclosed his drug involvement in the e-QIP he completed in 2011
and was candid about his drug usage and his errors in judgment when later queried by
the OPM agent who interviewed him in January 2012. MC ¶ 17(d), “the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused,”
applies to Applicant’s situation. 
Applicant’s repeated omissions of his marijuana use when completing e-QIPs in
2003 and 2008, while serious, were corrected by Applicant on his own volition in the e-
QIP he executed in March 2011. His actions are isolated when considered in
juxtaposition to the impressions of his supervisor about his overall honesty and
reliability. Mitigation credit is available to him under MC ¶ 17 (c), “the offense is so
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s omissions, consideration is
given to both his stated reasons for omitting his marijuana use in his e-QIPs, his
voluntary election to set the record straight with his admissions of drug usage,  and  the
positive overall impressions he forged with his supervisor about his honesty and
trustworthiness. Evaluating all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record,
Applicant mitigates security concerns associated with the allegations covered by
subparagraph 2.b of the SOR covering his e-QIP omissions.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):           AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.f: Against Applicant
      
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):          FOR APPLICANT
9
Subparas. 2. a and 2.b:            For Applicant 
                  C  o nclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
