KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  The Appeal Board has no authority over how clearance investigations
are conducted.  An applicant has the responsibility to present evidence in mitigation and
extenuation.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-03077
DATE: 05/13/2013
DATE: May 13, 2013
In Re:
---------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-03077
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 12, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 21, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Richard A. Cefola denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his application
of the mitigating conditions; whether the Judge properly applied the whole-person concept, and
1In the Analysis the Judge stated that Applicant had “been diagnosed as suffering from alcohol abuse or
dependence on at least four occasions.”  Decision at 4.  
2See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶¶ 15, 21.  
2
whether the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following,
we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant began drinking around 1989, consuming several beers a night on weekends.  By
the early 2000s he was drinking even more, consuming around five beers daily.  Sometimes he
would go to work hungover.  By the mid-2000s he began consuming shots of liquor.  He first sought
alcohol treatment in 2009.  He left the program one day short of completion, characterizing himself
as having been “in denial.”  Decision at 2.  He remained sober for a few months, but he resumed
drinking after his father passed away.  He experienced attendance problems at work and entered into
a second alcohol treatment program, which diagnosed him as alcohol dependent.1  He remained
sober for about six months but resumed drinking.  He entered two more alcohol treatment programs.
The last of these, which he entered in April 2012, consisted of both in-patient and out-patient
treatment as well as after-care.  Applicant states that he had resumed drinking prior to entry into this
last  program due to grief over the death of his niece.  Applicant attends Alcoholics Anonymous
twice a week.  He has not consumed alcohol since entering his last treatment program. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns both under Guideline G and
Guideline E.  In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge cited to evidence of
Applicant’s having resumed drinking after each of his first three treatment programs.  He stated that
Applicant’s less than a year of sobriety is insufficient to demonstrate genuine rehabilitation.  In the
whole-person analysis the Judge noted Applicant’s favorable character evidence but concluded that
this evidence was not sufficient to mitigate concerns arising from Applicant’s conduct.
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence of his good character, his employment history, his good security
record, family circumstances that influenced his drinking, etc.  He contends that this evidence
supports his case for a security clearance.  The Judge made findings about much of this evidence.
However, the gravamen of his overall decision appears to have been Applicant’s repeated return to
drinking despite attendance at numerous treatment programs and his many years of denial about his
alcohol abuse.  A reasonable person could conclude that Applicant’s alcohol history impugns his
reliability and trustworthiness, traits crucial to both Guidelines G and E.2  Given the record that was
before him, the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions is sustainable.  Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he
demonstrated that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
3
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08087 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 5, 2013).  Despite
Applicant’s challenge to the Judge’s whole-person analysis, the record supports a conclusion that
the Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct in reaching his decision, thereby complying
with Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a).  Applicant contends that officials erred in conducting his
background investigation, in that they failed to interview several witnesses that he believed could
have provided relevant information.  We have no authority over how clearance investigations are
conducted.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06026 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 5, 2013).  In any event,
Applicant was responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
concerns raised by his circumstances.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.       
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
