 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00651 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dorn G. Bishop, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement, Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DoD 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 25, 2012, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on January 25, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 7, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on March 13, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record 
was kept open for Applicant to submit additional evidence. He submitted AE C in a 
timely fashion and it was admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s transmittal 
letter was marked as HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 22, 
2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations stated in the 
SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He is single and has no children. Since July 2011, he 
has worked for a defense contractor as a software engineer. He has an associate’s 
degree. He has no military background and has never held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using 
methamphetamine about 20 times from 1999 to 2000; using methamphetamine, 
cocaine, ecstasy, and marijuana on multiple occasions from about 2006 to 2008; using 
marijuana daily from February 2010 to June 2010; using methamphetamine about 12 
times from about April 2010 to May 2012; purchasing methamphetamine and marijuana 
from about 1999 to 2012 (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e); (2) being treated for drug abuse in 
hospitals in 2000 and 2007; being arrested for driving under the influence of drugs 
(ecstasy) in July 2007; receiving inpatient drug abuse treatment in 2000 and 2008; 
receiving treatment beginning in May 2011 for lingering paranoia and anxiety resulting 
from methamphetamine use (See SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.i). The conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
-1.e, and 1.g was also alleged as criminal conduct and personal conduct concerns 
under Guidelines J and E. (See SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.a). 
  
 Applicant began using drugs as a sophomore in high school. He used them on 
weekends and when at parties. He smoked marijuana or drank alcohol daily. He 
smoked and drank in this manner because his friends did it and he was bored. He 
obtained the marijuana from his friends. He stopped using marijuana in 1998 when he 
moved to a different state. In the new state, he met a friend who used 
methamphetamine. Applicant began using this drug when he was around this friend. He 
lost contact with this friend and did not use any drugs again until about 1999. From 
1999 to 2000, he became associated with a group of friends who liked to party, drink 
                                                          
1 Tr. 23-24; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
alcohol, and use drugs. He began drinking with these friends on a monthly basis and 
using marijuana and methamphetamine weekly.2 
 
 In 2000, Applicant’s mother took him to a hospital emergency room because of a 
methamphetamine overdose. After his hospitalization, he entered into a drug treatment 
program. The program consisted of six days of inpatient treatment and three months of 
outpatient treatment. There is no information in the record about his diagnosis or 
prognosis from this treatment. He followed this program with active participation in 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) attending weekly meetings for about five years. He 
remained drug free during this time.3 
 
 In the summer of 2005, one of Applicant’s high school friends visited him. They 
smoked marijuana for “old time sakes,” which led to his resumption of regular drug use. 
He used marijuana, cocaine, and methamphetamine on a daily basis. He also stopped 
attending AA meetings. He bought the drugs (marijuana, cocaine, and 
methamphetamine) from friends and a particular cab driver. In 2007, his cocaine use 
caused his heart to beat irregularly. He believed he used a bad batch of cocaine. His 
father took him to the emergency room. Nothing appeared to be wrong with him, so he 
was released from the hospital. He continued to use drugs after this trip to the hospital. 
In July 2007, he was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). The night before the 
arrest, he was at a party where he used ecstasy. He had never used the drug before 
and wanted to experiment with it. The drug made him feel exhausted and sleepy, which 
carried over to the next day when he was driving. He was pulled over by law 
enforcement for swerving his car. The charges were reduced to reckless driving and he 
was fined.4  
 
 In April 2008 he voluntarily entered a drug treatment program. He stayed in the 
program as an inpatient for 12 days. He left without completing the program because he 
felt bullied by another member of the group. He was evaluated upon admission and 
discharge by a qualified medical professional of a recognized drug treatment program. 
Both his admitting and discharge diagnoses included amphetamine dependence. His 
prognosis was poor. He remained drug free for the next 18 months.5 
 
 In 2010, once again, the arrival of an old high school friend led to his use of 
marijuana. He then began using methamphetamine again for about four to five months. 
He smoked marijuana daily for about a month. He used drugs sporadically until about 
December 2010 when he stopped. He started going to AA meetings again. He 
abstained from using drugs through April 2012. During this time, he was interviewed by 
an investigator for his security clearance worthiness. He then relapsed again in April 
                                                          
2 Tr. 29; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. 32, 73-75; GE 2, 3. 
 
4 Tr. 81-83; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 75-76, 78; GE 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
2012 by using methamphetamine. He did not report his drug use to his security 
manager or anyone else connected with his job. He used it about 12 times for a month. 
He stopped on June 29, 2012, and claims to be drug and alcohol free since then.6 
 
 Applicant is currently an active member of AA. He has attended between five and 
seven AA meetings a week for the last nine months. He also is involved in AA “step” 
work, which is working the 12 steps of the program with other members. He has an AA 
sponsor who he talks to weekly. In May 2011, he began seeing a psychologist for an 
anxiety disorder. His withdrawal from methamphetamine abuse causes him paranoia 
and his psychologist is treating him for that. He initially saw the psychologist about once 
a week, but now is seeing him about once every three weeks. He is taking anxiety 
medication including Xanax. He used methamphetamine after he began seeing his 
psychologist. He did not disclose his use to his psychologist.7 
 
 Applicant had two witnesses testify for him. One witness knew him from their 10-
year working relationship. He believed Applicant was trustworthy and had good 
judgment. The second witness knew Applicant though AA. He was one of Applicant’s 
sponsors. He has known Applicant 12 years and has seen him grow in the AA program 
as he has gotten older. He believes Applicant will be successful with his sobriety this 
time because he has a support system around him now. Applicant also presented two 
character letters. One is from a coworker who believes Applicant is trustworthy, reliable, 
and honest. The second letter is from another AA sponsor who knows Applicant through 
a 12-step study program. He opines that Applicant will remain sober as long as he 
continues to go to daily AA meetings and “works the steps.” Applicant also submitted a 
written statement of intent not to use drugs or alcohol while holding a security 
clearance.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
6 Tr. 85-87, 90-93, 95; GE 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. 93-95, 97-98, 100; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 125, 135136, 144; AE A-C. 
 
 
5 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Between 1999 and 2012, Appellant purchased and used marijuana, cocaine, and 
methamphetamine on a number of occasions. In 2000 and 2007, he was hospitalized 
because of his drug abuse. In 2007, he was arrested for DUI based upon his use of 
ecstasy. In 2008, he was evaluated and diagnosed by a qualified medical professional 
as amphetamine dependent. I find that all the above disqualifying conditions apply, 
except as to SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i. The drug treatment he received is not a disqualifying 
condition, but rather is considered a good thing and is therefore included as a mitigating 
condition. Applicant may suffer from anxiety and paranoia related to his drug abuse, but 
that conduct does not fall within the stated disqualifying conditions under this guideline. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s short period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate his intent not 
to use illegal drugs in the future. He has made several attempts to abstain from drugs 
throughout the years, but has continually relapsed back into drug use with the most 
recent occasion being in June 2012, less than one year ago. His most recent use was 
after having filled out his security clearance application and after his investigative 
interview for a clearance was conducted. He was well aware at that time of the 
prohibition to use illegal drugs and that such use was not condoned by the DoD. 
Despite this knowledge, he used drugs anyway. Even though he signed a letter of intent 
not to use drugs in the future and has been drug free for about nine months, his past 
actions, particularly his repeated relapses into drug use, cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. It is too soon to tell whether his use will 
recur. Although he claims he no longer uses drugs or alcohol, this is not enough to 
show a demonstrated intent not to use drugs in the future. Neither AG ¶¶ 26(a) nor 
 
7 
 
 
26(b) applies. Although he completed a drug treatment plan in 2000, he relapsed into 
drug use after this program and he failed to complete the 2008 drug treatment plan that 
he entered. He also relapsed into drug use after the 2008 treatment program. AG ¶ 
26(d) does not apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s numerous drug purchases and use constituted criminal action on his 
part. I find that all the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Less than a year has passed since Applicant last criminal use of drugs. This is 
not a sufficient amount of time to determine whether his drug rehabilitative efforts will be 
successful. Given his past history of multiple drug-use relapses, it can’t be determined 
that it is unlikely that his drug use will recur and those relapses cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Under these circumstances, his last act 
is not sufficiently attenuated after considering his behavior in its totality. AG ¶ 32(a) 
does not apply. Likewise, his nine months of drug abstention, is not a sufficient period to 
determine whether his drug rehabilitation efforts have been successful. Although 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is fully participating in AA, his prior track record indicates that he has 
participated in that program for long periods in the past and yet he still relapsed into 
drug use. Although it appears he is headed down the right track, not enough time has 
passed to determine whether his rehabilitative efforts have succeeded. So, while some 
aspects of this mitigating condition are present, on the whole Applicant has not 
presented sufficient evidence for AG ¶ 32(d) to completely apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing.  
Applicant’s use of illegal drugs over an extended period of time, and as recently 
as June 2012, created a vulnerability to his personal standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s drug use. 
It is not a minor offense and his use casts doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability, and 
good judgment. Nothing about Applicant’s actions reduced his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (e) do not apply.  
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s recent 
commitment to AA and his coworker support. However, I also considered that he used 
drugs on multiple occasions, most recently after applying for and being interviewed for a 
security clearance. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement, Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:    For Applicant  
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
