 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06245 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has three unpaid 
judgments plus numerous charged-off and collection accounts, which are unresolved. 
When he completed a security clearance questionnaire he failed to reveal adverse 
financial information. Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the financial considerations 
and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 3, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On January 28, 2013, 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated March 15, 2013. The 
FORM contained ten attachments. On March 26, 2013, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
On April 4, 2013, Applicant response to the FORM was received. The response 
contained 13 attachments, which were marked as exhibits (Ex.) A through M. 
Department Counsel did not object to the response and attachments, which were 
admitted into the record. On May 2, 2013, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied one debt (SOR 1.a, $82) and 
admitted the remaining judgments, charged-off, and collection accounts. He neither 
admitted nor denied the personal conduct falsification allegation (SOR 2.a). I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old technician who has worked for a defense contractor 
since June 2009, and seeks to obtain a security clearance.  
 
When Applicant completed his January 30, 2012 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP), he indicated, in Section 26, that he was approximately 
$13,000 delinquent on his child support because he had been out of work for a year. 
(Item 5) He also indicated that he had no judgments entered against him in the previous 
seven years, had not had a debt turned over to a collection agency, nor had he been or 
currently was more than 120 days delinquent on any account. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant was divorced in January 2004, following a three-year marriage, and in 
January 2010, following a ten-year marriage. (Item 8) He was required to pay $600 
monthly child support, which was later raised to $700. (Item 8)  
 
From November 2008 through June 2009, Applicant was unemployed and 
received $230 weekly unemployment compensation. He borrowed money from his 
mother to help pay his expenses. (Item 8) In October 2011, his 2005 Ford truck was 
repossessed. (Item 8)  
 
In February 2012, Applicant had a personal subject interview concerning his 
finances. (Item 8) He indicated he had accounts which had been past due or in 
collection. He also stated he had judgments entered against him. (Item 8) At that time, 
he stated his creditors would only accept the entire balance, owed and he was saving 
his funds in order to pay the creditors. He did not explain why he failed to reveal his 
adverse financial information on his e-QIP.  
 
3 
 
In November 2012, Applicant completed financial interrogatories. (Item 8) He 
indicated his net monthly income was $1,950, his monthly expenses were $1,526, and 
his monthly debt payment was $346, which left him with a monthly net remainder of 
$77. The interrogatories asked him about the 20 SOR debts. He failed to respond to the 
questions asked about the debts and he did not provide documentation showing 
payments of those debts.  
 
Applicant stated that during the past four years he had lost his home, job, 
spouse, and had been financially destroyed. He asked to be granted a clearance so he 
could pay his debts. (Item 8) In response to the FORM, Applicant states he is working 
as a sub-contractor to a DoD contractor. If he gets his clearance, he can obtain a high 
paying information technology position with the DoD contractor. His current annual 
salary is $45,000. The job he applied for has a $152,000 annual salary. (Ex. A) 
 
 In June 2012, a collection agency stated they were in possession of a $75 post-
dated check for an account with a $424 balance. (Ex. D) None of the SOR debts lists 
this amount owed or list this creditor. There is also a June 2012 letter from the same 
collection agency regarding the same debt indicating they were in receipt of a $150 
post-dated check from Applicant. There is a hand-written notation, but no other 
documentation, stating the debt was paid. (Ex. K)  
 
 In June 2012, a collection agency sent Applicant a letter stating he owed $143 for 
what appears to be medical services. (Ex. I) A letter from the collection agency states 
the debt was paid in full on July 18, 2012. (Ex. I) There is no SOR debt corresponding to 
this creditor or an SOR debt of this amount.  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgments, charged-off, and collection accounts and 
their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Cable company collection 
account. 
$82 Unpaid.  
b Credit card collection 
account. 
$2,458 
 
Unpaid. 
c Utility bill collection 
account. 
$199 
 
In May 2012, the creditor sent a letter 
stating Applicant owed $199 on this 
debt. (Ex. E) There is a hand-written 
notation, but no other documentation, 
stating the debt was being paid. 
d Collection account for 
what might be a medical 
co-payment debt. (Item 8)  
$56 Unpaid. 
 
 
4 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
e Judgment entered June 
2011. 
$2,084 Unpaid. Applicant never went to court, 
but is aware of the judgment. (Item 8) 
f Judgment entered March 
2011.  
$1,246 Unpaid. Applicant never went to court, 
but is aware of the judgment. (Item 8) 
g Judgment entered July 
2011.  
$1,390 Unpaid. Applicant never went to court, 
but is aware of the judgment. (Item 8)  
h Credit card collection 
account. 
$2,199 Unpaid. 
I Credit card collection 
account. 
$419 Unpaid. During his February-March 
2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant said he intended to contact 
the creditor. (Item 8) 
j Bank collection account. $2,109 Unpaid. In his February-March 2013 
personal subject interviews, Applicant 
stated he had no contact with the 
creditor of his credit card debt. (Item 8) 
k Credit card collection 
account.  
$1,952 
 
Unpaid. As of March 2013, the 
attorney’s office collecting his debt 
indicated a $200 payment was due on 
March 25, 2013. (Ex. J) There is no 
documentation showing a payment was 
made.  
l Bank collection account.  $1,474 
 
Unpaid. As stated in his February-March 
2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant had no contact with the 
creditor of his credit card debt. (Item 8)) 
m Bank collection account. $91 In July 2012, the creditor stated they 
were in possession of a $91 post-dated 
check. (Ex. C) During his February-
March 2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant said he intended to contact 
the creditor. (Item 8) 
n Bank credit card 
collection account. 
$1,378 
 
Unpaid. During his February-March 
2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant said he intended to contact 
the creditor. (Item 8) 
o Collection account. $1,831 Unpaid. 
 
 
5 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
p Charged-off account. $504 
 
Paid. In May 2012, the creditor offered 
to settle this $840 debt for $336. (Ex. H) 
In July 2012, the debt was satisfied. (Ex. 
M) 
q Charged-off account. $3,431 
 
Unpaid. Applicant’s 2005 Ford truck was 
repossessed in October 2011. (Item 8) 
Applicant agreed to pay $180 monthly 
on this $4,235 debt starting in July 
2012. (Ex. B) He provided no 
documents showing he made payments 
in accord with the agreement.  
r Charged-off credit card 
account. 
$689 
 
Unpaid. During his February-March 
2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant said he intended to contact 
the creditor. (Item 8) 
s Charged-off credit card 
account. 
$1,098 Unpaid. During his February-March 
2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant said he intended to contact 
the creditor. (Item 8) 
t Mortgage foreclosure. 
Applicant purchased a 
home in March 2006 for 
approximately $154,000. 
(Item 8) 
No 
amount 
alleged. 
No documentation of what Applicant’s 
owes following foreclosure. 
u Department store credit 
card collection account. 
$1,770 Unpaid. During his February-March 
2013 personal subject interviews, 
Applicant said he intended to contact 
the creditor. (Item 8) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
6 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
7 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant has three unpaid 
judgments entered against him in 2011, which total approximately $4,700. He has 
twelve unpaid collection accounts, which total approximately $14,000 and four unpaid 
charged-off accounts, which total approximately $5,700. Two of the obligations are less 
than $100 each, which remain unpaid. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
8 
 Applicant has been aware of the security concerns over his unpaid accounts 
since his February 2012 and March 2012 interviews. Applicant received a settlement 
offer ($336), and in March 2013, he satisfied the charged-off account (SOR 1.p). In 
response to the FORM he provided a letter from the creditor on which he made hand-
written annotations that he was paying a gas utility bill (SOR 1.c, $199). However, he 
provided no documentation showing actual payment. The creditor in his vehicle 
repossession (SOR 1.q, $4,325) offered a consent agreement whereby Applicant was to 
pay $180 monthly starting in July 2012. Applicant established the creditor made the 
settlement offer, but he failed to establish he has made any payments pursuant to that 
agreement.  
 
 Applicant provided a letter from the law firm collecting a credit card debt (SOR 
1.k, $2,039) informed him his post-dated check payment in the amount of $200 was 
scheduled for March 25, 2013. He failed to provide any documentation that he made 
this payment or any subsequent payments. He failed to provide documents such as 
copies of cancelled checks or bank records showing debits, or other proof that he is 
actually making the payments. 
 
 Applicant documented that he satisfied a $143 medical services obligation not 
listed in the SOR. On a different debt ($424) not listed in the SOR, the creditor received 
two post-dated checks in the amounts of $75 and $150. He provided information that he 
was to make monthly payments on two other accounts, but failed to provide documents 
establishing that he made the payments to those creditors as agreed. Applicant 
provided no documents from the remaining creditors evidencing payment of these 
accounts or that he has arranged repayment plans on the judgments or delinquent 
accounts.  
 
Applicant’s three judgments and the majority of his delinquent debts remain 
unpaid. From November 2008 through June 2009, Applicant was unemployed and in 
January 2010, his marriage ended. These are conditions beyond his control that 
contributed to his financial problem. He has been with his current job since June 2010. 
He has shown payment or asserted payment of approximately $650 on four debts, of 
which two are listed in the SOR. Considering the meager payments he has made since 
obtaining his current job almost three years ago, I do not find he has acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
There is no evidence he has received financial counseling in the last several 
years. There is no clear indication that his financial problems are being resolved or are 
under control. There is evidence of a good-faith effort to repay four of his creditors, two 
of which are listed in the SOR. Overall, Applicant’s response lacks evidence that he has 
acted responsibly to address the SOR debts. I find none of the financial consideration 
mitigating conditions fully apply. 
  
 
9 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in regard to falsification of Appellant’s security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
The SOR raised the issue about Appellant falsifying his January 2012 security 
clearance application by intentionally failing to disclose derogatory financial information 
about his delinquent debts. Appellant failed to list three judgments entered against him 
in 2011. He did not attend the court proceeding, but stated he was aware of the 
judgments. He had numerous charged-off and collection accounts but failed to list any 
of them on his e-QIP. To his credit he did list on his e-QIP that he was approximately 
$13,000 behind on his child support obligation due to being unemployed.  
 
Applicant never explained why he failed to list this derogatory financial 
information on his e-QIP. None of the mitigating conditions apply to his conduct. The 
personal conduct concerns pertaining to Appellant’s falsification of his 2012 security 
clearance application cannot be mitigated at this time.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
10 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case.  
 
In not requesting a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. 
However, in so doing he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on 
only a brief explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
In choosing to have this matter handled without a hearing, I am unable to 
evaluate Applicant’s demeanor, appearance, or credibility. From the record, I am unable 
to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. Even if I found for him in these matters, 
there is no evidence of payment on the majority of the delinquent debts. Additionally, 
there is no explanation as to why he failed to list his recent judgments and derogatory 
financial information on his e-QIP.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid. It is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
11 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant  
   
Subparagraph1.c:    For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs1.d through 1.l:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph1.m:    For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs1.n  and 1.o:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph1.p:    For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs1.q through 1.u:  Against Applicant  
 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
 
