KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence is not sufficient to
demonstrate error.  Applicant failed to demonstrate that the Judge erred in his application of the
whole-person factors.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-09324.a1
DATE: 05/07/2013
DATE: May 7, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09324
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 2, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 31, 2013, after the close of the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Henry Lazzaro denied
1The Judge entered formal findings favorable to Applicant with regard to Guideline E.  Those findings are not
at issue on appeal.
2
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge committed harmful
error in the application of Guideline F mitigating conditions; and (2) whether the Judge failed to
properly apply the whole-person concept in the case.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms
the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant accumulated over $488,000 in student loans while attending
medical school. Those loans have now been submitted for collection, charged off as bad debts, or
listed as past due.  Applicant made two payments totaling $500 on one student loan account in the
spring of 2010.  He made one payment of $60 on another student loan account in 2004 and three
more payments of $60 on the same account beginning in November 2012.  Applicant obtained a
degree in medicine in 2007.  He has taken and failed the examinations required before he could
apply to begin a residency.  Applicant did not work while studying to become a doctor.  Instead, he
supported himself and his family with student loans.    
The Judge concluded: Applicant’s student loan debts have been delinquent for years.  Until
he was hired by his current employer, Applicant had only worked one year, at a low paying and
unskilled job, in the past ten years.  In addition to student loans, he primarily survived by borrowing
money from his mother.  As a result, he not only acquired enormous debt; he also maintained the
inability to satisfy that debt.  Applicant knowingly placed himself in a precarious financial position
by choosing to support himself and his family solely on student loans.  He has not acted responsibly
in simply ignoring the debt since he acquired it.  Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and
unlikely to be resolved in the foreseeable future.  The few and nominal payments he has made on
a couple of his accounts cannot be considered a good faith effort to resolve those debts.  Applicant
has not overcome the case against him, nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion.  
Applicant argues that the Judge erred by not applying the Guideline F mitigating conditions
in his favor.  He asserts that the student loan debt occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur,
namely an unanticipated amount of time being unemployed in addition to a divorce.  He asserts that
circumstances contributing to his financial problems were largely beyond his control, namely his
unemployment, divorce, and the death of his father.  Applicant states that the problem is being
resolved as he is now making payment plans for larger sums as he is currently employed and making
a significant income.  Applicant argues against the Judge’s conclusions that it is unlikely that he will
ever practice medicine.  He states that the Judge’s conclusion that it will take over ten years to pay
off the delinquent debts if Applicant actually makes the payments he says he will make is irrelevant
as Applicant is still showing his willingness to satisfy his debt, thus evidencing reliability and
trustworthiness.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish error on the part of the Judge.   
2“[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
3
Applicant’s argues that difficult circumstances outside his control should have been given
favorable consideration by the Judge under mitigating condition ¶20(b).2  This argument is not
frivolous.  Applicant presented evidence of unemployment, divorce and a death in the family, all of
which raise the first prong of the mitigating condition.  However, the mitigating condition has a
second prong, dealing with the issue of whether the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances.  In this case, the Judge explicitly and reasonably explained why Applicant’s conduct
did not satisfy the second prong of mitigating condition 20(b).  Decision at 7.  Applicant has not
demonstrated error.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  
The Judge offered a narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct was not mitigated,
while making specific reference to the language of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.  Central
to the Judge’s analysis were the conclusions that Applicant unwisely placed himself and his family
in a precarious position by relying on student loan proceeds for income over an extended period, and
the fact that Applicant has no meaningful prospects for resolving his financial delinquencies in the
foreseeable future.  The Judge stressed that heretofore, only a few payments had been made on two
accounts, and the majority of delinquent accounts had not been addressed at all.  Contrary to
Applicant’s assertion, these conclusions by the Judge, along with his conclusion as to the prospects
for meaningful resolution of debt delinquencies within a reasonable time were relevant to a
determination as to whether Applicant is evidencing a true willingness to resolve his debts.  After
a review of the Judge’s decision and the record, the Board concludes that the Judge appropriately
weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the seriousness of the disqualifying
conduct and reached a resolution that is sustainable.
Applicant argues that the Judge did not properly apply the whole-person concept to the case.
The Judge did not engage in a lengthy, separate whole-person analysis in his decision.  He did state
that he had given appropriate consideration to the whole-person concept.  Nothing in Applicant’s
appeal argument persuades the Board that the Judge failed to consider properly all aspects of the
case.  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
4
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
