 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05847 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s sexual behavior and psychological conditions continue to cast doubt 
on his judgment, stability, reliability, and on his ability to comply with the law and 
regulations. Moreover, he made false statements to government investigators when he 
omitted relevant information during his 2012 interviews. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 30, 2011. 
On September 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), listing security concerns under Guideline D (Sexual 
Behavior) and Guideline I (Psychological Conditions).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
October 15, 2012, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
The Government amended the SOR on December 13, 2012, and Applicant 
answered the amended SOR on December 26, 2012. The amendment deleted SOR ¶¶ 
2.a through 2.e, and 2.g. The only remaining allegation under Guideline I is ¶ 2.f. The 
amendment also added five allegations under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), SOR 3.a 
through 3.e. (Tr. 12-13) The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2013. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 16, 2013, convening a hearing for February 7, 2013. At the hearing, the 
Government offered two exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted no exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on February 14, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 2.f, 
3.a, 3.b, and 3.c, with explanations. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 3.d, and 
3.e. After a thorough review of all the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s 
demeanor and considered his testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old test software engineer working for a government 
contractor. He married his wife in 1999, and they have four children, ages 11, 9, 7, and 
5. Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in electrical and computer engineering in 
1997. While in college (1995-1997), Applicant worked as a cooperative education 
student for a government agency, and he was granted access to classified information 
at the secret level. In 1998, he was hired by his current employer, a government 
contractor. He has worked for the same employer, although under different company 
names, since 1998. Applicant possessed access to classified information, sometimes at 
the top secret level, from 1996 until 2010. There is no evidence to show that he has 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
In 2008, Applicant submitted a request for an upgrade of his security clearance 
required for an anticipated job position. From 2008 until March 2010, Applicant 
participated in six background interviews, two of which were polygraph-assisted 
interviews, and a third interview involved a mental evaluation by a licensed 
psychologist. During the interview process, Applicant disclosed that between 1996 and 
2008 he used binoculars to look into his neighbor’s home; drove his car naked from his 
garage onto his driveway one time; twice rode his bike naked at a public park; walked 
naked once at another public park (denied at hearing, Tr. 47); pulled down his pants in 
the workplace while alone in a closed office; and pulled down his swim trunks in a hotel 
hot tub. 
 
Applicant also disclosed that from 1999 to 2007, he ran in his backyard, stood on 
his porch, or bounced on his backyard trampoline while naked about once a month. He 
stated that he enjoyed daring himself to engage in public nudity, and that engaging in 
such activity was dangerous and sexually arousing. He knew that he would be arrested 
for public indecency if he was caught. In 2002, he put on a sweater gifted to his sister-
 
3 
 
 
in-law, because it excited him to know that she would be wearing the sweater he put on. 
Applicant reported having sexual fantasies regarding his teenage babysitter and 
teenage students (ages 17-19) from his Sunday school class. He also disclosed that 
after four years fantasizing about killing his neighbor, he assaulted her after a verbal 
altercation in 2005. 
 
During a September 2009 interview, Applicant told the interviewer that about four 
to five months after his April 2008 testing, he had thoughts of revenge against those 
involved in his security process that included “shooting up the place." He explained that 
his fantasies included kicking down the door of the adjudicators and confronting those 
involved in the decision-making process. At his hearing, Applicant explained that these 
were just his thoughts and that he would never do it. He was expressing his frustration 
with the security process. He also told the interviewer that he was so frustrated that he 
had been forced to think about breaking his secrecy agreement by shedding light on the 
security clearance process. 
 
After these disclosures, Applicant underwent a mental evaluation conducted by a 
qualified mental health professional who advised the agency that the evaluation 
conclusions raised significant concerns about Applicant’s stability, reliability, and 
judgment. In the mental health professional’s opinion, Applicant’s character logic pattern 
of schizoid adaptation (lack of social awareness and interpersonal isolation) was stable 
and of long duration. 
 
By letter dated March 19, 2010, the agency revoked Applicant’s security 
clearance. The agency’s revocation letter specifically outlined the factual information 
that was the basis for the revocation (as stated in the four preceding paragraphs). (GE 
2) Applicant did not appeal the agency’s revocation of his clearance.  
 
In March 2011, Applicant submitted an SCA to DOD in which he disclosed that in 
2005, he was arrested and charged with simple assault (Section 22); that he consulted 
with a health care professional regarding an emotional or mental health condition 
(Section 21); and that his clearance was revoked in 2010 (Section 25). Subsequently, 
Applicant participated in three DOD interviews. In his May 12, 2011 interview, Applicant 
discussed the circumstances surrounding his assault arrest, charge, and subsequent 
anger management counseling. Applicant also discussed that he had his security 
clearance revoked after several lifestyle-polygraph interviews. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose during his May 2011 interview most of the factual 
bases for the revocation of his clearance, including: Applicant’s detailed fantasies over a 
four year period of killing his neighbor; his revenge fantasies about “blowing-up” or 
“shooting up” the place and confronting agency personnel involved in his clearance 
processing; the sexual behavior alleged in SOR ¶ 1, his sexual thoughts about teenage 
women; and a mental evaluation that raised significant security concerns about his 
stability, reliability, and judgment. 
 
 
4 
 
 
On his second DOD interview (March 12, 2012), Applicant expanded on the 
circumstances surrounding his assault charge and the subsequent anger management 
counseling. He also discussed that his security clearance was revoked after several 
lifestyle-polygraph interviews and a mental evaluation. Applicant failed to disclose 
during the March 12, 2012 interview his revenge fantasies about blowing up offices and 
confronting personnel involved in his clearance processing, the sexual behavior alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1, and his sexual fantasies about teenage women. 
 
Applicant’s third interview was on March 27, 2012. During this interview, he 
revealed that he was called into a meeting by the agency during which the reasons for 
the revocation of his clearance were explained. A couple of weeks later, he received a 
formal letter stating the reasons for his clearance revocation. Applicant told the 
investigator that there may have been more reasons for the revocation of his clearance, 
but that he did not remember all of them. 
 
Applicant testified that he has always been a good employee. He follows rules 
and procedures. He believes that he has always done what he is supposed to do. He 
repeatedly stated that he has never compromised classified information, and that he 
always honored the vows of secrecy he took when he was hired. 
 
Applicant admitted that his nudist behavior was risky and demonstrated bad 
judgment. He claimed that the last public nudity incident happened 11 years ago, and 
he has not been involved in any recent questionable behavior. He believes he has 
matured, and claimed that he no longer has the desire to get involved in the same 
behavior. He promised never to repeat it again. Losing his security clearance has forced 
him to reinforce his vows to never get involved in questionable behavior again. 
 
Applicant denied making false statements and deliberately omitting relevant 
information during his interviews with DOD investigators. He testified that during the 
DOD interviews, he disclosed only that which he believed was pertinent to a secret-level 
security clearance investigation. (Tr. 30) During the first interview, he “just went into 
details he thought were appropriate.” (Tr. 31) He also claimed he did not know he was 
supposed to disclose all the information discussed during the polygraph-assisted 
interviews. He averred that it was not until the second DOD interview that he was asked 
to disclose everything that happened during his lifestyle polygraph.  
 
Applicant also claimed that he read the clearance revocation letter only once 
(when it was handed to him), because it was too painful. He claimed that during the 
interviews, he did not remember all the issues outlined in the revocation letter. (Tr. 30)  
 
Concerning his thoughts about “shooting up the place,” Applicant explained to 
the DOD investigator that he was frustrated with the agency’s clearance process. He 
admitted that he told an agency investigator during an interview that he wanted to blow 
up or shoot the place (the agency’s facility). At his hearing, Applicant claimed that his 
frustration was with the building and not with the people in it. He repeatedly stated that 
he no longer has the desire, and does not want to shoot up or kill anybody. (Tr. 33-34) 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant testified: “that was the worst thing I possibly could have said at the time . . . 
that was a terrible . . . that was a mistake for me to say.” (Tr. 33) 
 
Applicant claimed he has been able to control his anger using the tools he 
learned at his anger management training. During his treatment he was given a book 
with exercises and he has learned of ways to control his frustrations. He repeatedly 
apologized for his past behavior, and expressed regret and remorse. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior,  
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four disqualifying conditions relating to sexual behavior that 
apply to this case, raise a security concern, and may be disqualifying:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether the individual has been 
prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
Between 1996 and 2007, Applicant engaged in numerous incidents of public 
nudity because it was thrilling, dangerous, and sexually arousing. Applicant’s public 
nudity incidents exposed him to possible criminal charges; made him vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, and duress; and reflect lack of judgment and discretion. All of the 
sexual behavior disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 14 lists conditions that could mitigate the sexual behavior security 
concerns.  
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions is fully applicable. Applicant was a mature, 
married adult when he engaged in his questionable behavior. He claimed he stopped 
his behavior 11 years ago, but such claims are contrary to the information he provided 
during his polygraph-assisted interviews. It is not clear to what extent Applicant’s wife is 
aware of his behavior. Considering the adverse social stigma associated with his 
behavior, the lack of treatment or counseling, and Applicant’s last mental evaluation 
conclusions, I find Applicant’s sexual behavior continues to raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Applicant failed to establish that his high-risk 
behavior is unlikely to recur. Considering Applicant’s circumstances (his age, education, 
work experience, and period possessing a security clearance), his actions continue to 
cast doubt on his judgment.  
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
AG ¶ 27 articulates the security concern relating to psychological conditions: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
AG ¶ 28 provides one disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness 
 
Applicant’s nudist behavior from 1996 to 2007; his long-term fantasies about killing 
his neighbor (highlighted by his assault on the neighbor); his statements to investigators 
about “blowing up” or “shooting up” an agency’s facilities because he was frustrated with 
the security process; and his September 2009 mental evaluation results (indicating 
significant concerns about his stability, reliability, and judgment) support applicability of the 
disqualifying condition. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 29 provides three conditions that could mitigate the security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan; 
  
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment 
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is 
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional; and 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an 
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;(d) the past emotional 
instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one caused by death, illness, or 
marital breakup), the situation has been resolved, and the individual no 
longer shows indications of emotional instability;(e) there is no indication 
of a current problem. 
 
 In 2005, Applicant participated in anger management treatment after he assaulted 
his neighbor. He claims to be doing better controlling his anger. There is no evidence of 
any further anger management issues, except for Applicant’s September 2009 comments 
expressing his ideations of “blowing up or shooting up” an agency’s office because he was 
frustrated with the clearance process. Applicant expressed remorse for both incidents. He 
understands that his behavior and comments demonstrate a lack of judgment. 
 
Considering the seriousness of Applicant’s behavior and his 2009 mental evaluation 
results, he failed to present sufficient favorable evidence to mitigate the psychological 
conditions security concern. The 2009 mental evaluation raised “significant concerns about 
Applicant’s stability, reliability, and judgment.” Absent a favorable, current diagnosis and 
prognosis by a duly qualified mental health professional, the passage of time alone is not 
sufficient to mitigate the stability, reliability, and judgment concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Between 1996 and 2007, Applicant engaged in numerous incidents of public 
nudity because it was thrilling, dangerous, and sexually arousing. His behavior exposed 
him to possible criminal charges; made him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and reflects his lack of judgment and discretion. After four years fantasizing 
about killing his neighbor, in 2005, Applicant assaulted her after a verbal altercation. On 
May 12, 2011 and March 13, 2012, Applicant made false statements to government 
investigators when he deliberately omitted relevant and material information concerning 
the reasons behind the 2010 revocation of his security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
10 
 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I find that some of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions partially apply, but do not fully mitigate the personal conduct security 
concern. AG ¶¶ 17(a), (b), (f), and (g) are not pertinent to the facts of this case. AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply because Applicant’s false statements are recent, and constitute 
felony offenses in violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001. His actions continue to cast 
doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment.  
 
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) partially apply. Applicant acknowledged his mistakes and 
sought anger management counseling. He has taken some steps to reduce his 
vulnerability to exploitation and duress. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s false statements 
still raise serious questions about his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and his 
ability to protect classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant, 40, is considered to be a productive and valuable employee. He held a 
security clearance from 1995 until 2010. There is no evidence that he has compromised 
or caused others to compromise classified information. He spends his free time working 
for his church and taking care of his family. He expressed remorse for his past 
questionable behavior and promises never to engage in it again. 
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, education, work experience, his 
years holding a security clearance, the lack of a current mental evaluation, and his 
recent false statements, his sexual behavior, psychological conditions, and personal 
conduct continue to raise doubts about his judgment and his ability to comply with the 
law and regulations.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline I:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e, 2.g:   Withdrawn by Government 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a, 3.c,    Against Applicant 
    3.d, and 3.e: 
 
 Subparagraph 3.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
