 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07533 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines H 
(Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD adjudicators could not find under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a 
security clearance. On March 3, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to 
have a decision based on the administrative record in lieu of a hearing. On March 15, 
 
2 
 
2013, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 11. A complete copy of the FORM was mailed 
to Applicant on March 18, 2013, and he received it on March 23, 2013. He was given 30 
days from its receipt to file objections or submit matters in refutation, mitigation, or 
extenuation. He did not submit any objections or other information within the allotted 
time period. The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2013.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since December 2007. He graduated from college with a 
bachelor’s degree in January 2001. He is married and his wife is expecting their first 
child. He first held a security clearance in about April 2002.1 
 
 The SOR set forth two allegations under Guideline H. SOR ¶ 1.a alleged that 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from about 1997 to about November 
2009. SOR ¶ 1.b alleged that he used marijuana while possessing a secret and top 
secret security clearance. Under Guideline E, the SOR first cross-alleged the Guideline 
H allegation that he used marijuana while possessing security clearances (SOR ¶ 2.a) 
and then asserted that Applicant falsified his responses to five questions on three 
separate security clearance applications (SOR ¶¶ 2.b through 2.f). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted each SOR allegation. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.2   
 
 On October 30, 2001, Applicant submitted a security clearance application     
(SF-86). In that SF-86, he responded “No” to Question 27 that asked, “Since the age of 
16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you used any controlled substance, 
for example, marijuana . . . ?”. On April 4, 2002, the Defense Industrial Security 
Clearance Office (DISCO) determined he was eligible for a secret security clearance.3  
 
 On February 27, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In that e-QIP, he responded “No” to both Section 24a 
that asked, “Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana . . . ?”, and Section 24b 
that asked, “Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance . . . while possessing a 
security clearance . . . ?”. On June 4, 2008, DISCO determined he was eligible for a top 
secret security clearance.4 
  
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5, 6, and 10. 
2 Items 1 and 3. 
3 Item 6. 
4 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 On July 13, 2010, an other government agency (OGA) issued Applicant a letter 
stating,  
 
On 21 June 2010, the [OGA] cancelled your security processing for 
additional access to classified information and terminated your existing 
access. You reported that you illegally used marijuana from 1997 to 2009. 
You estimated that you used marijuana approximately 680 to 750 times 
between 2001 and November 2009. As such, you were determined to be 
an unlawful user of controlled substances. Therefore, pursuant to 50 
U.S.C. Section 435(c), the [OGA] disqualified your application.5 
 
The OGA letter indicated that decision was not considered a security clearance 
disapproval and Applicant was not required to indicate on future government forms that 
he was denied a security clearance because of that action. On June 21, 2010, 
Applicant’s access to SCI was revoked and that decision was later upheld on appeal.6 
 
 On April 6, 2011, Applicant submitted another e-QIP. In that e-QIP, he responded 
“No” to both Section 23a that asked, “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any 
controlled substance, for example, . . . THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.) . . . ?”, and 
Section 24b that asked, “Have you EVER illegally used a controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance . . . ?”. On April 25, 2011, the Defense Security Service 
suspended his security clearance.7    
 
 On May 18, 2011, a special investigator of the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) interviewed Applicant and obtained a sworn affidavit from him. In that affidavit, 
Applicant recanted his “No” response to Section 23a of the e-QIP, noted above. He 
noted that he previously disclosed his marijuana use during a polygraph interview and 
stated, 
 
I used marijuana sparingly when possessing a security clearance. I used 
marijuana from approximately 2001 to 2003 approximately 3 times a week 
and from 2003 to 11/2009, I used marijuana approximately twice a year as 
I started to remove myself from its use. The last time I used marijuana 
which was smoked in a cigarette form was in 11/2009.8    
 
In the affidavit, Applicant also indicated that he never purchased marijuana; that he 
never sold, distributed, or manufactured any drug; that he was never diagnosed as an 
abuser of any drug; and that he has not received drug treatment.9 
                                                          
5 Item 8. 
6 Items 8 and 11. 
7 Items 4 and 7. 
8 Item 9. 
9 Item 9. 
 
4 
 
 In responding to interrogatories on October 27, 2012, Applicant responded “Yes” 
to the question that asked if he currently associated with individuals who use illegal 
drugs. He noted that he had family members with drug issues, but also indicated that he 
did not frequent places where drugs were present.10   
 
 In his Answer to the SOR dated March 3, 2013, Applicant stated, “The reason 
why I was not forthcoming about my use of marijuana was because quite frankly I 
believed if I did I would not be granted a security clearance and therefore not get the job 
I was highly qualified and submitted for.” He indicated that the frequency of his use of 
marijuana has decreased over the years. He stated that he last smoked marijuana in 
November 2009. He also stated that he no longer puts himself in situations where 
marijuana or other drugs are used.11   
 
 Applicant provided no reference letters or other character evidence. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
10 Item 7. 
11 Item 3. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and find the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
From 1997 to November 2009, Applicant used marijuana, including while he held 
a secret and top secret security clearance. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has an extensive history of marijuana use. He engaged in that 
misconduct between the ages of 19 to 31. He acknowledged that he has family 
members that continue to have drug issues. He stated that he last used marijuana in 
November 2009. As discussed below, however, Applicant falsified material facts about 
his drug involvement on security clearance applications on multiple occasions to obtain 
a security clearance, which cause me to place little weight on his statements about 
stopping the use of marijuana.  
 
Given his 12-year history of marijuana use, I cannot find that his drug abuse 
happened under unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur, and that it does not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find that 
sufficient time has not passed to conclude that he has put his wrongful drug involvement 
behind him. In making that finding, I note that I did not have the opportunity to hear 
Applicant’s testimony, observe his demeanor, or evaluate his credibility. 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) partially apply, but do not mitigate the Guideline H 
security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information;  
* * * 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or  rule violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
Applicant admitted that he deliberately falsified responses in security clearance 
applications submitted in 2001, 2008, and 2011. He also admitted that he used 
marijuana while possessing a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) 
apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
 
8 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant repeatedly falsified information about his drug involvement on his 
security clearance applications. His most recent falsification occurred in 2011 after he 
had previously admitted his drug involvement to a government investigator. He provided 
false information because he thought he would not obtain a security clearance if he told 
the truth. He also used marijuana for years while holding a security clearance. His 
misconduct raises serious security concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply to the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.f.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
9 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant has worked for his current employer for over five years. 
Nevertheless, little or no evidence warranting a favorable whole-person assessment 
had been presented. He abused drugs over a 12-year period. He has recently and on 
multiple occasions falsified information on security clearance applications. He has 
shown an unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Applicant’s 
disregard of the law raises doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E  AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
