 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04745 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on December 6, 2011. On January 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On 
February 16, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case 
was assigned to me on April 2, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued the Notice of Video Teleconference Hearing on April 4, 2013. The 
hearing was held as scheduled on April 23, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through H that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left open until May 7, 2013, for 
the Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant submitted AE I through T that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s email indicating he had 
no objection to Applicant’s post-hearing submission was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 1. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on April 29, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She began working 
for that contractor in November 2011. She served on active duty in the Air Force from 
August 1999 to September 2001 and received an honorable discharge. She was 
awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2006 and a master’s degree in 2007. She is divorced 
and has two children, ages 12 and 16. While serving in the Air Force, she held a 
security clearance without incident.1 
 
The SOR asserted that Applicant was granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge 
in April 2002 and that she had 20 delinquent debts totaling $19,897. In her Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted two allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, the bankruptcy discharge, 
and 1.s, a debt of $49) and denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions are 
incorporated as findings as fact.2 
 
The father of Applicant’s first child, who she never married, has not paid child 
support. She does not have contact with him and last heard that he was in prison.3  
 
Applicant was married for about 14 years. She and her ex-husband separated in 
about 2009 and divorced in 2011. They have joint custody of their child. Neither pays 
child support, but they split expenses. As part their divorce, they entered into a 
settlement agreement in which each agreed to be responsible for any prior or 
subsequent debts in his or her name and to hold the other harmless for such debts. She 
                                                          
1 Tr. 7-8, 46-51; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 46-53, 81-83; GE 1, 2.  
 
3 
 
 
indicated that one of the reasons for their divorce is because her ex-husband could not 
handle money.4 
 
In her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), Applicant 
indicated that she had been unemployed on several occasions. She also testified that 
her ex-husband lost a job while they were married. Her periods of unemployed included: 
 
a. Applicant was unemployed from September 2001 to January 2003, a period of 
17 months following her release from active duty. At that time, she was dealing with 
medical issues, including torn Achilles tendons that resulted in her receiving a 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) disability. During this period, she was granted a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. 
 
b. Applicant was unemployed from December 2004 to July 2005, a period of 
about eight months. This occurred because she left her job to move to a different state.   
 
c. Applicant was unemployed from November 2007 to February 2008, a period of 
about four months. This occurred because she left her job to move to a different state.  
 
d. Applicant was unemployed from October 2010 to January 2011, a period of 
about four months. This occurred because she left her job to move to a different state.  
 
e. Applicant was unemployed from June 2011 to November 2011, a period of 
about five months. She was released from that job soon after she refused the sexual 
advances of the owner of that company.5 
 
At the hearing, Applicant provided documentation showing that she paid the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.m ($1,408) in March 2012. Her ex-husband was supposed to pay a portion 
of that debt, but failed to do so. She had been making periodic payments on that debt 
since about July 2010. She admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.s (library book for $49). She 
attempted to pay this debt with a credit card over the telephone, but the library was not 
able to accept that payment. At the time of the hearing, she was waiting to receive a bill 
in the mail from the library so that she could pay it. She also provided proof that she 
paid a delinquent medical debt that was not alleged in the SOR.6 
 
The largest alleged debt (SOR ¶ 1.n) is a timeshare mortgage loan in the amount 
of $11,800. This debt constitutes more than half of the total amount of all the SOR 
debts. Applicant and her ex-husband purchased the timeshare for about $10,000 to 
$12,000 in about 2006. Their monthly mortgage payments were about $205. When they 
                                                          
4 Tr. 46-53, 81-83; GE 1, 2; AE S. The settlement agreement for her divorce indicated that both of 
Applicant’s children were issue of that marriage.  
5 Tr. 20-24, 50-56; GE 1. 
6 Tr. 40-43, 87-90, 100-101; GE 2; AE G, H. 
 
4 
 
 
purchased the timeshare, they were informed that they could transfer their timeshare 
interest to another location if they moved. When they were planning to move to another 
state, they attempted to transfer their timeshare interest, but were told they could not do 
so. At that point, they notified the timeshare company that they wanted to terminate their 
timeshare interest. They signed paperwork turning over their interest in the property to 
the lender. At that point, Applicant thought that she was relieved of any further financial 
obligations concerning the property. In her post-hearing submission, Applicant provided 
a credit report that indicated “credit grantor reclaimed collateral to settle defaulted 
mortgage” and did not list any outstanding balance or past-due amount. In her post-
hearing submission, she also provided email correspondence from the creditor 
indicating that no further financial obligation existed on this debt.7 
 
Upon her discharge from the Air Force, she was rated with an 80% VA disability. 
She qualifies for free VA medical care. If a nearby VA medical facility cannot provide the 
medical treatment she needs, it will issue her an authorization letter so that she can 
obtain that treatment from a private medical facility. The VA will then cover those 
medical costs. The VA, however, often takes a long time in paying bills from the private 
facilities. When there is such a delay, a private facility may attempt to collect the debt 
directly from her. She indicated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.p, and 1.q were 
the responsibility of the VA. She indicated that she called the VA in January 2011 and 
was informed those debts were paid. Of those debts, two (SOR ¶¶ 1.c for $70 and 1.e. 
for $279) remained listed on her most recent credit report dated May 7, 2013.8 
 
Applicant indicated that she had no knowledge of a number of the debts. She 
believed some of those were her ex-husband’s debts. She also indicated that she may 
have been the victim of identity theft perpetrated by a relative of her ex-husband. A 
credit report reflected that she has disputed eight debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d for $394; 1.f for 
$1,225; 1.g for $382; 1.h for $1,006; 1.i for $498; 1.j for $163; 1.k for $988; 1.l for $180).  
She also indicated that she disputed other debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 1.r, and 1.u), but 
provided no documentation supporting those disputes. She testified that her ex-husband 
paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.u; yet, it still remained on her credit report.9 
 
Applicant also disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.t in which the original creditor was a 
car insurance company. This debt was assigned for collection in February 2008. In post-
hearing submission, she indicated that she called the car insurance company and was 
informed the delinquent account belonged to a couple to whom she had no connection. 
                                                          
7 Tr. 90-96; AE M, N, R. 
8 Tr. 50-51, 56-64, 98, 120; GE 2. 
9 Tr. 15, 64-87, 96-100, 103; GE 2, 3, 4; AE Q, R. At the hearing, Department Counsel indicated 
that the some of the SOR debts were duplicates. These included the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.k, ¶¶ 1.g 
and 1.h, and ¶¶ 1.i and 1.l. See Tr. 15, 119-120. Applicant testified that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h 
were low-limit credit cards that she opened, but fees were tacked on to those debts that she disputes. 
She has inquired into those fees, but has not received a response that explains them. 
 
5 
 
 
She provided documentation that confirmed she had car insurance with a different 
insurance company from at least December 2007 to December 2008. The car insurance 
debt is not listed on her most recent credit report.10 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is $31,500. She also has been rated with 80% Veterans 
Affairs disability for which she receives $19,000 annually. Consequently, her annual 
income is about $51,000. She stated that she is living within her means and currently 
has no credit cards. She provided proof showing she was current on her rent and utility 
payments. She had been making those payments regularly for a number of months. In 
November 2012, she provided a personal financial statement that showed she had a net 
monthly income of $3,638, and monthly expenses of $2,109, which left her a net 
monthly remainder of $2,109. She indicated that she have never received financial 
counseling.11 
 
Applicant’s supervisor recommended Applicant for a security clearance. He 
described her as a professional and dedicated employee. He testified that it has been a 
honor to have her working for him. He indicated that he can count on her and noted that 
she has assumed greater responsibility and taken on difficult challenges. He would 
place her at the top of the three individuals that he supervises. Applicant also submitted 
letters of reference from present and past coworkers that indicate she is reliable, 
dedicated, and valued employee.12 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
                                                          
10 Tr. 101-103; AE O, P 
11 Tr. 19, 22-24, 45-51, 56-60, 103-119, 127; GE 2, 3; AE G, I, J, K, L, Q, R. 
12 Tr. 30-36; AE A-F.   
 
6 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2002. Since then, she 
accumulated delinquent debts totaling over $19,000 that she has been unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Security clearance adjudications are not debt collection procedures. Instead, they 
are procedures designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
 
8 
 
 
trustworthiness.13 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he or 
she has resolved every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan 
to resolve the financial problems and take sufficient action to implement the plan. 
Resolution could include successfully disputing alleged SOR debts.14 
 
After a 14-year marriage, Applicant and her ex-husband divorced. She indicated 
that he was not financially responsible and had acquired debts in her name. He has not 
paid some of the debts that belonged to him. Applicant and her ex-husband also 
encountered periods of unemployment while they were married. Her divorce and some of 
her periods of unemployment were conditions beyond her control. 
 
Applicant has shown that the timeshare mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.n, i.e., the largest 
alleged debt, is resolved. She paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m, which was partially her ex-
husband’s responsibility. She has successfully disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 
1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l. 1.p, 1.q, and 1.t. Four debts remain unresolved. Two of 
those four debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.r), she disputes, but failed to provide to provide 
supporting documentation. She said she was going to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.s, but 
failed to provide proof. She indicated her ex-husband paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.u, but also 
failed to provide proof. The unresolved debts, which total $755, are minor and do not 
raise security concerns that reflect negatively on her trustworthiness, reliability, and good 
judgment.   
 
Applicant financial problems occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur. Since her divorce, Applicant has been living within her means. She is now 
financially stable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) apply. AG 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
14 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all relevant facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline 
F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant served honorably in the Air Force. She is a mature adult, a responsible 
mother, and a valued employee. The alleged debts are attributable to financial 
difficulties arising from her divorce. Specifically, her ex-husband was not financially 
responsible and acquired debts in her name that he did not pay. Applicant has paid 
some of those debts. She has successfully disputed others. She currently lives within 
her means. Although documentation has not been provided to show she disputed some 
debts or to show other debts were paid, those unresolved debts are minor and not 
significant from a security clearance perspective. From the evidence presented, she has 
shown that she is a trustworthy and reliable individual who exercises good judgment.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1u:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
