 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-09332 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concerns arising from his family 
members residing in Afghanistan. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging the security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
On or about October 5, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a 
hearing, and requested a decision on the written record. 
 
 On January 11, 2013, Department Counsel issued his file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed 
findings of facts, argument, and 16 documentary exhibits. Applicant did not object to 
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 16, and they are hereby admitted into evidence.  
 
 On February 5, 2013, Applicant submitted his response to the FORM 
(Response). With his Response, Applicant submitted two character letters, decorations 
 
2 
 
 
he has received for his work in support of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan, his 
identification badges, and proof of his wife’s U.S. citizenship. These documents were 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A through E and admitted into evidence without 
objection. On April 5, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 40, was born in Afghanistan and immigrated to the United States in 
1986. He was naturalized in 1996. He has worked for the U.S. Government as a linguist 
in Afghanistan since 2009. He has received high praise for his commitment and work on 
behalf of the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. (Gx. 4; Ax. A – C)  
 
Applicant’s parents and two of his siblings are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His parents are elderly and retired. His brother manages the family farm, 
while his sister does not work outside the home. Applicant has irregular contact with his 
parents and siblings due to the lack of dependable phone service where they live. He 
provides some financial support to his family. In about 2010, Applicant briefly saw his 
brother once, while at work as a federal contractor in Afghanistan. He asked his brother 
not to ask him or even speculate what he was doing in Afghanistan for their family’s 
safety. Applicant states that he was not required to report this brief contact with his 
brother, a host country national, to U.S. authorities. (Gx. 3 – 6; Response)1 
 
Applicant’s wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen, who currently resides in Afghanistan 
with her family.2 Her parents and siblings are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Applicant has no contact with his wife’s siblings, but tries to stay in constant contact with 
his wife. He believes his wife is relatively safe where she resides. He has told his wife 
not to disclose to anyone that he works for the U.S. Government or even that he is in 
Afghanistan. (Gx. 3 – 6; Response; Ax. E) 
 
 Following the September 11 attacks, U.S. and coalition forces liberated 
Afghanistan. (Gx. 7 at 7) “Afghanistan has made significant progress since the Taliban 
were deposed in 2001, but still faces daunting challenges, including fighting an 
insurgency, preventing the return or resurgence of al-Qaida, recovering from over three 
decades of civil strife, and rebuilding a shattered physical, economic, and political 
infrastructure.” (Gx. 8 at 1) The threat posed by remnants of the former Taliban regime, 
the al-Qaida terrorist network, and other groups hostile to the International Security 
Assistance Force, remains high. No part of Afghanistan is considered safe, “and the 
potential exists throughout the country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, 
against U.S. and other Western nationals at any time.” (Gx. 12 at 1) The U.S. State 
Department reports significant human rights problems persist. (Gx. 9) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant has another brother who is a citizen and resident of another country and no foreign 
influence concern arises from said relationship. Thus, allegation 1.c is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
2 In light of the evidence Applicant presented with his Response, allegation 1.e is amended to 
read: “Your wife is a citizen of the United States, residing in Afghanistan.”  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. Furthermore, “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 
499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
An individual’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. However, there is no per se rule against applicants who have such ties. 
Instead, in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
coercion, an administrative judge must consider the foreign government involved; the 
intelligence gathering history of that government; the country’s human rights record; and 
the presence of terrorist activity in that country.3 
 
 Applicant’s family members in Afghanistan, coupled with the danger posed by 
hostile forces in Afghanistan, raise the foreign influence concern. These foreign 
connections also establish the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.4 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-06619 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 2013)  
 
4 I considered AG ¶ 7(f), “failure to report, when required, association with a foreign national.” 
(emphasis added) No evidence was presented contradicting Applicant’s assertion that he was not 
required to report his contact with his brother, as alleged in ¶ 1.g. Although such reporting requirement 
seems reasonable, Applicant has voluntarily disclosed and discussed his foreign family members 
throughout the course of several security interviews. Accordingly, allegation 1.g is decided in his favor.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s foreign connections do not end the analysis. AG ¶ 8 sets forth a 
number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8 are relevant: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.5 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States when he was a young man and has 
been a U.S. citizen for nearly two decades. He has been working in Afghanistan in 
support of the U.S. mission for the past four years and forcefully states that he is a loyal 
U.S. citizen. However, his family’s presence in Afghanistan raises a significant security 
concern because of the realistic danger that they can be used by hostile forces within 
Afghanistan to influence or manipulate him. Notwithstanding his deep and longstanding 
relationships to the United States and his attempts to shield his family from the danger 
posed by his work for the U.S. Government in Afghanistan, the foreign influence 
concern is not mitigated. Applicant’s family remains particularly vulnerable to the threat 
posed by the Taliban and other extremist elements operating within Afghanistan.6 AG 
¶¶ 8(a) and (b) do not apply. At the same time, this finding is not a comment on 
Applicant’s patriotism and loyalty but merely an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, 
such as a family member.7 
 
                                                          
5 I considered the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.” Although Applicant has no contact with his wife’s siblings, his contact and the 
depth of his relationship with his wife, his parents, and his siblings cannot be classified as either 
infrequent or casual. He also did not rebut the presumption that he “has ties of affection for, or obligation 
to, the immediate family members of [his] spouse.” ISCR Case No. 11-06619 at 3 (App. Bd. May 2, 2013). 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 09-08099 (App. Bd. Sep. 14, 2012) (Despite his deep and longstanding 
relationships in the United States, applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concern arising from 
his family in Afghanistan). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09329 (App. Bd. Mar. 18, 2013) (same). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a 
federal contractor for the past four years and his exceptional performance in support of 
the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. However, after weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, 
I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b:         Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.c:          For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.f:         Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.g:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
