 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 12-00809 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debts over the past seven years, 
including unpaid federal income taxes of about $73,000. He provided credible evidence 
that he paid one debt. However, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to document the 
resolution of the remaining debts or to demonstrate reliability or good judgment in 
addressing his financial obligations. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on August 26, 2010. 
On November 23, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 23, 2013 (Answer), and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 4.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 7, 
2013. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing ten Items, 
was provided to Applicant on March 7, 2013. He received it on March 13, 2013, and 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He did not submit any 
additional information. I received the case assignment on April 25, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant agreed that he was responsible for the debts listed in 
Paragraphs 1.a and 1.c of the SOR, and was making monthly payments. He agreed he 
owed the tax debt listed in Paragraph 1.h, and was negotiating a resolution with the 
federal government. He denied the debts listed in Paragraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, 
stating that he either paid them or was paying them. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He has been employed by a defense contractor as a 
software developer since April 2010. He and his wife were married in 1981, and have 
two adult children. He was born on a U.S. Navy base while his father served in the 
Navy. From January 1996 to April 2010, he owned and operated a software company. 
Between April 2003 and August 2006 of those years, he was also employed with a 
private company. (Item 5.) 
 
 In his August 2010 SF 86, Applicant disclosed seven delinquent debts totaling 
$72,532, and a federal income tax debt for an amount not listed. He stated that he was 
making arrangements to pay some debts or was paying on arrangements he 
negotiated. He indicated that he had good credit until April 2009, when the business he 
owned and the company he worked for experienced a decline in the housing market, 
resulting in his loss of income. At some point his wife was unemployed. (Item 5.) 
  
 In September 2010 a security investigator interviewed Applicant about 
background issues and unfiled tax returns. Applicant admitted that he did not file income 
tax returns for his software business for 12 years, resulting in unpaid income taxes for 
monies earned through the business. He said he paid taxes on his outside employment 
income. He hired a company to resolve his tax liabilities with the Internal Revenue 
Service, but did not know when he would receive a settlement offer. At this time, the 
company said he owed about $50,000 in unpaid income taxes, but could settle the debt 
for $25,000. (Item 6.)  
  
  
 
 
3 
 
 
 On October 5, 2012, Applicant completed and submitted a set of Interrogatories 
inquiring into the status of five delinquent debts, an income tax lien for 1993, and 
income tax liabilities for tax years 2006 through 2011.1 He indicated that he resolved or 
was resolving the five debts, and had paid the 1993 tax lien. He was in the process of 
resolving the unpaid income taxes. (Item 7.)  
 
 In his January 2013 Answer, Applicant elaborated on the cause of his financial 
difficulties, stating that when the economy started collapsing his creditors lowered his 
credit limits and demanded payment on his debts. That forced him to use retirement 
funds and cash out insurance policies to pay his bills. He decided not to file for 
bankruptcy, but instead chose to slowly pay his bills. (Item 4.)   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated February 2013, August 2012, and 
September 2010, the SOR alleged six delinquent debts totaling $54,173. It also alleged 
one unpaid federal income tax lien for $13,731 and unpaid federal income taxes for 
approximately $50,000. The total of all delinquent debts alleged was $117,904. The 
non-tax debts began accumulating in April 2009. The status of each SOR-listed debt is 
as follows: 
 
 1. (¶ 1.a) The $5,689 debt is owed to a medical creditor. Applicant submitted a 
payment agreement, dated July 6, 2010, in which he agreed to make monthly payments 
of $225. (Item 6 at 147.) He noted that the balance, as of October 2012, increased to 
$12,409 (Item 6 at 137.) He did not submit proof of his payments or the balance. This 
debt is unresolved. 
 
 2. (¶ 1.b) The $8,496 debt is owed to a national credit card company. It was 
settled and paid on October 2, 2012. Applicant made monthly payments on the debt. 
(Item 6 at 143.) This debt is resolved. 
 
 3. (¶ 1.c) The $6,585 debt is owed to a national credit card company. The current 
balance is $9,127. Applicant has been making monthly payments on the account since 
December 2009. He has paid $6,800 as of October 2012. However, the balance on this 
debt is increasing, not decreasing. (Item 6 at 138.)  It is not being resolved. 
 
 4. (¶ 1.d) The $6,500 debt is owed to furniture credit card company. Applicant 
asserted that he has been making monthly payments of $250 on the account and that 
the balance is now $1,416. (Item 4.) He did not provide documents to confirm his 
assertion. This debt is unresolved. 
 
 5. (¶ 1.e) The $14,602 debt is owed to a department store’s credit card company. 
On April 24, 2012, he executed a Stipulated Agreement to make monthly payments of 
$280 on the debt’s balance of $10,079. (Item 6 at 145.) According to his Answer, the 
                                                 
1
 During his interview in September 2010, Applicant indicated that he had not filed or paid income 
taxes for monies received from his business from 1996 to 2010. 
 
 
4 
 
 
balance is $8,927. (Item 4.) He did not provide documents to verify his assertion. This 
debt is unresolved. 
 
 6. (¶ 1.f) The $12,301 debt is owed to an automobile company. He asserted in 
his Answer that after he made monthly payments on the account, the company forgave 
the balance of the debt. (Item 4.) He submitted a page from a CBR that stated in the 
Comments section: “Charged off account. Paying under a partial payment agreement.” 
(Item 6 at 142.) He did not provide persuasive proof, confirming his statement that the 
debt was paid or settled. This debt is unresolved. 
 
 7. (¶ 1.g) The $13,731 federal tax lien was filed in July 1993. In his Answer, 
Applicant asserted the lien was paid in January 1996 through a home loan. (Item 4.) He 
did not provide any documentation verifying that he was released from the lien. This tax 
debt is unresolved. 
 
 8. (¶ 1.h) The $50,000 debt for unpaid income taxes for 12 years remains 
unresolved. Applicant stated that the company he hired to resolve the issues went 
bankrupt and that he is resolving the matter.2 
  
 Applicant submitted his budget as of October 2010. His net monthly family 
income was $7,800, and expenses were $2,780. He has scheduled monthly payments 
on a $331,920 mortgage and an $80,000 second mortgage. He also has scheduled 
payments on eight debts, including six SOR-listed debts. The balance on those eight 
debts totaled $51,238. His total monthly payment on all ten debts is $4,198. He has 
$822 remaining at the end of the month. The budget does not include payments on his 
federal income taxes owed. He did not submit evidence of participation in credit or 
financial counseling.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
                                                 
2
The record does not contain definitive information as to the specific tax years, between 1996 and 
2010, for which Applicant failed to file income tax returns or pay taxes while operating his business.   
 
 
5 
 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
 Since approximately 1993, Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy 
delinquent debts and pay federal income taxes, as alleged in the SOR and totaling 
$117,904.  Between 1996 and 2010, he willfully failed to file annual federal income tax 
returns and pay taxes for 12 years. The evidence raises all four security concerns, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent non-tax debts began accumulating in April 2009 and 
continue to date. His income tax problems began in 1993 and continue to date.  He 
resolved one debt in October 2010. Although he presented information that he has been 
paying on another debt since December 2009, the balance on that debt has increased 
and not decreased over the years. The other SOR-listed debts also remain unresolved 
to date. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing his financial obligations remain a 
concern. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 To the extent that conditions beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his 
situation, he failed to provide documentation that he began to adequately and 
responsibility address the majority of the delinquent debts until 2012. His large federal 
tax liability remains unaddressed. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or other financial 
counseling. He failed to submit persuasive proof that he is making payments in 
accordance with the payment plans he claimed he negotiated or that his 1993 lien was 
paid and released as stated. His $50,000 federal tax liability is not resolved. There is 
insufficient evidence to establish clear indications that his delinquent debts are being 
resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is inapplicable.  
 
 Applicant submitted proof that he made a good-faith effort to pay one delinquent 
debt. AG ¶ 20(d) applies only to the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 Applicant did not dispute the legitimacy of any of his delinquent debts. Therefore, 
AG ¶ 20(e) has no application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 54-year-old 
employed by a defense contractor since April 2010. His financial problems are recent, 
significant, and serious. For approximately 12 years, between 1996 and 2010, he 
voluntarily decided not to file annual federal income tax returns, resulting in his failure to 
pay owed taxes on his business income. Prior to that tax problem, the Internal Revenue 
Service filed a lien for unpaid taxes in 1993.    
 
 In August 2010, Applicant disclosed in his SF 86 six delinquent debts and two 
federal income tax problems. In September 2010 he discussed his debts and income 
tax problems with a security investigator. He told the investigator that a company he 
hired was addressing his large tax debt. In October 2012 he completed financial 
Interrogatories, stating that he was resolving several delinquent debts, had resolved the 
1993 tax lien, and was trying to resolve the large unpaid income tax bill. He provided 
some information regarding the debts he said were resolved or being resolved. He did 
not submit documents verifying balances or payments on the debts. In his January 2013 
Answer he essentially reiterated that he had resolved or was resolving seven of the 
eight SOR-listed debts, and was working on the tax bill. He did not provide additional 
information pertinent to those resolutions. He did not provide evidence that he has filed 
tax returns for the years 1996 to 2010. In March 2013 the Government notified him that 
the information he had submitted to date, regarding the resolution of his delinquent 
debts, was insufficient. Although given additional time to produce evidence relevant to 
the Government’s contentions, he did not respond. His inaction and failure to 
aggressively address his delinquent debts over the past several years is concerning. 
However, his decision to ignore his responsibility to file returns and pay taxes for 12 
years is inexcusable, and raises significant questions about his reliability and judgment.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c ─ 1.h:   Against Applicant   
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
