 
1 
 
 
                        
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 12-05809 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the foreign   
influence adjudicative guideline.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                   Statement of the Case 
  
On November 12, 2010, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 9, 2013, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
 
2 
 
 
Classified Information (AG), effective within DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On February 22, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR, provided additional 
information, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge at the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on April 8, 
2013, and a notice of hearing was issued on April 18, 2013. I convened a hearing on 
May 6, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.   
 
During the hearing, the Government called no witnesses and introduced two 
exhibits, which I marked as Ex. 1 and Ex. 2 and admitted without objection. The 
Government offered for administrative notice a summary memorandum containing facts 
about the People’s Republic of China (China) as found in 14 official U.S. Government 
documents. The Government also provided for administrative notice the 12 source 
documents from which the facts in the summary memorandum were derived. I marked 
the Government’s summary memorandum as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant did not 
object to my taking notice of the facts about China in the summary memorandum or in 
the source documents. 
 
Applicant testified and called no witnesses. She introduced 12 exhibits, which 
were identified as Ex. A through Ex. L and admitted without objection. Applicant also 
offered one document for administrative notice, which I marked as HE 2 and admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered one post-hearing document, which was marked as 
Ex. M and entered in the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of 
the hearing on May 16, 2013, and on that day, the record was closed. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations under Guideline B, Foreign Influence (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations at ¶¶ 
1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. She denied the allegations at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.g. and provided 
additional information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including Applicant’s testimony, 
all exhibits, all relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a certificate of naturalization for her 
husband, establishing that he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2013. She 
also provided a certificate of citizenship for her older son, establishing that, as her minor 
dependent, he became a U.S. citizen at the time she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen 
in August 2010. Since these documents rebutted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 
1.b., the Government withdrew these allegations at the hearing. (Ex. A; Ex. C; Tr. 19.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR provided information showing that SOR 
allegations 1.f. and 1.g. referred to the same individual, Applicant’s sister-in-law. At the 
hearing, the Government also withdrew SOR allegation 1.g. since it was a duplicate of 
allegation 1.f. (Tr. 21.)   
 
 Applicant is 44 years old, and, since 2006, she has been employed as a software 
engineer by a government contractor. She was born and raised in China. After 
completing her secondary education, she earned an undergraduate degree in 1990, and 
in 1993, she earned a master’s degree. In 1994, she married, and she and her husband 
served as junior faculty at the Chinese university where she received her master’s 
degree. In 1996, their older son was born. Soon thereafter, Applicant joined her 
husband in the United States for further graduate study, leaving her baby in the care of 
her husband’s parents. In 1999, she earned a master’s degree in electrical and 
computer engineering from a U.S. university. (Ex. 1; Answer to SOR; Tr. 45-49.)   
 
 When Applicant’s son was two and one-half years old, he was brought to the 
United States and joined his parents. He has lived in the United States since that time, 
with occasional visits back to China to visit his grandparents. (Ex. 1; Tr. 68-69.)  
 
 Applicant and her husband have a second child, a son who was born in the 
United States in 2007. Like his older brother, the younger son attends a public school in 
the United States. The family speaks Chinese at home, and both sons also attend 
Chinese language school in their community as one of their extracurricular activities. 
(Ex. 1; Ex. I; Tr. 70-72.)  
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant’s father and mother are citizens of China 
and reside with her in the United States. Applicant reported that her parents are citizens 
of China and U.S. permanent residents. They travel to China, where they own an 
apartment, for her mother’s medical treatments. When her parents are living in China, 
Applicant communicates with them by telephone every week or two. When they are in 
the United States, they reside with Applicant or with her brother, who is a Chinese 
citizen residing in the United States. (Ex. 1; Ex. D; Ex. E; Tr. 50-56.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are in their 70s and retired. Her mother was employed as a 
communication equipment engineer by a business. Her father was employed by the 
government as a building inspector. Her mother receives retirement payments from the 
business, and her father receives a pension from an entity of the Chinese government. 
(Tr. 49-51.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant’s brother is a citizen of China and 
resides in the United States. Applicant testified that her brother came to the United 
States to pursue a Ph.D. degree. After receiving his degree, he remained in the United 
States and received permanent resident status. Applicant’s brother owns a medical 
equipment company in the United States. He is married to a woman who was born in 
China, but Applicant does not know if she is at present a citizen of China. Applicant’s 
brother and his wife have a 13-year-old child. Applicant’s brother travels to China, but 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant does not know how frequently he travels to China. Applicant communicates 
with her brother about ten times a year. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 29, 55, 75.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of China. 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired high school teacher. Her mother-in-law is a retired 
vocational school teacher. Applicant’s parents-in-law own an apartment in China. In 
2008, they visited their son and Applicant after the birth of their second child. In 2009, 
Applicant, her husband, and their two children visited her husband’s parents in China. 
Applicant communicates with her parents-in-law once or twice a year. (Answer to SOR; 
Tr. 29, 58-60.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband has one sibling, a sister, who is a citizen and resident of 
China. Applicant met her sister-in-law about 20 years ago, when she was dating her 
husband. The sister-in-law is now married and teaches in a normal school in China. Her 
husband is a bank employee. Applicant’s sister-in-law and her husband have one son, 
who is a student in a Chinese middle school. Applicant communicates with her sister-in-
law at most once a year. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 29-30, 60-62.) 
 
 Applicant and her husband have established themselves as U.S. citizens. In 
2007, they purchased a home for $650,000 in the community where they now live. In a 
post-hearing document, Applicant stated that the balance on her home mortgage is 
$54,226. (Ex. M; Tr.64.) 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $100,000. Her husband’s annual 
salary is approximately $125,000. She reported she had two 401(k) accounts, one with 
a current balance of $149,677 and one with a current balance of $129,776. (Ex. M; Tr. 
63-64.) 
 
 Applicant’s facility security manager provided a letter, dated February 12, 2013, 
stating that Applicant had surrendered her Chinese passport in November 2010, when 
she initially applied for access to classified information. The facility security officer also 
noted that Applicant was a model employee “who has completed all the required 
training of company policies and security briefings to properly perform her daily tasks.”  
(Ex. F.) 
 
 The director of software engineering at Applicant’s workplace provided a letter of 
support on her behalf. The director stated that Applicant had worked for the government 
contracting company since 2006. During that time, the director noted, Applicant “has 
proven to be hard-working, conscientious, and meticulous in performing her tasks and 
delivering her work. She is well liked by the team and is always responsive to helping 
others.” (Ex. J) 
 
 The official who hired Applicant and who was her supervisor in 2006 also 
provided a letter of support. He reported that he and Applicant had worked together on 
a number of projects, many of which required access to sensitive information. The 
official stated that he had always trusted Applicant and found her to be “compliant with 
 
5 
 
 
all applicable privacy and classified information rules, restrictions, and procedures.” (Ex. 
K.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of a document entitled “U.S. Naturalizations: 2011,” 
prepared by the Office of Immigration Statistics, U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 
This document, which was provided by Applicant, reported that in 2011, 32,864 
individuals whose country of origin was China became U.S. citizens. (HE 2.) 
 
 I also take administrative notice of the following facts, which appear in official 
U.S. Government documents:1 
 
China has powerful military forces, including strategic nuclear missiles. China is 
geographically vast, and has a population of over a billion people. It has significant 
resources and an economy that in recent years has expanded about 10% per year. 
China aggressively competes with the United States in many areas. China’s competitive 
relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by Applicant’s 
connections to family members living in the China.   
 
China has an authoritarian, Communist government. In China reported human 
rights problems include suppression of political dissent, arbitrary arrest and detention, 
forced confessions, torture and mistreatment of prisoners. China also monitors 
communications devices, such as telephones, telefaxes, and internet servers. 
 
 China actively collects military, economic, and proprietary industrial information 
about the United States for the following reasons: (1) its position as a global power; (2) 
its military, political, and economic investments in the Pacific Rim and Asia; and (3) its 
leading role in the development of advanced technology that China desires for 
economic growth. China’s active intelligence gathering programs focus on sensitive and 
protected U.S. technologies. Chinese intelligence services and private companies 
frequently try to target Chinese citizens or individuals with family ties to China who can 
use their insider access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media 
devices or e-mail. Additionally, it is projected that Chinese attempts to collect U.S. 
technological and economic information will continue at a high level and will represent a 
growing and persistent threat to U.S. economic security.   
   
                                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
                                            
1 The facts in the administrative notice narrative are from the Department Counsel’s documents submitted 
for Administrative Notice. I have omitted footnotes. See HE 1. 
 
 
6 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
7 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, parents-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens of 
China. Applicant’s parents-in-law and sister-in-law are also residents of China. 
Applicant’s parents, who are Chinese citizens and U.S. permanent residents, travel to 
China and reside there when Applicant’s mother is undergoing medical treatments. 
They own an apartment in China, and Applicant’s father receives pension benefits from 
the Chinese government. Applicant’s brother, a Chinese citizen and a U.S. permanent 
resident, also travels between the United States and China. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is a good daughter and solicitous of her parents. Applicant’s parents 
reside with her and her family or with her brother and his family when they are in the 
United States. Applicant’s mother, father, and brother have resident alien status and 
retain their Chinese passports. Their status and their presence in the United States 
diminish but do not extinguish the possibility of foreign exploitation or coercion. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. However, 
the facts must demonstrate a risk higher than normally occurs when a family member 
lives under a foreign government. China’s active collection of military, economic, and 
proprietary industrial information about the United States is sufficient to establish the 
“heightened risk” required in AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with her parents, parents-in-law, and sister-in-law, all of 
whom are Chinese citizens and all of whom reside, either permanently or occasionally, 
in China is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” These relationships with residents and citizens of 
China create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and [her] desire to help” family members who are in 
China.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in China is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of China with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her contacts 
with her family members residing in China do not pose a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
   
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from China seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or her family 
members living in China, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Applicant’s relationships with family members create a potential conflict of interest 
because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about her 
desire to assist her family members in China, in the event they should be pressured or 
 
9 
 
 
coerced by agents of the Chinese government or intelligence services for sensitive or 
classified information.  AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant’s close relatives are 
citizens of China. Her parents travel to China and reside there during her mother’s 
medical treatments. When they are in the United States, Applicant’s parents reside with 
her and her family or with Applicant’s brother, who is a Chinese citizen living in the 
United States. Because of her connections to her close family members, Applicant is 
not able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her 
relationships with relatives who are Chinese citizens] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.”    
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has strong 
family connections to the United States. Applicant came to the United States in 1996, 
 
10 
 
 
and she became a U.S. citizen in 2010. She and her husband have established their 
professional lives in the United States. Their two children are U.S. citizens and attend 
public schools in their U.S. community. They have purchased a home and have created 
a family life in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her family members who 
are citizens of China, and who reside there permanently and occasionally. There is no 
evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Chinese government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or her family in China 
to coerce Applicant or her family for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is 
a reduced possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected 
as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have 
any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was 
present, Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate 
foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ 
relationship with China, and China’s systematic human rights violations. China’s 
conduct makes it more likely that China would coerce Applicant through her family living 
in China, if China determined it was advantageous to do so.     
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. AG ¶ 8(f) has minimal applicability. Applicant 
has substantial property interests in the United States, which include her salary, her 
retirement accounts, and the value of her home. However, this mitigating condition can 
only fully mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 7(e) is not raised 
in this case. 
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s familial relationships with her 
parents, brother, parents-in-law, and sister-in-law, all of whom are citizens of China and 
who have contact with China. Applicant’s parents reside in China while her mother 
undergoes medical treatments; Applicant’s parents-in-law and sister-in-law reside 
permanently in China; and Applicant’s brother, a Chinese citizen with U.S. permanent 
resident status, travels to China. All of these individuals are readily available for 
coercion. The Chinese government’s history of espionage (especially industrial 
espionage) against the United States and its failure to follow the rule of law further 
increase the risk of coercion.  
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested she was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is an engaging, talented, honorable, and hard-working U.S. citizen. She is 
considered to be a valued employee. She seeks to use her experience, skills, and 
knowledge to serve her adopted country, and she seeks a security clearance as a 
government contractor. 
 
Applicant is an admirable family member. She is attentive and devoted to her 
mother and father, who are citizens of China and U.S. permanent residents. She stays 
in touch with her brother, a citizen of China and a U.S. permanent resident. She is 
respectful to her husband’s three immediate family members who are citizens and 
residents of China. While security concerns about her contacts with her parents have 
been partially extenuated by their immigration to the United States and their status as 
resident aliens, their periodic travel to China for her mother’s medical treatments 
exposes them to the possibility of coercion and pressure because China is a country 
that poses “an extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy 
of the United States.”   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the foreign 
influence adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:                      Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.c. - 1.f.:            Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g.:             Withdrawn   
  
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
