KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s arguments are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence
in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-09421.a2
DATE: 10/02/2018
DATE: October 2, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09421
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 28, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On August 18, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On November 15, 2017, we remanded the case.  On June 29, 2018, the Judge issued a
Decision on Remand that denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant again
appealed pursuant to the Directive.
Applicant raised the following issue in his latest appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the
Decision on Remand.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 62 years old, has held a security clearance for about 35 years.  He and his
wife are the guardians for three young children.  He attributed his financial problems to expenses
arising from his mother’s passing, periods of unemployment between 2001 and 2014, and
responsibilities arising from being a guardian.
The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his state income tax returns for 1998, 2000,
2002, 2003, and 2004; that he owed delinquent state taxes for 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005, and 2008;
that he had a Federal tax lien entered against him in 2011; that he was indebted on a collection
account and a charged-off account; and that he was arrested in 2013, charged with providing false
information to increase benefits, pled guilty, and agreed to pay back the amount of unemployment
benefits he was not entitled to receive.  The Judge found against Applicant on the state tax filing
deficiencies and the allegation pertaining to the false information offense.  The Judge found in favor
of Applicant on the other allegations.
Applicant did not consider the filing of his state tax returns to be a significant matter because
he always received a small refund.  He admitted the alleged tax filing deficiencies. There is no
record that he filed those tax returns.  During a period of unemployment from May to September
2012, he collected unemployment compensation.  After obtaining his next job, he continued to
collect unemployment benefits for at least a month.  Because his earnings were low in the new job,
he convinced himself that he was justified in continuing to collect unemployment benefits.  He now
understands that behavior did not make sense.  He informed his new employer of his arrest.  He pled
guilty to a misdemeanor offense and paid restitution and court costs of about $1,500.
The Judge’s Analysis
  
2
Applicant failed to file his state tax returns for five years, did not pay his delinquent state
taxes until the SOR was issued, and fraudulently received unemployment compensation for at least
one month while holding a security clearance.  Applicant provided no documentation that he has
filed his state tax returns since 1998.  He has not established that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances or that his taxes are being resolved or are under control.
Discussion
As best we can discern from Applicant’s appeal brief, he is complaining about delays in
issuing the Decision on Remand.1 As we previously stated, absent a showing that the timing of the
issuance of the Judge’s decision caused an identifiable prejudice to the appealing party, mere proof
of a delay is not sufficient to warrant remand or reversal of a Judge’s decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 02-32581 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2005). In this case, Applicant has not established that any
identifiable prejudice arose from the length of time it took to issue the Decision on Remand.
Applicant also contends the Judge did not consider the documents he submitted during the
remand.  In doing so, he highlights information in those documents and argues he mitigated the
alleged security concerns.  The Judge, however, made findings of facts regarding the documents
submitted on remand.  Applicant’s arguments are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the
Judge considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
15-01717 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2017).                                                                                               
                                                     
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
1In the Decision on Remand, the Judge noted that Applicant’s request for a 60-day period to supplement the
record on remand was granted.  Applicant’s requests for two other extensions for that time period were also granted.
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
