KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The evidence reflects that Applicant’s wife maintains close contact with her mother
and sister, that Applicant and his wife received a $5,000 loan from his in-laws, and that he
typically meets with them on his trips to China.  In-laws represent a class of persons who can
present a security risk.  “As a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate
family members of the person’s spouse.”  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s essential
conclusion that Applicant’s decision to marry his second wife while still married to his first wife
raises at the very least doubts about hid judgement and trustworthiness. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 15-05357.a1
DATE: 10/18/2018
DATE: October 18, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-05357
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 14, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On August 9, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on three Guideline
E allegations that are not an issue on appeal and are not discussed below.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He served in the military and
received a “general discharge for misconduct (sexual transgressions and violating orders)” in 1990.
Decision at 5.  
Applicant married his first wife in 1999, separated from her in 2011, and divorced her in
2013.  In early 2011, he traveled to Hong Kong and Thailand to meet random people through dating
websites.  Around that time, he traveled to China to meet the woman who became his second wife.
She was born and raised in China.  They met through a website, and he began paying for English
lessons for her.  While still married to his first wife and living in a Middle Eastern country that
permits male residents to have multiple wives, he married his second wife in March 2012.  It is
unclear whether the validity of his second marriage would be upheld if challenged in the United
States.  His second wife came to the United States in 2013 and became a U.S. citizen in 2015. 
Applicant and his current wife have a child who was born in the United States.  They currently
reside in the Middle Eastern country.  He plans to place his family’s roots in the United States. 
After arriving in the Middle Eastern country in early 2012, he disclosed his relationship with his
current wife to his supervisor.  However, his Facility Security Officer did not learn of his marriage
to a then-foreign national until he submitted a security clearance application in August 2012.    
Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased.  His mother-in-law, sister-in-law, and sister-in-law’s
husband are citizens and residents of China.  His wife maintains close contact with her mother and
sister.  His mother-in-law is a homemaker and his sister-in-law owns a business.  Little is known
about the sister-in-laws’ husband.  Applicant has little contact with his in-laws due to language
differences.  
In 2013, Applicant and his wife started an online business that involved shipping products
from China.  They invested approximately $15,000 in the business.  His in-laws loaned them about
$5,000 for business purchases.  He repaid those loans.  In 2014, they closed the business following
the birth of their son.  Between 2011 and 2017, he has traveled to China on a number of occasions
2
for business and personal purposes.  Typically, on his trips to China, he would meet with his wife’s
family.
 
China is known to use its intelligence services to collect information about the United States
and obtain advanced technologies.  It actively monitors communications satellites and collects
information on U.S. military operations and exercises.  Its actors are the world’s most active and
persistent perpetrators of economic espionage.  It uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence
collection against U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense entities.  Reports of Chinese espionage
extend back 15 years.  China is an authoritarian state with a wide variety of human rights violations. 
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s contacts in China create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or coercion. 
Little is known about his in-laws.  Due to these foreign contacts, a potential conflict of interest
between Applicant’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information and his desire to help
his in-laws cannot be ruled out at this time.  None of the Guideline B mitigating condition apply to
the circumstances in this case.  
Under Guideline E, the Judge, in part, concluded:
 
Afforded opportunities at hearing, Applicant could provide no saving legal
explanation for his entering into a marriage with his current spouse with the
knowledge that he was still in a legal marriage relationship with his first wife.  His 
claim that his marriage contract with his current spouse was legally consummated
and is enforceable under his host country’s Sharia law is highly unlikely to draw
comity acceptance against any hypothetical bigamy charges waged against Applicant
under cover of state bigamy laws in the United States that criminalize bigamy. 
Comity principles recognized under our U.S. system of federalism do not require
courts to recognize bigamous marriages consummated in foreign countries whose
laws sanction bigamous marriages that conflict with marriage laws in force
throughout the United States.1    
Discussion
Applicant contends that his relationship with his in-laws is minimal and notes that, due to
language differences, he cannot communicate with them directly.  This argument is not persuasive. 
The evidence reflects that Applicant’s wife maintains close contact with her mother and sister, that
Applicant and his wife received a $5,000 loan from his in-laws, and that he typically meets with
them on his trips to China.  In-laws represent a class of persons who can present a security risk.  “As
a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has
ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”  See,
1 Decision at 15.  
3
e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-07068 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 7, 2018).  In his case, Applicant has failed to 
rebut that presumption.  
Applicant also argues that his marriage to his second wife was legal under the laws of the
Middle Eastern country where it occurred, that he was already separated from his first wife at that
time, and the Judge concluded it was unlikely he would face criminal prosecution for bigamy.  These
arguments are not convincing.  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s essential conclusion that
Applicant’s decision to marry his second wife while still married to his first wife raises at the very
least doubts about his judgement and trustworthiness.2  
Applicant further argues that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence, mis-
weighed the evidence, and misapplied the mitigating conditions and whole-person concept.  His
arguments, however, are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of
the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02488 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 30,
2018).  We give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant’s Counsel has cited,
but it is neither binding precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s
decision.  Id. at 3-4.  “Each case must be judged on its own merits.”  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
2(b).  
 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
2 The Judge also noted that Disqualifying Condition 16(e) under Guideline E provides that, while in another
country, engaging in legal conduct there, but illegal in the United States, may create a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress.  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 16(e).
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
