                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )   ISCR Case No. 15-05506
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 19 February 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 7
Consisting of the transcript (Tr. I), Government exhibits (GE) 1-7, hearing exhibit (HE) I, and Applicant1
exhibits (AE) A-B. AE A-B were timely received post hearing. The record closed 28 May 2017, when
Department Counsel stated no objection to AE A-B. 
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017.
This decision is issued under the original AG, but I have examined the new AG to ensure that I would not
reach a different result if I issued this decision under the new AG. For this case, the principal change to
Guideline F is to provide a specific mitigating condition for failing to file required taxes. I would not rule
differently under either set of AG.
1
April 2017 and I convened a hearing 11 May 2017. DOHA received the transcript 18
May 2017.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations, except SOR 1.d and 1.f, which
she disputed. She is a 40-year-old help desk technician employed by a defense
contractor since May 2011. She was unemployed from February-May 2011, when her
job was eliminated and she received one month’s severance pay. Before that, she was
continuously employed from January 2004 to February 2011. She has never married,
and has an adult son and a 16-year-old daughter from separate relationships. She
claims to have previously held a clearance, but was unable to provide any dates.3
The SOR alleges, and GE 1-7 substantiate, 18 delinquent debts totaling over 
$12,000. Applicant admits all but two debts totaling about $1,500.  She also admits4
failing to timely file her 2012-2013 state and Federal income tax returns. Applicant
reported these financial issues on her October 2014 clearance application (GE 1),  and
discussed them during a January 2015 interview with a Government investigator (GE 2),
based on her November 2016 credit report (GE 3). SOR debt 1.b and SOR debt 1.e
appear to the same debt. Applicant’s Answer contained a 22 January 2016 settlement
offer from the collection agent to resolve the account at an 80% discount, or $856.
Applicant lacked the funds to take advantage of the offer, which had further been
improved to $328 (Tr. 35-36).  AE B claimed that Applicant eventually settled the5
account for $323.
Applicant also admitted thirteen delinquent medical debts totaling about $4,000
(SOR 1.c, 1.g-1.h, and 1.j-1.s), which she claimed in her Answer to be consolidating
with a debt consolidation company. She stated that she made two payments on the
plan, but was unable to keep them up (Tr. 29). AE B, a partial unidentified, undated
credit report  listing 22 May 2017 updates shows removal of duplicate medical entries6
for SOR debts 1.o and 1.p, SOR debt 1.q, and 1.f (cable bill). It also shows removal of a
mobile telephone account and an medical account that appear on Applicant’s May 2017
However, Applicant’s April 2004 sworn statement (GE 5), discusses various security concerns, including3
numerous delinquent debts that are not alleged in the SOR. At a minimum, they would have aged off her credit
reports between April 2003 and her October 2014 clearance Application (GE 1). Whatever security concerns
were raised in 2004 were not adjudicated at hearing (Tr. 44-45).
SOR debt 1.d is for a vacuum cleaner Applicant bought which the vendor was contractually obligated to repair4
when it stopped working within three weeks. SOR debt 1.f involves cable service that Applicant terminated
when the vendor failed to provide the offered cable channels.
Applicant was awaiting her income tax refunds to resolve several of the SOR debts.5
Applicant’s cover email states that the partial document comes from an online credit monitoring site that offers6
free access to two of the three major credit reporting companies. Neither the document nor Applicant identifies
which company the partial report comes from.
2
credit report (GE 7) , but which were not alleged in the SOR. The medical account is for7
an amount that apparently does not correspond to any of the SOR debts. Applicant has
provided no information which would connect that unalleged debt to any of the SOR
debts.
In her March 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that she would be filing her
delinquent 2012-2013 income tax returns within two weeks. However, she had stated
during her January 2015 interview with a Government investigator that she had all the
documentation to file those tax returns. Nevertheless, she had not filed the tax returns
until December 2016 (Tr. 38). Moreover, the 2012-2016 state and Federal income tax
returns Applicant submitted as AE A are not signed, and contain no indications that any
of them were ever filed. Finally, there is no evidence regarding Applicant’s tax liability
for 2012-2013 (or any subsequent years) or any repayment plans she may have in
place.
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to losing her job in February 2011 as
well as her generally low pay in the positions she has held. She acknowledged living
paycheck to paycheck (Tr. 21). When she lost her job, she missed a rent payment. The
landlord sued for possession of the home, and even though Applicant later came up
with the rent payment, the landlord proceeded with the eviction. From July-October
2011, Applicant was essentially homeless, living in hotels. From November 2011 to April
2012, she rented space in a couple of basements. From May-August 2012, she was
back and forth between a hotel and a friend’s house. From September 2012 to July
2013, she rented a room in a couple of different homes, until she found her current
residence in August 2013. This nomadic existence contributed to her failure to file her
tax returns in 2012 and 2013.
Applicant reported her tax problems, mortgage and related loan issues, some
delinquent debts, and some efforts to obtain resolution of her debts on her October
2014 clearance application. However, she did not provide any evidence of any financial
or credit counseling she may have received. She provided no work or character
references, or any evidence of community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
GE 7 also shows a delinquent medical account that does not appear in the SOR, as well as SOR debts 1.e-7
1.g and 1.j
3
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and 
Applicant failed to fully mitigate the security concerns. Applicant weathered financial
problems when she first obtained a clearance in 2004. She fell into a financial whole
when she lost her job in February 2011, and although she obtained a new job fairly
quickly, the cascade financial failure followed. Her housing situation was unstable until
August 2013. Nevertheless, her efforts to resolve her financial problems show no
significant progress on the problems.9
Applicant only partially meets the mitigating factors for financial considerations.
Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and have not ended; so they
cannot be considered unlikely to recur.  Her initial financial problems were due to10
circumstances beyond her control, and while many of her actions taken to resolve the
debts might constitute dealing with the debt responsibly (if better documented and
pursued to some resolution), the fact that she was unable to continue with the
consolidation plan or show that her tax returns were actually filed means that the debt
has not been mitigated, nor have the tax issues been resolved.  Her AE A does not11
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
¶19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; (c) a history9
of not meeting financial obligations; (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that10
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and11
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
4
document when her tax returns were filed or what her current tax situation is (SOR
1.a).12
She did not document how she may have benefitted from the debt- consolidation
firm she retained, and in any event was unable to keep up the payments. She provided
no evidence of credit or financial counseling, or a budget to address her current debt
plans, so I cannot conclude that the SOR debts have been, or are being, resolved.13
Moreover, no track record of payments means no good-faith effort to satisfy the loans.14
The Appeal Board has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt
alleged in the SOR, need not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all
debts simultaneously. Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve the financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement
the plan.  Applicant’s efforts to date might have constituted such a plan, but for the15
shortcomings of her documents. Moreover, there is no “whole person” evidence  to
support a “whole-person” analysis arguing for granting her clearance notwithstanding
her financial issues. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs  a, c-s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                                 
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
¶20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amoount12
owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.
¶20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that13
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.14
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).15
5
