                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 15-08273 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I grant Applicant’s clearance.1
On 15 June 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 4
Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-5, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-E. 1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017.
This decision is issued under the original AG, but I have examined the new AG to ensure that I would not
reach a different result if I issued this decision under the new AG. For this case, the principal change to
Guideline F is to provide a specific mitigating condition for failing to file required taxes. I would not rule
differently under either set of AG.
1
April 2017, and I convened a hearing 10 May 2017. DOHA received the transcript 17
May 2017, and the record closed
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 59-year-old flight test
technician employed by a U.S. defense contractor since October 2013. He worked in a
similar position with a different contractor from January-October 2013.  He was3
unemployed or underemployed from May 2012 to January 2013.
Applicant served honorably in the United States military from November 1977 to
December 1997, when he retired. He held a clearance without incident while in the
military. His clearance history is otherwise unclear. After retiring from the military in
December 1997, he went to work for a Government contractor as a helicopter mechanic
in June 2001, and was satisfactorily employed there until June 2011. His clearance
status there is undocumented. In June 2011, he changed employers to continue to work
on the same helicopter, but at a facility that required him to have an upgraded
clearance. When it took too long to secure the clearance approval, his employer laid
him off in May 2012. From May-November 2012 he was underemployed as a
landscaper for his own company. From November 2012 to January 2013, he was
unemployed, actively looking for full-time employment. Consequently, his March 2015
clearance Application (GE 1) must be for a new clearance.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 1-5) substantiate, and Applicant
admits two delinquent debts totaling just over $11,000. Applicant was unaware of the
SOR 1.a medical debt at the time of his April 2015 subject interview with a Government
investigator (GE 2), but stated he would investigate and pay the debt. He claims to have
paid the debt, but provided no corroboration.4
Applicant disclosed SOR debt 1.b on his March 2015 clearance application (GE
1).  He stated that he had obtained a mortgage modification and had been making5
As is regularly the case with Government contractors, Applicant went from working for a subcontractor to3
working directly for the prime contractor
The $25 debt appears to have fallen delinquent in December 2010 (GE 3). It does not appear on Applicant’s4
April 2016 or May 2017 credit reports (GE 4, 5), both of which are by a different vendor than reported the debt
on GE 3. In any event, a $25 delinquent debt is de minimus in terms of security significance.
He disclosed $78,000 delinquent mortgage debt, and provided excruciating detail of the circumstances of5
hurricane damage in August 2011 and subsequent misadventures with his insurance company, as well as
trying to get a mortgage modification. 
2
payments since about October 2014.  He managed to make the required payments6
between October 2014 and May 2015 (Tr. 46).
 Applicant’s tale of woe begins in August 2011, when his home was damaged in
a hurricane. From early on, Applicant was in contention with his insurance company
about the amount it would pay for repairs. The repair estimates Applicant obtained were
far higher than the company was offering. Moreover, the company was slow with
housing payments for Applicant’s dislocation, and would not advance any repair
payments until a given portion of repairs was completed and inspected.
As stated above, Applicant was laid off from his job (the job that allowed him to
afford his home), in May 2012, when he was unable to obtain the required clearance.
His landscaping job was insufficient to pay his mortgage, or advance repair funds on his
home. In addition, Applicant’s home was damaged again in another hurricane in
October 2012, resulting in the same owner-contractor-insurance conundrum, further
complicated by Applicant’s unemployment and now-delinquent mortgage. Finally, in
August 2015, Applicant’s home was damaged in a fire. Now, the mortgage servicer’s
service and insurance departments were added to the discussions. Applicant continued
to work with the various parties.  However, they were not able to come to an agreement7
over repairs to the home. The various bids vary greatly. The wrangling continued from
June-November 2016. In about November 2016, Applicant learned from his attorney
that he could file a grievance with the state insurance commission. At that point, the
servicing department started pre-foreclosure proceedings; the insurance department
had always been in favor of restoring the home, but the two departments did not
communicate frequently.
As of the date of the hearing, Applicant estimated that he was about $38,000
past due on his mortgage. He had retained counsel to file a Chapter 13 reorganization
plan (AE A), and had undergone the required credit counseling (AE B). He paid one bill
that became delinquent after the SOR was issued (AE D), but his other expenses are
current.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
Applicant’s March 2015 credit report (GE 3) appears to confirm that fact, as the $78,000 past-due balance6
reported by Applicant had been reduced to $65,262. Moreover, the credit entry stated that Applicant was
paying under a partial or modified payment plan. Applicant’s April 2016 credit report (GE 4) shows an $11,358
past-due balance (the amount alleged in the SOR), while noting that the last payment was August 2015. His
May 2017 credit report (GE 5) shows the past-due balance grown to $33,588. However, the credit report noted
Applicant’s dispute of the account information.
I forbore from having Applicant produce his voluminous communications with the parties (Tr. 56-57).7
Applicant’s Answer contained enough conflicting repair estimates and insurance estimates to illustrate the
problem.
3
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Applicant experienced a series of financial
pressures beginning in August 2011; hurricane damage to his home in August 2011;
underemployment beginning in May 2012; more hurricane damage in October 2012;
complete unemployment beginning in November 2012; and fire damage to his home in
August 2015.9
        
Applicant meets most of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations. 
While his financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, the circumstances which led
to his financial situation are unlikely to recur.  They were certainly due to circumstances10
beyond his control, and he dealt with them responsibly, having obtained a mortgage
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
¶19(a) inability to satisfy debts; (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial9
obligations
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that10
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
4
modification and substantially reduced his part-due mortgage, until squabbling between
the various home repair parties caused him to miss additional payments11
On the advice of counsel, Applicant resolved to undertake a Chapter 13 wage-
earner reganization, and took the required credit counseling. The automatic stay of any
foreclosure action will give Applicant the time necessary to sort his home repair
issues.  Applicant was working with his mortgage servicer well before the SOR was12
issued, and although the home-repair parties have not yet agreed on a plan for repairing
his home, his ongoing efforts constitute a good-faith effort to address this aspect of his
finances.  Moreover, his filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection is a sensible plan13
for reorganization the financial pressures that are not completely resolved. 
 
The Appeal Board has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt
alleged in the SOR, need not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all
debts simultaneously. Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve the financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement
the plan.  Applicant has taken sensible action to resolve his financial pressures before14
the SOR was issued, and has adapted that plan as circumstances require.  Applicant’s15
actions constitute such a plan and execution as contemplated by the Appeal Board. I
conclude Guideline F for Applicant.
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b: For Applicant
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and11
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that12
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.13
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).14
Which early credit reports showed to have been delinquent but now current and which later credit reports15
showed to have been paid. None of the education loans was alleged in the SOR, but Applicant’s actions to
resolve them are relavant to this decision.
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
6
