 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 15-00853 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
During college about 15 years ago, while downloading music files through use of 
an internet file-sharing service, Applicant inadvertently downloaded and viewed a single 
image of child pornography. He deleted the image. The allegation that he downloaded 
multiple such images is not established. Applicant’s conduct did not constitute sexual 
behavior under Guideline D. Applicant mitigated resulting security concerns cross-
alleged under Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in May 2015, in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry. (GE 1) On September 8, 2017, 
following a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline D, sexual conduct, and a cross-allegation 
under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
 
2 
 
 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 
2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 4, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on April 27, 2018. On June 6, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was 
issued scheduling the hearing for July 26, 2018. The hearing convened as scheduled. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and GE 2, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through P, all of which were admitted without objection.1  I left the 
record open after the hearing to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
evidence. Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked collectively as AE Q, 
and admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 4, 2018. 
The record closed on August 8, 2018.  
  
Findings of Fact  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant partially admitted and partially denied SOR ¶ 
1.a. He admitted the cross-allegation at SOR ¶ 2.a, but incorporated his answer to SOR 
¶ 1.a. His admissions and explanations are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He and his wife have been married since 2005. They 
have two young children. Applicant graduated from high school in 2000. He graduated 
from college in June 2003. He earned a master’s degree in 2011. Since June 2003, he 
has worked for various defense contractors. He has worked for his current employer for 
the last four and half years. He earns an annual salary of $123,000. He has held a DOD 
industrial clearance since late 2003, after he graduated from college. (Tr. 22-33; 
Answer; GE 1; AE A-AE D)  
 
Under Guideline D, SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that “Between 2000 and 2003, [Applicant] 
downloaded, from the Kazaa website, approximately 100 images of nude children 
engaged in sexual acts.” Guideline E ¶ 2.a is a cross-allegation.  
 
While in college, when he was about 18 to 21 years old, Applicant used computer 
“peer-to-peer” file-sharing services to download material from other people’s computers. 
As Applicant explained, this technology allows users to share their computer files with 
other users of the service voluntarily. During college, Applicant used this file-sharing 
program (rather than a “website” as alleged), to download music and music videos from 
other people’s computer files. (Tr. 46, 52-53) 
 
                                                          
1 AE A through AE K were submitted with Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant acknowledged that downloading music files in this manner is illegal, as 
it likely constituted copyright infringement. However, Applicant’s music downloading is 
not specifically alleged as a security concern. (Tr. 26-27, 46-51)2 Nonetheless, he 
pledged not to engage in illegal downloading of any kind in the future. (AE J) 
 
At some point after college, in about 2003, Applicant applied for a job with 
another government agency (AGA). The background investigation included a polygraph. 
During the related interview, Applicant was asked if he had ever done anything illegal. 
Applicant disclosed that he had illegally downloaded music and music videos. Applicant 
also told the AGA interviewer that between 2000 and 2003, he had also downloaded as 
many as 100 images of nude children engaging in sexual acts, as alleged. (GE 2 at 6, 9; 
Tr. 38)3 Applicant disclosed the incident out of the abundance of caution, and because 
he wanted to be fully honest with the interviewer. (Tr. 34, 38, 62-63)  
 
 At hearing, Applicant explained that when he used the file-sharing service, he 
would download files in bulk from other people’s computers without knowing what was 
being downloaded. He testified, “I selected the first file and the last file on the list, and 
downloaded everything” without looking at the content of each individual file before he 
did so. (Tr. 52-55) These bulk downloads would often yield not only music files and 
music videos he was looking for, but also other “collateral” material, such as pictures 
and images. (Tr. 26) Applicant would download the files in bulk and save them but he 
did not know what they contained until he looked at them later. (Tr. 64-66) 
 
Applicant testified that on one occasion, the files he had captured included about 
100 photographic images in “JPEG” format. Even though Applicant was looking for 
music to download, and not photographs, he clicked on one of the images. (Tr. 38-43) 
He opened one of the image files “to see what it was. I didn’t know if it was the album 
cover artwork or maybe something else.” (Tr. 55, 64-66)  
 
When Applicant clicked on the image file, he found an image of nude children 
engaging in sexual acts. He testified, “I don’t recall exactly what was going on, but I 
knew it wasn’t right and I didn’t want to see it.” (Tr. 56; GE 2)4 Once he saw the first 
image, Applicant deleted all of the other image files that he had downloaded in bulk, 
without looking at them. (Tr. 38-43, 57-58) There was no indication in the title of any of 
                                                          
2 During my questioning of Applicant, I called his attention to the fact that the sole Guideline E allegation 
(SOR ¶ 2.a) was a cross-allegation of the sole allegation under Guideline D (SOR ¶ 2.a), and did not 
allege the illegal music downloading as a security concern. (Tr. 46-51) Department Counsel had ample 
opportunity to correct me on this point, but did not do so. (Tr. 75, 79-80) 
 
3 GE 2 is the summary of Applicant’s personal subject interview (PSI), in February 2014. Applicant 
authenticated his PSI summary in an interrogatory response in August 2015. In doing so, he made 
additional explanations concerning the subject matter at issue here, and corrected some other minor 
discrepancies. 
 
4 In Applicant’s interrogatory response, he said, “I was disgusted that someone would even have 
something like that and I had absolutely no desire to see it myself. It made me feel dirty and [gave me] a 
sense of guilt that I even downloaded it unintentionally.” (GE 2 at 9)   
 
4 
 
 
the image files Applicant downloaded that they contained sexually-related material. (Tr. 
55-56) 
 
Applicant had no way of knowing where the image files came from, because the 
owners of the files he downloaded through the file-sharing service were not identified, 
except by their internet provider (“IP”) address. (Tr. 66) Applicant knew that possessing 
and distributing child pornography was illegal. He did not report what he saw to law 
enforcement authorities, and did not tell anyone what he saw. (Tr. 59-60) He did not 
share the file with anyone else, or otherwise distribute it. (Tr. 67) If he found similar 
material in the future, he would contact authorities. (Tr. 70) Applicant has never 
intentionally viewed or downloaded child pornography. He does not view adult 
pornography. (Tr. 27-28, 34, 44-45, AE N, AE O) 
 
Applicant’s intentions were to download music and music videos. He did not 
intend to use the peer-to-peer file-sharing service to view or download child 
pornography. (Tr. 27, 63; GE 2; Answer) Applicant continued to use the file-sharing 
service after that, but was more careful after that to only download music files. He 
stopped downloading music illegally after he graduated college in 2003, got a job and 
received a security clearance. (Tr. 60)  
 
Applicant was not hired by the AGA. (GE 1, GE 2) There is no record evidence 
directly from the AGA about what Applicant actually said in his interview there, in 2003. 
Nor is there any record evidence from the AGA about any findings they made as a 
result of their conclusions about what he told them in his interview. There is no record 
evidence that the DOD clearance Applicant held at the time was affected. 
 
Applicant testified that his wife is aware of the nature of the SOR allegations. (Tr. 
38) She has never known him to view or download anything illegal or pornographic. He 
is a loving husband and an attentive father. Applicant’s wife works for a non-profit 
organization. Applicant volunteers at the organization about 10 hours a week. (Tr. 24-
25; AE F, AE P)  
 
Applicant submitted numerous certificates and merit pay awards he has earned 
for his professional and technical capabilities. He is consistently rated as “exceptional” 
or “exceeds expectations” in numerous rating categories in his performance reviews. 
(AE G, AE H, AE I, AE L, AE M) 
 
Applicant provided several reference letters from co-workers and supervisors 
attesting to his integrity, dedication, professional skill and technical abilities. Several 
people said he has significant experience protecting and handling classified material, 
and does so with the highest care. Applicant’s pastor attested to his character, integrity, 
and selflessness. He is a dedicated husband and father. He has the pastor’s highest 
levels of trust and confidence. (AE E) Applicant supplemented the record after the 
hearing with updated recommendation letters from his references, attesting that they 
were aware of the allegations in the case, and considered Applicant’s actions to be 
inadvertent, dated, and out of character. (AE Q) 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 Applicant was asked during a polygraph interview with an AGA if he had ever 
done anything illegal. He disclosed that when he was in college, between 2000 and 
2003, he illegally downloaded music and music videos through a peer-to-peer file-
sharing service. He also disclosed that he had downloaded images of nude children 
engaged in sexual acts during this timeframe. 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant downloaded 100 such images. The 
images Applicant downloaded were part of a “bulk download” of someone else’s 
computer files. He did not view any of these images beforehand. He did not know what 
they contained at the time. He opened one of the files later, and when he saw an image 
of nude children engaging in sexual acts, he was horrified and he deleted it 
immediately. He also deleted the other estimated 100 images without opening them, so 
he did not in fact know what they contained. The allegation that Applicant downloaded 
multiple such images is not established. Applicant consistently stated and testified that 
his downloading and viewing of a single image of child pornography was inadvertent, 
since his intent was to download music and music videos.  
 
Guideline D: Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern for sexual conduct: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress;  and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
 Applicant downloaded and viewed a single image of child pornography 
inadvertently, while seeking to download music. Applicant’s conduct did not constitute 
any form of “sexual behavior.” No Guideline D disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13 
apply. Since no Guideline D disqualifying conditions apply, I need not address the 
applicability of any mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14 that might otherwise apply given 
the dated and isolated nature of Applicant’s college-era conduct.6   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
The single allegation under Guideline D is cross-alleged under Guideline E (SOR 
¶ 2.a). As noted during the hearing and as also discussed above, Applicant’s illegal 
downloading of music and music videos through a peer-to-peer file-sharing service 
while in college is not itself alleged as a Guideline E security concern.  
                                                          
6 See, e.g., AG ¶¶ 14(a), (b), and (c). 
 
8 
 
 
As also noted above, I have concluded that Applicant was credible when he 
explained and testified that his downloading and brief viewing of a single image of child 
pornography a single time was inadvertent. I must consider his intent in weighing the 
Guideline E AGs as well.  
 
Applicant downloaded and briefly viewed an image of child pornography off of 
someone else’s computer files. In doing so, Applicant associated with individuals 
involved in criminal activity. AG ¶ 16(g) applies.  
 
Even if Applicant’s conduct was inadvertent, it could nonetheless subject him to 
exploitation, manipulation or duress, as it could affect his personal, professional, or 
community standing. Thus, AG ¶ 16(e) applies.  
 
As noted above, Applicant’s conduct did not constitute sexual behavior, and is  
therefore not a security concern under Guideline D. Applicant was not charged with any 
criminal offense, and a security concern under Guideline J for criminal conduct was not 
alleged. The allegation is therefore not sufficient for an adverse determination under 
any other single guideline. However, when considered as a whole, Applicant’s 
conduct supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, 
or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 sets forth potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E:   
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
  
 Applicant has no history of downloading or viewing child pornography other than 
a single time, inadvertently, during college many years ago, while illegally downloading 
music through a peer-to-peer file-sharing service. Applicant no longer downloads music 
in this fashion. He does not view child pornography. Applicant’s action occurred under 
unique circumstances many years ago, and is unlikely to recur. It does not cast doubt 
on his current judgment, reliability or trustworthiness. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. AG ¶ 17(g) 
applies for the same reasons.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant voluntarily disclosed the incident to the AGA interviewer when asked if 
he had ever done anything illegal. He did so out of the abundance of caution, in the 
interest of candor. His wife and references are also aware of the incident. Applicant 
therefore took appropriate steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, and AG ¶ 17(e) applies.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. I had the opportunity to observe 
Applicant’s demeanor during the hearing. I believe his testimony that his downloading 
and viewing of the image was entirely inadvertent. His explanation at hearing was also 
consistent with his earlier statements, in his SCA, his PSI, and his answer. Applicant’s 
conduct did not constitute sexual behavior. The security concern under Guideline D is 
not established. The security concern under Guideline E is mitigated because 
Applicant’s conduct occurred many years ago, was inadvertent, and has been 
appropriately disclosed. There is no likelihood of recurrence. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
