 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-08319 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Guideline E, personal conduct concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 18, 2013. On 
December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant timely answered the SOR, admitting all of the SOR allegations except 
for SOR ¶ 2.b. He admitted failing to file federal income tax returns for seven years, and 
owing federal income tax liens entered in April and September 2007, as alleged in SOR 
 
2 
 
 
¶¶ 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
The case was assigned to me on August 20, 2018. On September 4, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for September 26, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted two documents, which were 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on October 4, 2018. I granted Applicant’s request to leave 
the record open until October 10, 2018, so that he could provide substantiating 
documentation. (Tr. 84) He submitted another letter from his certified public accountant 
(CPA) and attached IRS transcripts. (AE C)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He obtained his GED in 2009, and he is married since 
2006 with two grown stepchildren. Applicant has been employed as either a concrete 
specialist or doing construction work since the 1990s. He traveled to the hearing from 
an overseas embassy reconstruction project, where he works doing stucco work for a 
federal contractor. (Tr. 22) He reports filing a previous SCA in 2013, (GE 2) that was 
never adjudicated. (Tr. 11) In section 26, he disclosed his failure to file and pay federal 
income taxes for multiple tax years (TYs). He stated “haven’t done anything, 
overwhelmed with amount owed.”2 However, he did not disclose his numerous tax 
issues in his recent 2017 SCA. (GE 1) Applicant has worked extensively overseas.   
 
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent consumer debts, totaling $138,482, including six 
medical debts placed for collection. Additionally, the SOR alleges his failure to file 
federal income tax returns for several years, and over $22,000 in tax liens that were 
entered against him in 2007. Applicant admitted all of these allegations in his answer to 
the SOR.  Applicant testified that he had worked in the construction industry his whole 
life, and in the 1990’s he switched over to independent contractor (Form 1099) status. 
(Tr. 22) He failed to pay quarterly taxes as required due to a misconception that he 
earned too little income to meet the threshold income required to file. (Tr. 23)  
 
In his October 2017 Answers to Interrogatories (GE 4), Applicant attached copies 
of his IRS tax transcripts for TYs 2005, 2006, 2007, 2010, 2014, 2015, and 2016. He did 
not provide tax transcripts for TYs 2008, 2009, 2011, or 2012, as requested. Included 
IRS documents stated “requested data not found” for these particular years. (GE 4) 
Applicant admits that he did not file income tax returns for these years. (Tr. 68) 
Applicant testified that he retained a Financial Services company in 2005 to help him 
resolve his tax delinquencies. (Tr. 25) However, this company accepted two payments 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 18, 2013 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summary of his personal subject interview (PSI) on 
November 12, 2014.  
 
2  GE 2, p. 37. 
 
3 
 
 
of $1,500 from Applicant, and appeared to accomplish nothing. So, Applicant terminated 
this relationship, which he thought was a scam. (Tr. 26) He testified that he has since 
hired a CPA in 2018 to file all of the overdue federal income tax returns on his behalf. 
His CPA assured Applicant that all returns have been filed, and he owes no back 
federal income taxes. (Tr. 72)   
 
Applicant attached a letter from his CPA dated February 15, 2018, to his Answer 
to the SOR. It stated that he was recently contacted by Applicant to help him catch up 
on his back tax filings and set up a payment plan for his back taxes owed. The CPA 
obtained a power of attorney and contacted the IRS twice on Applicant’s behalf. He 
specifically inquired about TYs 2005 to 2016. He was informed by the IRS that all back 
taxes are paid and his filings are current. No details were provided about when the 
federal income tax returns were filed for each TY in question.  
  
Applicant testified that he has from time to time, done odd jobs, and worked 
“under the table.” (Tr. 79-80) In some years, he suggested he earned too little to have to 
file federal income tax returns. However, it is unclear which years pertained, and 
whether the years of non-filing alleged in the SOR (TYs 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 
2011, and 2012) were included. The record was left open for two weeks specifically so 
that Applicant could provide explicit information from his CPA about what the earnings 
threshold was for each relevant year, and whether Applicant met that threshold. (Tr. 82 
– 84) Applicant responded by providing a September 27, 2018, letter from his CPA. 
Attached were IRS tax transcripts for TYs 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003. (AE 
C) Although not all of these TYs are alleged in the SOR, the CPA letter shows that 
unpaid taxes were due for each of these TYs, resulting in tax liens imposed in 2007, 
which were removed only in 2016-2017.3 (AE C)  
 
 Notably, the CPA’s letter of September 27, 2018, states “in a few years, 
[Applicant] did not file since his income was below that year’s threshold to file.” (AE C) 
However, he does not specify the exact years that Applicant fell below the filing 
threshold in earnings or his exact amount of earnings. Thus, for TYs 2008, 2009, 2011, 
and 2012, there was no evidence presented about: the threshold amount of earnings 
required for a taxpayer to file a return; Applicant’s actual earnings in those TYs; or tax 
transcripts to show that he filed returns. The IRS transcripts attached to the CPA letter 
(AE C) show that Applicant filed a federal income tax return for TY 2005 on February, 
13, 2006 (adjusted gross income or AGI  was $19,894); for TY 2006 on February 19, 
2007 (AGI $22,134); and for TY 2007 on February 8, 2008 (AGI $17,422).   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a resulted from a credit card debt that was charged off in the amount of 
$1,793 after Applicant’s wife purchased a mattress. (Tr. 30) It has now been paid in full. 
                                                          
3 In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered stating: a) to assess an Applicant’s credibility; 
b) to evaluate an Applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances: c) to 
consider whether an Applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; d) to decide whether a 
particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or e) to provide evidence of whole-person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
4 
 
 
(AE A) SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.i, are all for delinquent medical accounts 
placed for collection. Applicant testified that he went to the emergency room in 2012. 
(Tr. 41-42) He had no health insurance. Applicant had surgery in December 2012 
because his femoral arteries in both legs were blocked, and he was in the hospital for a 
week. (Tr. 42) Applicant received a $98,000 bill from the hospital and providers, which 
he was unable to pay. The hospital wanted payments of $300 per month. (Tr. 48) He 
was fined $600 under the Affordable Care Act for failure to maintain health insurance. 
(Tr. 43) He reached out to the medical creditors on multiple occasions, but after 2013, 
Applicant heard nothing more from them. He assumed since he was “out of sight, out of 
mind” that the providers wrote off these delinquent medical debts. (Tr. 52) SOR ¶ 1.g 
(radiology) has now been paid in full. (AE A)  
 
 Applicant testified that he was out of work for 18 months following hurricane 
Charley in 2004. (Tr. 53)  Then, the mortgagee bank foreclosed on his home in 2007-
2008, because he was “upside down” on the mortgage, after making payments for 20 
years. (Tr. 54) Applicant tried unsuccessfully to arrange a short sale of the property or 
renegotiate the terms of the mortgage, before he moved to state A. (Tr. 54) Applicant 
also voluntarily surrendered his 2004 Ford Explorer around that time. (Tr. 55) The 
dealership sold the vehicle, and it resulted in a deficiency amount. Applicant has a 
balance owing of $6,306, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, that he was unable to pay. (Tr. 56) 
However, he testified credibly that he has now entered into a payment plan and made 
six payments of $100 each to the creditor. (Tr. 58)   
 
 Applicant produced documentation showing that the debt placed for collection in 
the amount of $3,776 at SOR ¶ 1.h has now been satisfied and a zero balance remains. 
(AE B) He testified credibly that the delinquent debt placed for collection in the amount 
of $120 at SOR ¶ 1.j (insurance) has now been paid in full after a final payment of $70 
pursuant to a repayment plan with that creditor. (Tr. 62) Applicant has reached out to 
the telecommunications creditor concerning the $230 debt placed for collection at SOR 
¶ 1.k to no avail. However, he still has service by this provider, and his credit with this 
provider is good. (Tr. 64)  
 
 Applicant testified credibly that he did not understand the questions in section 26 
of the 2017 SCA. (GE 1) (Tr. 86) Since he had already fully disclosed his tax issues and 
financial problems in the earlier 2013 SCA, he logically assumed that the Government 
was apprised of his financial issues. Applicant had no specific intent to deliberately 
falsify his responses on the SCA or deceive the Government, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b. (Tr. 87-88) He reasonably believed that he only needed to fill in the gaps, with 
new developments that occurred between the 2013 SCA and 2017 SCA. (Tr. 88) So, he 
did not disclose these tax problems again.  
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
 
5 
 
 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income taxes as 
required.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts, failure to file income tax returns, and tax liens, 
alleged in the SOR, are confirmed by his SCA, clearance interview, and answer to the 
SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.4 
Applicant has not met that burden. He exercised poor judgment in repeatedly failing to 
file, or filing federal income tax returns late, going back to 1997. He also failed to pay his 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
federal income taxes when due. He had multiple tax liens filed against him by the IRS, 
which were not timely resolved. They were still reflected in his 2015 credit report. (GE 7)  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with appropriate tax authority to 
file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant was overseas continuously for several years preceding the hearing. He 
suffered through Hurricane Charley in 2004, and emergency surgery (with attendant 
medical costs) in December 2012. To some extent, these conditions were beyond his 
control. However, he has not produced relevant and responsive documentation, 
demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He broached the 
delinquent income tax debts in his SCA in April 2013. Yet, over five years later, he has 
not resolved these issues.  
 
 The record was left open for two weeks explicitly so that he could obtain a letter 
from his CPA showing that he either earned insufficient income to require filing, or he 
filed federal income tax returns for each of the relevant TYs alleged in the SOR. It 
remains unclear what happened in TYs 2008, 2009, 2011, and 2012. He only obtained 
the professional services of his CPA in early 2018. Applicant has not met his burden to 
provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and 
that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He has 
made some progress pursuant to payment plans with numerous creditors on his 
delinquent consumer debts, and he has now paid off the tax liens. However, his efforts 
to resolve his medical delinquencies and tax issues have not met the mark. In short, his 
response has been too little, too late. He produced insufficient substantiating documents 
even after being specifically requested to do so at the hearing. The allegations of failure 
to file income tax returns alleged in the SOR have not been resolved for TYs 2008, 
2009, 2011, and 2012. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) apply only partially for the consumer 
 
8 
 
 
debts, taxes owed, and TY 2005, 2006 and 2007. Otherwise, the mitigating conditions 
enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
   The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is 
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during 
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following 
normally will result in an unfavorable national security eligibility 
determination, security clearance action, or cancellation of further 
processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to 
meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, completing 
security forms or releases, cooperation with medical or psychological 
evaluation, or polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
           (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from  
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications,  
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or trustworth- 
iness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant had already disclosed his tax issues and financial travails to the 
Government in his 2013 SCA. He denied any intent to falsify his responses in section 26 
of the 2017 SCA. He believed that he only had to update the 2017 SCA with any newly 
incurred delinquent debts or tax issues since his 2013 SCA was submitted. This was a 
reasonable interpretation and I accept his testimony in this regard. AG ¶16(a) does not 
apply. No disqualifying condition has been established.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant raised a family and  
made significant contributions to the DOD for several years. Most importantly, Applicant 
has not addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures 
to resolve them. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant did not intend to falsify his 2017 SCA. However, Applicant’s finances 
remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial 
problems are under control. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E, but 
he has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                 AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j and 1.k :       For Applicant            
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e:                           Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Subparagraph 1.i:                                                 Against Applicant   
 
 Subparagraphs 1.l through 1.n:                             Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2 , Guideline E:                                     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:                                   For Applicant  
 
                                           
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
