 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01372 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was charged with a gross misdemeanor firearm offense in 1995, and 
with felony child molestation and child rape in 2013. He deliberately omitted the firearms 
charge from two Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) that he 
executed in 2007 and 2015. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based 
upon the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On May 4, 2015, Applicant submitted an e-QIP for reinvestigation of his security 
clearance eligibility. On January 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 23, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on April 24, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on July 11, 2017, setting the hearing for July 27, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into evidence, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but offered no documents 
into evidence during the hearing. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open 
until August 28, 2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2017. Applicant submitted documentary exhibits on 
August 17, 2017, which were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A, B, and C, and admitted 
without objection.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), 
implemented new adjudicative guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All 
national security eligibility determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be 
decided using the new National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), as promulgated in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative 
guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. 
This decision is issued pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be 
the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed by a major Federal contractor, and is applying to continue 
the security clearance he has held since 2007 in connection with that work. (GE 1.) The 
SOR alleged that Applicant was charged with four felony offenses in 2013, a 
misdemeanor firearms offense in 1995, and two traffic offenses in 1977; and that he 
deliberately falsified material facts by answering, “No,” in response to the questions on 
his 2015 and 2007 e-QIP forms that asked if he had ever been charged with a firearms 
offense. Applicant admitted the SOR allegations related to the felony and traffic 
offenses, and denied the remaining allegations, with some explanations. (Answer.) 
Applicant’s admissions, including his statements to an OPM investigator during his 
March 17, 2016 interview (GE 6) and his hearing testimony, are incorporated in the 
findings below.   
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He dropped out of high school, then earned a General 
Equivalency Diploma (GED) in March 1974. He has been married since 1989, and has 
three adult children. He served an active duty enlistment in the U.S. Navy from 1974 to 
1978, and was honorably discharged in 1980 after serving two more years the inactive 
reserve. He has been continuously employed in technical data project management at 
the contractor since October 1996. (GE 1; GE 6; Tr. 6-7, 53-54.)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant was stopped and arrested for resisting an officer, attempting to elude, 
reckless driving, and not having a valid license or registration, when he failed to pull 
over promptly after running through a yellow light in his “hotrod car” on March 22,1977. 
He was on active duty in the Navy at the time. Applicant was issued citations, but all 
charges were eventually dismissed by the court on April 13, 1977. (Answer; GE 2; Tr. 
54-58.) 
 
 On September 14, 1995, Applicant and his sister-in-law were moving his 
personal property into the motel owned by her, and where he and his wife resided 
during his first year in the region where they still live. A group of juveniles began 
throwing what he called, “horse apples,”1 at them from the top of a hill across the street. 
Applicant shouted at the group to stop what they were doing, and says that he was 
concerned that his sister-in-law might be injured if one of the thrown objects hit her. 
Applicant said that it was the end of a long and frustrating day, and when the juveniles 
continued throwing things he took out his pistol and shot it into the air. A woman who 
lived across the street called the police and reported that someone was shooting bullets 
into her house. The police responded, confiscated Applicant’s pistol, and took him to the 
police station where he was booked and issued a citation for illegal discharge of a 
firearm. He said in his Answer that he pled no contest to this charge and received six 
months of probation. Court documents indicate that he eventually appeared in court on 
November 8, 1996, where he pled not guilty and charges were dismissed with $150 in 
court costs assessed. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 58-68.) 
 
 During mid-October 2012, Applicant’s 12-year-old former neighbor told her twin 
sister and several of their friends that Applicant had sexually molested her “multiple 
times,” while he was babysitting them during 2007 or 2008. The sister told their parents, 
who reported the matter to the county sheriff. The twins were in second grade at the 
time of the incidents and were friends with Applicant’s youngest daughter, who was 
about three years older. Applicant admitted that he would take the twins, and 
sometimes his daughter, down into his basement to watch movies while his wife worked 
upstairs. He and one twin, occasionally joined by the other girls, would sit on a couch 
with a blanket over them to watch the movies. The twin claimed not to be ticklish, and 
he would frequently tickle her all over, which often turned into a wrestling match, 
according to his late 2012 statements to the county sheriff’s detective investigating the 
case. He said that he never intentionally put his hand down her pants or digitally 
penetrated her, as she described him doing during some of these sessions. Other than 
denying that he molested the girl, he declined to discuss these incidents in detail during 
his March 2016 OPM interview and during his hearing and referred to his prior 
explanations in the records of the criminal proceeding. (GE 4; GE 6; Tr. 72-78.) 
 
 After the investigation was completed in April 2013, Applicant was charged with 
two counts of rape of a child and two counts of child molestation in the first degree. 
These are Class A felonies. After multiple continuances, his trial resulted in a mistrial on 
                                            
1 From his description of, “a large, green, hard spiky, some sort of fruit that grows on trees,” the objects 
being thrown were probably thorn apples that grow on jimsonweed.  
 
 
 
 
4 
February 3, 2015, because the jury could not reach a unanimous verdict. The 
prosecutor decided not to retry the case, and the charges were dismissed without 
prejudice2 on March 18, 2015. (GE 1; GE 5; Answer; AE C; Tr. 82-84.)    
 
 Applicant completed e-QIP questionnaires on March 27, 2007, and May 4, 2015, 
by certifying that his statements on them were true, complete, and correct to the best of 
his knowledge and belief, and were made in good faith. He further acknowledged his 
understanding of the potential adverse consequences of knowing and willful false 
statements. On the 2015 e-QIP, he also certified that he had carefully read the 
foregoing instructions to complete the form. Pertinent instructions include to report 
information regardless of whether the record in the case has been sealed, expunged, or 
otherwise stricken from the record, or the charge was dismissed. In Section 22 of his 
2015 e-QIP he was asked, among other things, “Have you EVER been charged with an 
offense involving firearms or explosives?” He answered, “No.” However, he responded, 
“Yes,” and described his recently dismissed rape of a child charges in response to an 
earlier question asking about any arrests, charges, summonses, or convictions by a 
court during the past seven years.3 In Section 23.b of his 2007 e-QIP he was asked, 
“Have you ever been charged with or convicted of a firearms or explosives offense?” He 
also answered the question, “No.” Applicant did not otherwise disclose his 1995 charge 
and 1996 trial for illegal discharge of a firearm. (GE 1; GE 7.) 
 
 When asked about firearms offenses during his March 2016 OPM interview, 
Applicant initially answered, “No,” again, then said there were none except for the illegal 
discharge of a firearm offense in 1995. He went on to describe that incident and the 
subsequent police and court proceedings in some detail to the interviewer. He said that 
he had not listed the charge on his 2015 e-QIP because it was self-defense and the 
charge was dropped. In his Answer, Applicant denied that he was arrested by the police 
during this incident, or convicted of the firearms offense, for which he was taken to the 
police station, booked, and issued a citation. During his hearing and post-hearing 
submissions, he continued to debate the definition of, “arrest,” and asserted that he had 
not been formally arrested or read his rights, so he had not intended to misrepresent or 
falsify his e-QIP answers. Throughout the process, however, he has acknowledged that 
he was formally charged with illegal discharge of a firearm, and appeared in court to 
answer that charge. The drafter of the SOR used the language, “arrested . . . and 
charged,” and, “deliberately failed to disclose that you were arrested for a firearm.” 
However, the questions at issue were quoted in the SOR and neither contained the 
word, “arrest.” When he answered the e-QIP questions, “No,” he denied having been 
charged with, not having been arrested for, a firearms offense. (GE 1; GE 6; GE 7; AE 
A; Tr. 64-71.)    
 
 
                                            
2 This means that no final determination was reached and the charges could be retried at the 
prosecutor’s discretion. 
3 Applicant also insisted that he was not technically ‘arrested’ on these 2013 charges. (GE 6; Tr. 80.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 Applicant submitted letters from five coworkers, including his manager, and from 
seven friends and family members. They discussed their opinions and observations of 
his good character, reliability, integrity, and dedication. All of these people have known 
Applicant for many years and hold him in high regard. None of them commented on the 
specific allegations in the SOR. (AE B.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns 
and may be disqualifying. Two of those conditions were established, as discussed 
below: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s criminal charges in 1977, 1995, and 2013 involved driving offenses, 
illegal discharge of a firearm, and child rape/molestation incidents. The traffic, 
misdemeanor, and felony charges were dismissed by the courts in each case, but the 
underlying conduct casts continuing doubt on Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Legitimate security concerns under this guideline were raised by this 
evidence.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct that led to these criminal charges spanned the past 40 years, 
was intermittent, and arose in unrelated settings. Each incident involved circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur, but they all demonstrate poor judgment and immaturity. He 
continues to deny the wrongfulness of his conduct on each occasion, and failed to 
sufficiently demonstrate remorse or other evidence of rehabilitation, accountability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Significant mitigation of the criminal conduct 
concerns was not established. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant falsely answered, “No,” in response to the questions on his 2007 and 
2015 e-QIP security questionnaires that asked if he had ever been charged with a 
firearms offense. He acknowledges that he was charged in 1995 with illegal discharge 
of a firearm. He has alternatively attempted to justify his false answers by saying that he 
fired his pistol in self-defense, by saying the charge was later dropped, and by 
questioning whether his interaction with law enforcement officers at the scene and the 
police station technically constituted an arrest. The e-QIP questions did not mention the 
word, “arrest,” and made no exception based on subsequent dismissal by the court. 
This evidence establishes that Applicant intentionally concealed and omitted information 
concerning this firearms charge, and raises substantial security concerns under AG ¶ 
16(a).  
 
On multiple occasions, Applicant engaged in conduct with a neighbor girl who 
was in second grade that led, several years later when she finally reported it, to multiple 
felony charges for child rape and molestation. Although a hung jury did not convict him 
of these charges, and they were subsequently dismissed, the underlying conduct and 
his concealment of it, while holding a security clearance, clearly jeopardizes his 
personal, professional, and community standing. Security concerns under AG ¶ 16(e) 
were accordingly established.   
 
AG ¶ 17 includes four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s potentially disqualifying personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant did not provide, and the record does not otherwise contain, evidence 
that would support mitigation under any of the foregoing conditions. Applicant did not 
acknowledge his 1995 firearms charge until he was confronted during the 2016 OPM 
interview, and more recently attempted to justify his false answers on two e-QIP forms 
by quibbling about the definition of an arrest. His ongoing reluctance to discuss or 
answer questions concerning the child rape and molestation charges demonstrates his 
continuing vulnerability to manipulation or duress based on the underlying conduct. 
 
 
 
 
9 
Neither falsely denying the firearms charge on two e-QIP forms nor molestation of a 
young girl are minor offenses. His questionable actions on multiple occasions, and his 
subsequent attempts to deny or conceal them, generate continuing doubt about his 
judgment and trustworthiness. He neither acknowledged these issues nor demonstrated 
positive steps to reduce the likelihood of recurrent inappropriate behavior. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is sufficiently 
experienced to be accountable for his voluntary decisions and actions that led to the 
criminal charges and falsifications involved in this case. His sporadic episodes of bad 
judgment span 40 years, and he continues to deny or minimize the wrongfulness 
involved. A number of coworkers, friends, and family members expressed their general 
views of his good character, but there is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation or a track 
record of compliance with security-related and other legal obligations. The potential for 
pressure, exploitation, or duress remains significant.  
 
Overall, the evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s trustworthiness, 
judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for criminal conduct and 
personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
