 
1 
  
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01440 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisner, Esq. 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant had four unpaid 
judgments, two past-due mortgage accounts, eight collection accounts, and one charged-
off mortgage account, which totaled in excess of $212,000 in delinquent financial 
obligations. She has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 17, 2016, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations security 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
concerns. On August 8, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On May 25, 2017, the DoD issued an amendment to the 
SOR listing a $26,993 charged-off mortgage (SOR 1.o). The amended allegation was 
neither admitted nor denied.2 On May 16, 2017, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
scheduling a hearing for June 29, 2017. On June 21, 2017, a cancellation notice was 
issued cancelling that hearing. On February 7, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was issued for 
a hearing that was conducted on March 2, 2018. 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 
3. The exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant offered exhibits3 
A through F, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 12, 2018. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted, with explanation, the allegations in SOR paragraphs 1.b, 1.e, 
1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.l and 1.m. She was researching and disputing the collection debt alleged in 
SOR paragraph 1.h and neither admitted nor denied the allegation in paragraph SOR 1.o. 
She denied the remaining seven allegations in the June 17, 2016 SOR. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old senior electrical engineer working for a defense 
contractor since March 1995. She seeks to retain a security clearance. She has not 
served in the military. She received a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering. 
(Tr. 19) Her annual salary is $102,000. (Tr. 60) At one point, she owned the six real estate 
properties before experiencing financial problems. (Tr. 29) Starting in 2002, she 
purchased a home as her primary residence and, in the following years, purchased five 
                                                          
2 In Applicant’s testimony she explained what caused the delinquent obligation and testified as to the current 
status of that obligation. 
 
3 Applicant’s submissions were submitted as four sets of exhibits (Set A through Set D) with multiple 
documents contained within each set, which were also lettered. For clarity, Applicant’s titling of documents 
was retained. Additionally, Applicant’s documents were Bates stamped on all the pages starting with page 
Gr. 01.  
 
4 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
real estate investment properties. Two of the properties were “four-plexes,” which were 
four townhouses connected together in one unit. (Tr. 44) She is unsure as to the dates 
when she purchased each property. (Tr. 40) 
 
Following financial difficulties, Applicant now owns the home that is her primary 
residence, one multi-unit property, and two other single-family homes. (Tr. 46) All the 
properties, except her primary residence, are currently rented. Her mother lives in one of 
the homes and pays rent. (Tr. 41) Applicant has approximately $330,000 equity in the 
real estate she owns and has a positive income flow from all the rental units totaling 
$1,200 to $1,300 per month. (Tr. 48) 
 
Sometime between 2009 and 2012, Applicant began experiencing financial 
problems. (Tr. 22) Prior to her problems, she had good credit with a credit score was over 
700, somewhere in the mid-700s. (Tr. 22) As of February 7, 2018, her three credit scores 
were: 711, 674, and 708. (Ex. Set C, page Gr 705) Even though she had funds in her 
401(k) retirement plan, she did not use those funds because she thought she could handle 
her financial accounts. (Tr. 33) As of February 28, 2018, her 401(k) retirement account 
had a balance of $492,336. (Ex. E) She sought financial assistance from attorneys, 
financial advisors, the state’s attorney, the Federal Reserve, and the U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and her family members. (Tr. 34) 
 
The SOR lists four judgments against Applicant totaling more than $93,000. She 
was approximately $46,600 past due on two mortgages and had eight collection 
accounts, which totaled more than $45,000, plus a $26,993 charged-off mortgage. The 
judgment listed in SOR 1.a ($6,684) was the result of a delinquent credit card account. It 
was released the in May 2016. (Ex. A, SOR Response Ex. A) 
 
In May 2016, Applicant paid the judgment holder of the judgment listed in SOR 1.a 
($6,684) and the judgment was released. (Ex. A, Gr. 4-6) The judgment holder of the 
judgment listed in SOR 1.b ($25,160) accepted a settlement agreement for $10,500 
whereby Applicant was to make $250 monthly payments for 33 months starting in August 
2016 with the last payment in May 2019. (SOR Response Ex. B1) In September 2016, 
Applicant paid the delinquent obligation, and the judgment was released. (Ex. B, Gr. 7-9) 
The judgments listed in SOR 1.c ($37,855) and SOR 1.d ($25,160) were settled, 
compromised, and released in September 2015. (Ex. C) 
 
While Applicant was growing up, her father and uncle employed an investment 
strategy whereby they invested in real estate. Applicant decided investing in real estate 
was an important financial strategy. (Tr. 20) In 2002, at age 32, she purchased her first 
property for $190,000. (Tr. 21, 62) She still lives in that home and the current fair market 
value is $262,000. (Tr. 62) She purchased her second property in a city where her sister 
and mother live. She ultimately owned two single family homes and two multi-unit 
properties in that city. (Tr. 29, 41) One of the multi-units was foreclosed upon. (Tr. 45) 
The holder of a second mortgage on the foreclosed property requested Applicant pay the 
deficit on the second mortgage. The unit sold for a price sufficient to satisfy the primary 
                                                          
5 Applicant submitted  
 
4 
mortgage. (Tr. 45) A mortgage company obtained a judgment against her for the 
delinquent second mortgage, which has since been paid. (Tr. 46) 
Applicant has worked for the same company since 1995. After ten years with the 
company, her company transferred her to another state. (Tr. 42) After renting for four or 
five years while renting, she decided to purchase a townhouse. (Tr. 26) In August 2005, 
she purchased the townhouse for $191,920, with a 30-year mortgage with monthly 
payments of $1,291. A year after purchasing the property, she was reassigned to a work 
location in the state where she had originally worked. When she left the state, she leased 
the townhouse to renters. (Tr. 44) After the original lease ended she had no success in 
renting out the property at a price that would cover the mortgage payments on the 
property. (Tr. 27, 57)  
Applicant decided to sell the property. When the house did not sell for the asking 
price, Applicant considered a short sale. (Ex. Set A – Ex. 1 through Ex. E-3, Gr. Pages 
19 – 24) The mortgage balance had increased to $207,296 (SOR 1.e), which included 
approximately $36,600 past due on the mortgage. The past-due amount indicates she 
failed to make payments on the home for more than 28 months. In an attempted short 
sale, Applicant found a buyer willing to pay $169,900 for the property, but the offer was 
declined by the bank. The bank had set the approved price for a short sale at $190,000. 
(Ex. Set A – Ex. 2, Gr. Page 22) The townhouse went into foreclosure in 2010 and sold 
for $169,000. (Tr. 61)  
Following foreclosure the bank never sought reimbursement from Applicant to pay 
the deficiency. (Tr. 30) State law requires a mortgage holder to bring suit to collect on 
deficiencies following a foreclosure within two years. (Ex. F) The two year statute of 
limitations has passed without action by the lender. The deficiency following the 
foreclosure is no longer enforceable. (Ex. E-1 through E-3, Ex. F)  
In May 2004, Applicant purchased real estate (SOR 1.f) with a mortgage loan of 
$174,000 requiring monthly mortgage payments of $1,410. When her financial problems 
started, she became approximately $10,000 past due on the mortgage. The past-due 
amount indicates she failed to make payments on the property for at least 14 months. 
Foreclosure proceedings commenced, but in April 2013, Applicant was able to secure a 
home loan modification on the property. (Ex. Set A – Ex F, Gr. Pages 25 – 40)  
Under a second modification6, she was to pay $1,100 on her first mortgage, $300 
on her second mortgage, and escrow fees. (Tr. 35) Each month she made payments of 
$1,597. (Tr. 35, Ex. Set B, Gr. Pages 62 – 64) The mortgage was sold to a different 
company, and she made payments on the property for two years. (Tr. 38) After two years, 
she was informed by the holder of the second mortgage that she had not made any 
payments on the second mortgage and was $26,993 past due (SOR 1.o) on the loan. (Tr. 
49) There is no evidence as to why the holder of the second mortgage failed to contact 
Applicant about nonpayment when payments where not initially received. 
                                                          
6 This is a separate loan modification for one of the four-plex properties she owned.  (Tr. 35) It is not the 
mortgage loan modification for the mortgage listed in SOR 1.f. 
 
5 
Applicant said she was naïve and new to the loan modification process. (Tr. 50) 
She had assumed some of her monthly payments had been applied to her second 
mortgage since making the loan modification. On September 30, 2015, the current holder 
of the second mortgage stated in a letter that they would review her account and would 
inform her of the results of a review her account. (Ex. Set B, Gr. Page 68) The record 
contains no additional correspondence from the holder of the second mortgage. In April 
2017, the second mortgage was charged off. (Ex. Set B, Gr. Page 67) Since disputing the 
note, she has not received any communication from the company. The company has not 
filed for a judgment against her and the debt does not appear on her credit report. (Tr. 
51) 
 
Applicant asserted she received IRS1099-C, Cancellation of Debt, forms regarding 
the cancellation of debt on the foreclosed property. (Tr. 53) She stated she provided her 
attorney with the forms and believes the amount of the cancelled or forgiven debt was 
added as income on her tax returns. (Tr. 54) She is current on her $400 per month 
payments on her 2014 vehicle. (Tr. 60) Applicant had been past due on the mortgage for 
her current home prior to the loan modification. She is now current on the mortgage of 
her primary residence. (Ex. Set B pages Gr. 62 – 64)  
 
Applicant followed her financial advisor’s advice by addressing the larger debts 
first. This resulted in smaller accounts becoming delinquent. (Tr. 52) The bank attempting 
to collect an $11,661 debt (SOR 1.g) agreed to settle the debt for $5,000. In November 
2016, Applicant paid the $5,000. (Ex. G, Gr. 42 – 44) Applicant had a $1,775 collection 
account (SOR 1.h) with a department store. She asserts the account was closed, which 
prevented her from paying or settling the delinquent account. She therefore decided to 
donate $260 to charity. (Tr. 23, Ex. Set A – Ex. H, page Gr. 45-47) She asserts the $3,733 
mortgage debt listed in SOR 1.i was included in the SOR 1.c and SOR 1.d judgments 
obtained by the same creditor.  
 
A collection agency was attempting to collect a $15,295 credit card delinquent 
obligation (SOR 1.j) Applicant submitted a letter from the collection agency stating they 
would no longer be attempting to collect the debt. (Ex. I, Gr. 49) The letter does not state 
the debt has been paid or forgiven. It only stated that particular collection agency would 
no longer be involved in attempting to collect the debt. 
 
 The collection agency attempting to collect a $3,344 delinquent obligation (SOR 
1.l) offered to settle the debt for $1,672, which was half of the amount owed. (Ex. J, Gr. 
51) In December 2016, Applicant paid the amount requested. The collection agency 
attempting to collect a $2,425 delinquent bank obligation (SOR 1.m) offered to settle the 
debt for $1,092, which was less than half of the amount owed. (Ex. K, Gr. 55) In December 
2016, Applicant paid the amount requested. She paid the $86 medical collection account 
(SOR 1. n) in May 2016. 
When investing in real estate, Applicant has learned whatever the amount of her 
reserve funds, she need to double that amount. (Tr. 34) She has a reserve of $5,000 in 
savings. (Tr. 56)  
 
6 
Applicant submitted four character reference letters. (Ex. Set D, Gr. 72 – 75) A 
colleague of 20 years states Applicant is remarkably selfless, often helping others in need. 
She states Applicant is discrete, conscientious, dependable, has a high sense of morals, 
and one who gives open and frank feedback. A close friend says Applicant is respectful, 
reliable, trustworthy, dedicated, pragmatic, and a clear-headed counselor. A co-worker 
says Applicant is motivated, moral, ethical, and has a work ethic she admires. A doctor 
and close friend, who has known Applicant since the 9th grade, states Applicant is a 
mentor, is dependable, responsible, candid, selfless, supportive, and consistent. (Ex. D 
Set, Gr. 72-75) 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
7 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. Applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
Security concerns are established under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) because Applicant 
had a four unpaid judgments, eight collection accounts, was past due on mortgage 
accounts, and one charged-off delinquent account, which totaled in excess of $212,000. 
The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ E3.1.15) 
 
 Four of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
 
8 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control, and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve the debts. 
 
 Applicant paid or settled and paid on terms acceptable to her creditors for the four 
judgements. She settled and paid five of the delinquent collection accounts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to the debts paid or settled and paid. One department store collection account 
had been closed, which prevented her from settling the debt. She therefore made a $260 
payment to a charity in a demonstration of her willingness to pay the obligation. One of 
the eight collection accounts was owed to the creditor of the judgments listed in SOR 1.c 
and SOR 1.d. The collection agency attempting to collect the remaining collection account 
is no longer attempting to collect the debt. This does not mean this debt has been paid, 
forgiven, or that some other collection agency will not attempt to collect this $15,295 
delinquent obligation.  
 
 Applicant is current on the mortgage on her primary residence. More than two 
years has passed since the foreclosure on real estate owned by Applicant. Regarding 
that foreclosure, the past-due mortgage deficiency ($36,593) is no longer enforceable. 
Because of changes in financial markets outside of her control, she was unable to find a 
tenant that would pay sufficient rent to cover the mortgage. She tried a short sale on the 
home, but the bank refused to accept the amount being offered by the potential buyers. 
Applicant had located. The house went to foreclosure. When Applicant purchased the 
townhouse, her credit was good and it was not unreasonable for her to purchase a home 
where she was working. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) apply. 
 
Applicant sought assistance from attorneys, a financial advisor, the state’s 
attorney, the Federal Reserve, and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, and family members as to how to best address her financial difficulties. 7 
Since resolving most of her financial difficulties, her credit scores have returned to 711, 
674, and 708. She has approximately $330,000 equity in the real estate she owns and 
has a positive income flow from her remaining rental units totaling $1,200 to $1,300 per 
                                                          
7Both Applicant’s father and uncle each had a couple of properties that were lost to foreclosure. (Tr. 55) 
 
9 
month. She has almost $500,000 in her 401(k) retirement plan. It appears her financial 
problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
An Applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously, but she is required to act responsibly given her 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan to address her delinquent obligations, 
accompanied by evidence of a serious intent to effectuate the plan. This she has done. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. An administrative judge must evaluate 
an Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in the whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
previously addressed, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant embarked on a 
plan for financial security through real estate investment. She purchased six properties 
and when the market no longer supported renters willing to pay sufficient amounts to 
cover the mortgages, two of the properties were lost through foreclosure. She has learned 
from this that she needs to have a larger reserve to cover those times when rent fails to 
cover the mortgage payments. She will be more cautious in the future about real estate 
investment. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts are paid—it is whether her 
financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. See 
AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(b). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Accordingly, I conclude that it is 
 
10 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue her eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Financial Considerations Security Concern:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
