                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )       ISCR  Case No.  16-03658          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On February 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect when the SOR was issued would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 2, 2017, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on February 8, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on April 17,
2018. The Government’s case consisted of seven exhibits (GEs 1-7). Applicant relied on 
one witness (himself) and 10 exhibits. (AEs A-J) The transcript was received on May 4, 
2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with copies of (a) his revised loan
application, updates on the progress of his application, and the latest complaint he filed
against his lender. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement
the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with copies of (a)
docket sheets covering the history of his first and second complaints filed against his
lender, (b) his revised loan modification application of January 2018, and (c) his most
recently filed complaint against his lender. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without
objection as AEs K-M. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated delinquent mortgage and
consumer debts exceeding $520,000. Allegedly, Applicant’s delinquent debts remain
unresolved and outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the alleged delinquent debts
in the SOR with explanations. He claimed the SOR debts covered by ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are
included in his revised loan modification of January 2018, remain in dispute, and are
covered in his pending federal law suit. He further claimed that due to his wife’s
experiencing serious business losses attributable to the 2008 recession, he applied for a
loan modification with his mortgage lender, only to be told that he needed to cease
making monthly payments, so as to facilitate his creating a delinquent balance. Applicant
claimed that he followed his lender’s advice and ceased making monthly mortgage
payments, beginning in May 2009. He further claimed that he continued to withhold
payments on his mortgage secured loan while he unsuccessfully pursued loan
modification approvals with the lender. He claimed to have filed a second lawsuit in state
2
court (this one against the loan assignee referenced in SOR ¶ 1.c) to enable the lender to
modify his loan. 
Addressing SOR debt ¶ 1.b, Applicant denied the allegations and claimed that the
alleged debt is barred by his state’s statute of limitations and no longer appears in any of
his credit reports. He further claimed that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c were
originated by SOR creditor 1.b, who committed fraud against him. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 55-year-old manager of a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR were not admitted by Applicant and are
reserved for fact-finding based on the developed evidence at hearing. 
Background
Applicant married in September 2004 and has one adult stepchild from this
marriage. (GE 1) He earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical and computer engineering in
June 1985. (GEs 1 and 6) He reported no military service.
Since June 2012, Applicant has worked for his current defense contractor. (GEs 1-
2) Between April 1987 and April 2012, he was employed by a laboratory operated by the
Department of Energy (DoE). (GEs 1 and 6) Applicant’s wife, a music educator, opened
her business in 2005. (Tr. 65, 77-78)
Applicant’s finances
In July 2004, Applicant purchased a home for about $1.2 million and financed the
purchase with a 90-10 loan package that consisted of a  first mortgage with SOR creditor
1.c ($958,400) and a purchase money mortgage to cover the required 10% down
payment on the home with SOR creditor 1.a ($120,829). (GEs 2-5 and 7 and AEs B-C
and M; Tr. 42-43, 57-58) The interest rate agreed to by Applicant on the promissory note
and first trust deed was an adjustable rate of $4.8% for five years after which the rate
would be adjusted upwards by 2.5%. (AE M) At the time of his purchase, Applicant was
netting a little over $80,000 a year and reported a net worth of $23,000, but still claimed
he could afford the combined mortgage payments of $4,300 a month ($51,600 annually)
on the two mortgages. (Tr. 57-58, 79) 
With over 60 per cent of his annual income committed to his mortgages, Applicant 
left little margin for covering his other expenses with his home financing and willingly
assumed the heavy mortgage debts with the hope of gaining asset value with expected
appreciation of the property. (Tr. 79-81) From the beginning, he relied on high-risk
financing instruments that with his limited resources left him acutely vulnerable to major
shifts in market conditions. 
3
Shortly after their purchase, Applicant’s current wife sold her townhouse for about
$470,000, making a profit of around $200,000 on the sale. (Tr. 75) She and Applicant
used $100,000 of the sale proceeds to buy expensive furniture for their home. (Tr. 61-
62,75-76) 
Beginning in January 2009, Applicant experienced financial hardships when his
wife’s business incurred business losses attributable to the widespread economic
downturn. (GE 6; Tr. 77-78) Her income losses impacted Applicant’s finances.
Compounding his financial problems was the loss of his mother and related anxiety
associated over both his mother’s loss and employment termination. (GE 6; Tr. 82-83) 
Despite their losses, Applicant and his wife continued to make payments on their
mortgages in the face of rising interest rates on the strength of Applicant’s income. (Tr.
79-80) While they continue to reside in the home, they have made no payments since
2009. (Tr. 67-68) 
In an effort to reduce the interest rates on their first mortgage, Applicant and his
wife applied for a loan modification on their first mortgage in early 2009. (AE D; Tr. 66-69)
Before making their application, they were told by a lender representative to cease
making their monthly mortgage payments during the application process until they receive
their modification approval. 
By letter of July 3, 2009, the first lender acknowledged Applicant’s loan
modification application and laid out steps to follow in the process. The lender cautioned
Applicant that while his loan modification application was pending, he would continue to
receive collection letters or notices, which could include notice of foreclosure
commencement. (AE D) Eventually, the lender then holding Applicant’s first denied
Applicant’s loan modification request. In 2014, Applicant’s first mortgagee assigned its
loan to SOR creditor 1.c. (GE 3)  SOR creditor 1.c has continued to decline Applicant’s
loan modification requests and has yet to affirmatively approve Applicant’s latest request .
(AE D)
Between 2009 and 2018, Applicant continued to withhold due mortgage payments
from both his first and second mortgagees. (Tr. 67-68, 72) Aggregate delinquent
mortgage payments due the first mortgagee (SOR creditor 1.c) exceed $450,000.
On the advice of counsel, Applicant filed suit in federal court in July 2013, seeking
damages for fraud and other acts of wrongdoing against the first lender, in addition to
asking for injunctive relief. (AE E) Records confirm that this complaint was dismissed in
2016 on jurisdictional grounds. (GE 6 and AE F; Tr. 45) 
Credit reports confirm that Applicant’s first mortgage holder sold and assigned its 
first mortgage-backed loan to Applicant’s current first mortgagee in November 2015.
(SOR creditor 1.c in 2014. (GE 3 and AE M)) Shortly thereafter, SOR creditor 1.c issued a
notice of default and election to sell under deed of trust to Applicant. (AE M) Records do
4
not reflect whether creditor 1.c ever followed through with its non-judicial foreclosure
election. 
In November 2016, Applicant filed a complaint against SOR creditor 1.c in state
court for fraud, state statutory violations, and negligence, in addition to seeking injunctive
relief. (AE F) Docket records for this case confirm that Applicant removed the case to
federal court in December 2016. Proceedings in federal court on Applicant’s complaint
were centered on SOR creditor’s motion to dismiss throughout 2017. (AE L) Applicant’s
case was dismissed by the court on September 22, 2017, and judgment was entered by
the court on the same day. Whether the judgment was entered with prejudice to Applicant
is not clear from the docket sheet. (AE L)  
Applicant formally reapplied for loan modification relief with creditor 1.c in January
2018. (AE K) In his loan application, Applicant listed gross monthly income of $16,666
and no current residence-related expenses. (AE K) While he noted his first and second
monthly mortgage payments due, he was not paying these expenses out-of-pocket, and
accordingly, left the space for listing total debt expenses blank. (AE K) Under questioning
from Department Counsel at hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he has neither paid
nor escrowed monthly payments due on both of his mortgages since he ceased paying on
them in 2009. (Tr. 68-69) By saving over $4,000 a month from withholding his mortgage
payments for the past eight and one-half years without escrowing, Applicant has saved
over $400,000 that he has been able to apply to his wife’s business and other needs. (Tr.
68-70) 
By letter of February 1, 2018, the assignee of Applicant’s first trust deed holder
(SOR creditor 1.c) notified Applicant of its denial of Applicant’s application for loan
modification relief. (AE M)  Following up on Applicant’s request for explanations for its
loan modification denial, SOR creditor 1.c advised Applicant’s attorney that their denial of
a standard loan modification for Applicant was due to insufficient payment reduction. (AE
M) Creditor 1.c, in turn, offered Applicant three options: reinstatement upon returning the
account to current status; deed-in-lieu of foreclosure; and pre-foreclosure sale/short sale.
(AE M) Applicant provided no documentary evidence of his acceptance of any of these
furnished options, or of any error in the lender’s calculations.
In April 2018, Applicant filed a new complaint against SOR creditor 1.c in state
court seeking damages for fraud, negligence, and statutory violations, in addition to
seeking an historical accounting. Docket records confirm that this latest suit remains
pending with no projections of outcome.
Besides Applicant’s first mortgage debt with SOR creditor 1.c, he has an
outstanding second mortgage with SOR creditor 1.a in default and unresolved. He has
made no payments on this loan since 2009 and currently owes over $120,000 on this
purchase money loan. (GEs 3-4) Although the debt no longer appears on Applicant’s
credit reports (AEs G-J) and is the result of a non-recourse loan, now dead for lack of
equity according to Applicant’s information received from SOR creditor 1.a, it remains
5
delinquent behind the first mortgagee’s interest and unresolved. (GEs 2-3 and 6; Tr. 40-
43, 72-74)  
By Applicant’s estimates, his property is worth in excess of $1.335 million and on
paper is quite likely to support the satisfaction of both his first and second mortgage debts
should either creditor elect to foreclose. (GEs 2-7 and AE M; Tr. 103) Whether charged
off for statute of limitations reasons, for the lack of projected security interest in the
property, or for other technical reasons not involving payment, the debt remains
outstanding and a legal obligation (past or present) that Applicant has declined to address
since 2009. Notwithstanding his withholding monthly payments on this debt, he continues
to live in the house while saving over $50,000 in annual payments on this purchase
money mortgage. 
Applicant has a third debt listed in the SOR (SOR debt ¶ 1.b) that he has failed to
address to date. This debt is a credit card debt with the same lender  that initially financed
Applicant’s home purchase with a first mortgage. This admitted debt remains outstanding
and unresolved.
Applicant currently earns $200,000 a year as a base salary, with an annual 20 per
cent bonus of $40,000, for a total annual compensation of $240,000. (AE K). It is unclear
what additional income his wife earns.
Character references
Applicant is well-regarded by his facility clearance officer (FSO) (AE A) His FSO
who works daily with Applicant credited him with service as his employer’s assistant FSO.
She expressed understanding of the legal issues related to Applicant’s loan modifications
regarding the mortgages on his residence and the legal steps he has taken to address his
mortgages. (AE A) She characterized Applicant as trustworthy and a person who would
recommend for a position of trust and confidence. 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
6
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
7
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of two delinquent
mortgage debts exceeding $520,000 in the aggregate and a credit card debt
approximating $11,972. Applicant’s two mortgage debts relate to a defaulted first
mortgage listed in his credit reports as a past-due $978,400 debt and a charged-off
second mortgage debt totaling $120,829. His first mortgage is the subject of a series of
complaints brought in state and federal courts over denied loan modification, the last of
which remains pending.
Financial Concerns
      Applicant’s failure to address his two mortgage loans (SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c)
over a nine-year period while he pursues loan modification relief on his first mortgage
and his lack of payment initiatives taken with respect to his consumer debt (SOR debt ¶
1.b) warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts
regardless of the ability to do so”; and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
8
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Historically, the addressing of delinquent debts are critical to an assessment of
an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment in following rules and
guidelines necessary for those seeking access to classified information or to holding a
sensitive position. Applicant’s cited extenuating circumstances (i.e., medical issues
requiring his time commitments for caring for his mother, his wife’s erosion of income
during the economic downturn that impacted her business in 2008-2010, and his
mortgagee’s failure to approve his loan modification request) provide some mitigation
credit for his initial withholding of mortgage payments on both mortgages. Based on his
cited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” has some application to
Applicant’s situation.
However, Applicant has continued to withhold mortgage payments from both
mortgagees for over nine years without escrowing any of the withheld mortgage
payments, saving over $400,000 in the process while continuing to reside in the house
and benefit from increased appreciation in the property. Offered options by SOR
creditor 1.c to Applicant following the creditor’s denial of Applicant’s application for loan
modification in January 2018 were never accepted by Applicant. 
Rather, Applicant opted to file suit against the assigned loan service creditor for
fraud and other relief. Based on Applicant’s cited circumstances and steps he has taken
to date to avoid payments to SOR creditors 1.a and 1.c over an extended period, the
“acting responsibly” prong of  MC ¶ 20(b) has only limited application and cannot
excuse his past failures to pay on his mortgages while he continues to litigate his claims
against creditor 1.c and avoid addressing his SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b debts.
Applicant’s failure or inability to furnish persuasive evidence of his addressing all
three of his listed SOR debts while litigating his claimed wrongful withholding of loan
modification relief by SOR creditor 1.c prevents him from demonstrating a good track
record of maintaining his payment obligations with his listed creditors and fully availing
himself of the  benefits of MC ¶ 20(b)  See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd.
Dec. 26, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR
Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). For similar reasons, MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” is not available to mitigate any his accumulated delinquent
debts.
9
Whether Applicant is entitled to the full mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 20(e), “the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt[s] which
is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue,” is still unclear at this
time. That Applicant’s listed debts no longer appear on his credit reports debts  are not
dispositive of a successful or even reasonable dispute of the debts. For as a general
rule, debts may be dropped from a credit report when creditors believe the debt is not
going to be paid, a creditor fails to timely respond to a credit reporting company’s
request for information, or when the debt has been charged off. 
Mere evidence that debts no longer appear on credit reports is not reason to
believe that they are not legitimate or that they have been satisfactorily resolved.” ISCR
Case No. 16-02941 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017)(citing ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015).  Under this analysis, neither his disputes with SOR creditor
1.c or creditor 1.b ( a creditor whose listed consumer debt has not been addressed) can
be mitigated.
Applicant’s previous complaints against creditor 1.c and its predecessor were
dismissed, and his most recent suit was only recently filed in April 2018 has not had the
time to permit the substantive legal issues raised by Applicant in his complaint to be
fully aired and resolved. Based on the legal issues raised by Applicant to date, it is
premature to ascertain whether his dispute with creditor 1.c and its predecessor have a
reasonable basis to dispute.  Keeping in mind that Applicant has the ultimate burden of
establishing the applicability of a mitigating condition, Applicant by his produced
evidence has not met that burden. See ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec.
19, 2002)
Turning to the security issues related to creditor 1.a’s purchase money mortgage,
Applicant’s second mortgage is a non-recourse loan that limits the creditor’s recovery
option to the security only in the event of a foreclosure under his state’s anti-deficiency
law. See CCP § 580b. This does not mean that Applicant may simply refuse to make his
monthly payments under the loan’s terms in the expectation of a first mortgagee
foreclosure that leaves the second mortgagee’s interest sold out and satisfy his good-
faith responsibilities as a borrower. While SOR debt ¶ 1.a might be barred by his state’s
statute of limitations, taking advantage of an enforcement bar due to the passage of
time can not be equated with the establishment of a strong track record of payments.
See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010). 
Moreover, the rising value of his property (now estimated to be worth $1.35
million) makes it increasingly likely that in the event of a foreclosure sale there will be
enough equity in the property to cover the loan balances of both creditor 1.c and
creditor 1.a. At the very least, it is premature to conclude that Applicant’s purchase
money lender has no interest in the property. At this point at least, Applicant has not
10
made the case that SOR creditor 1.a’s interest in Applicant’s real estate has no equity
value.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely filing of tax
returns. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  In Applicant’s case,
his failure to make more concerted efforts to satisfy or resolve any of his three listed
SOR debts are not enough to warrant favorable findings and conclusions with respect to
raised security concerns. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his mortgage-backed debts and consumer debt to
warrant favorable whole-person assessment. Applicant’s general contributions to the
U.S. defense effort through his work with his current defense contractor and his work in
general in the defense industry merit considerable respect and appreciation. His
positive credits are insufficient, though, to surmount historical trust and judgment issues
associated with his failure to maintain a better tack record with his mortgage and
consumer debts.
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances reflect too little
evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable
doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information
or occupy a sensitive position. See AG ¶ 18. 
Conclusions are warranted that his  finances are insufficiently stabilized at this
time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶
1.a-1.c. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this
case is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                Against Applicant
 
11
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
12
  
  
13
14
