 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03638 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by her history of financial problems and the 
intentional falsification of her security clearance application. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for 
a determination whether to revoke her security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on June 12, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective June 8, 2017.   
 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on June 18, 2018.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.l because the 
allegations are duplicative of SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.f. The motion was granted without 
objection from the Applicant.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor since 
June 2017. She was previously granted a security clearance in 2007, in connection with 
a previous period of employment with another federal contracting company. She held 
access to classified information for approximately five years. She completed her most 
recent security clearance application in May 2017. She did not disclose any derogatory 
financial information. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant has a history of 
financial problems dating to the early 2000s, including at least eight collection accounts 
and one vehicle repossession. The SOR also alleges that the Applicant is indebted to 
nine creditors for approximately $12,100, and that she filed for and received Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in 2005. The largest debt, SOR ¶ 1.i ($7,311), is for a December 
2014 vehicle repossession.3 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in around 1999 when her husband was 
diagnosed with a serious illness. Although they had insurance, the couple was 
responsible for almost $50,000 in medical expenses. In 2000, Applicant’s husband 
returned to work, but lost his job shortly thereafter. He previously earned $25 per hour 
and could not find a job earning the same pay. He remained unemployed for a year. At 
the time, Applicant earned $12 per hour. Their annual household income decreased 
from approximately $72,000 annually to less than $25,000, which was not enough to 
support the family of five. In 2005, taking the advice of an attorney, Applicant and her 
husband filed for bankruptcy protection in September 2005. Their petition was 
successfully discharged in December 2005.4 
 
 After the bankruptcy, Applicant’s finances remained stable for approximately six 
months, until her husband lost his job. Both Applicant and her husband have sporadic 
employment histories. Between 2004 and 2017, Applicant has held 11 jobs and 
experienced 6 periods of unemployment, the longest of which lasted from May 2004 to 
March 2008. Her most recent period of unemployment, almost two months, preceded 
                                                          
2 Tr. 8. 
 
3 Tr. 17; GE 1-4.  
 
4 Tr. 17-20, 33.  
 
3 
 
her current job. In the last 13 years, Applicant’s husband has held at least 20 different 
jobs and has experienced at least 10 periods of unemployment.5  
 
 When Applicant completed her May 2017 security clearance application, she did 
not list any derogatory financial information in response to Section 26: Financial 
Records. She interpreted the questions as seeking information about liens against 
property.6 Because she does not own any property, she did not believe the questions 
applied to her situation and skipped the next set of questions regarding delinquencies 
involving routine accounts, which sought information about automobile repossessions 
and collection accounts.7 At hearing, Applicant testified that she did not intend to falsify 
her security clearance application.8 
 
After the subject interview in August 2017, Applicant contacted her creditors to 
establish payment plans and made arrangements for SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, and 1.h. She did 
not contact her largest creditor regarding the vehicle repossession (SOR ¶ 1.i) because 
the loan servicer went out of business and she did not know how to contact the lender 
directly. Applicant did not make payment arrangements for the medical accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.f, because the creditor informed her the accounts had 
been charged off, causing Applicant to believe that she no longer owed the outstanding 
balances. Applicant paid $142.50 toward SOR ¶ 1.g, a utility account, and made one 
$25 payment to SOR ¶ 1.c, a satellite television service. However in December 2017, 
her husband lost his job, reducing the household income from $80,000 to $40,000. In 
April 2018, one of Applicant’s adult children moved back home. As of the hearing, 
Applicant’s husband remained unemployed.9  
 
Applicant is very involved in her church community. She is a ministry leader and 
considered by her fellow congregants to be of good character. Her supervisor believes 
that Applicant is a model employee who is honest and trustworthy.10 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 21-23. 
 
6 Section 26 Financial Record is comprised of six questions covering gambling, taxes, issues with an 
employer travel or credit card, assistance for financial difficulties, delinquency involving enforcement, and 
delinquency involving routine accounts. In pertinent part, the questions involving delinquency involving 
enforcement asks applicants, “in the past seven (7) years, [have] you had a lien placed against your 
property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?”  
 
7In pertinent part, Section 26: Financial Records: Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts asks, “Other 
than previously listed, have any of the following happened? . . . In the past seven years, you had any 
possession or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? …[Y]ou had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency?” 
 
8 Tr. 30, 35.  
 
9 Tr. 26-28, 31-36; Answer. 
 
10 AE A- D.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”11 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.12 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,13 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make her 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.14 The record supports a finding that Applicant 
has a history of financial problems resulting in a 2005 bankruptcy and delinquent debts 
that she is unable to repay.15  
 
Applicant receives partial mitigation because the circumstances that caused her 
financial problems were beyond her control. The resulting delinquent debts are not 
indicative of lavish spending, reckless, or irresponsible behavior. Between 2005 and 
2017, Applicant and her husband have experienced sporadic employment with multiple 
periods of unemployment. However, Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. And 
although she is willing, Applicant does not have the means to address her delinquent 
debts at this time.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s lack of candor or dishonesty raises questions about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and his ability to protect classified information. Of special interest in any 
adjudication is an applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process.16 The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally failed to 
disclose derogatory financial information on her May 2017 security clearance 
application. Specifically, Applicant failed to disclose information about any of her 
delinquent accounts, including a vehicle repossession in response to Section 26: 
Financial Record. The record supports a finding that Applicant intentionally falsified her 
security clearance application.17 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
13 See  Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
14 See  ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
15 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
16 AG ¶ 15. 
 
17 AG ¶16(b). 
 
6 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
misunderstood the question. Applicant claims that the omission was based on a 
misunderstanding of the question. However, Applicant is a prior clearance holder and 
has completed a security clearance application in the past. She should have known the 
importance of providing full and complete answers to each question on the application 
and taken care to do so. Furthermore, the language of the question is clear on its face. 
A reasonable person with Applicant’s history of financial problems, reading the same 
question, would have understood that applicable delinquent accounts should have been 
disclosed.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s security worthiness. In reaching 
this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d) Ultimately, 
Applicant failed to meet her burdens of production and persuasion. Because the 
security concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan18 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i, 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
18 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
