 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00853 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 25, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 4, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) originally issued a notice of hearing on 
August 21, 2017, scheduling the hearing for September 25, 2017. The hearing was 
initially convened as scheduled, but it became abundantly clear that Applicant had little 
idea as to what his hearing encompassed. (Transcript (TR) #2 at page 4 line 19 to page 
6 line 7.) As a result, the hearing was continued until November 20, 2017. (TR.) The 
Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented two documents, which I marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B, and received into evidence. The record was left 
open until February 23, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. On February 22, 
2018, Applicant presented an additional document, which I marked as AppX C, and 
received into evidence. DOHA received TR #2 on December 5, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 65 years old. His wife passed away in 2012. (GX 1 at page 5 and AppX 
B.) He attributes his past-due indebtedness to losing his will to live with the passing of his 
wife. (TR at page 15 line 16 to page 17 line 10.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
1.a. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor A for a past-due store debt in 
the amount of about $7,585. (TR at page 18 line 12 to page 19 line 2.) Despite having 
been given three months to address this substantial debt, Applicant has submitted nothing 
in this regard. This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
1.b. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor B for a past-due credit card 
debt in the amount of about $5,040. (TR at page 19 lines 3~19.) Applicant has made 
intermittent $10~$25 payments towards this debt from June of 2016 until September of 
2017, but has submitted nothing more current in this regard. (AppX C at page 5.) This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
1.c. Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor C for a past-due automobile 
loan  in the amount of about $4,572. (TR at page 17 line 16 to page 18 line 11.) Despite 
having been given three months to address this substantial debt, Applicant has submitted 
nothing in this regard. This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
1.d. and 1.g. These are one and the same past-due debt to Creditor D in the 
amount of $114. (TR at page 19 lines 20~25.) Despite having been given three months 
to address this admitted debt, Applicant has submitted nothing in this regard. These 
allegations are found against Applicant. 
 
1.e. Applicant has paid this admitted past-due phone debt, as evidenced by 
documentation from Creditor E. (TR at page 20 lines 14~20, and AppX C at page 2.)  This 
allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
1.f. Applicant has paid this admitted past-due gasoline debt, as evidenced by 
documentation from Creditor F. (TR at page 20 lines 2~11, and AppX C at page 4.) This 
allegation is also found for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 2.a. At his hearing, Applicant’s admitted that he falsified his December 2015 
Security Clearance Applicant when he answered “No” to two questions under Section 26 
– Financial Record Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts. (TR at page 21 line 12 
to page 22 line 10, and GX 1 at page 23.) This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
  
 A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any determination under this order 
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall 
 
4 
 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports (GXs 3~5), establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
None of these mitigating conditions have been established. Although Applicant had 
attributed his past-due indebtedness to his wife’s passing, his financial problems are not 
under control.  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the 
SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d., and 1.g. against Applicant. As 
stated, SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f. are found for Applicant. 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his SCA, the following 
disqualifying condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted falsifying his SCA. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 
6 
 
 The personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by 
any of the following potentially applicable factors in AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, none of them apply. 
Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification or 
concealment. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-advised in completing 
his SCA. Falsifying information is a serious offense and Applicant has not shown that 
similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, he failed to take responsibility for 
his actions. He has not provided sufficient information in this record to demonstrate that 
he has met his burden of proof to mitigate the concern under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA, 
and he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. ~ 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e. and 1.f.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
