 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03973 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his foreign family members. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 18, 2017. 
On December 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. Applicant answered the 
SOR on February 13, 2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
I was assigned to the case on May 14, 2018. On May 15, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
June 12, 2018, and I issued an order to both parties to produce their documentary 
evidence by June 1, 2018. Department Counsel submitted her documentation as 
requested, and Applicant did not submit documentation. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and 
B, were admitted without objection. Applicant also testified. I received the completed 
transcript (Tr.) on June 20, 2018, and the record closed. 
 
 
 
 
 
2
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Ethiopia. Those facts are set forth 
in the Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Ethiopia, marked as GE 3. 
These documents are included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are limited 
to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. Those 
facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 49 years old, and he was born in Ethiopia. In 1990, he fled the 
communists in Ethiopia and entered the United States. (Tr. 19) He was naturalized in 
1996. Applicant received his associate’s degree in 2002. (Tr. 11) He has been 
unemployed since March. He is sponsored by a defense contractor and requires a 
clearance for this position. This is his first security clearance application. (Tr. 9) 
 
Applicant has married three times in Ethiopia to Ethiopian citizens. He married his 
first wife in 1990, and they divorced in 2001. He married his second wife in 2005, and 
they had a son in 2006. His second wife and son moved to the U.S. in 2008, and they 
subsequently divorced in 2014. (Tr. 22-23) Applicant has been married to his third wife 
since June 2015, and they have two children who are four and six. His third wife is an 
Ethiopian citizen and resident. Their children are citizens of the United States, but have 
resided their entire lives in Ethiopia. (Tr. 40) 
 
Applicant returned to Ethiopia in July 2003 to take care of his mother.1 Between 
July 2003 and October 2016, Applicant worked as an administrator at an Ethiopian 
hospital. (GE 2 at 2) He lived in the United States from October 2016 until March 2017, 
and was unemployed during this period. In March 2017, Applicant returned to Ethiopia 
and lived with his wife, children, and mother until March 2018, when he returned to the 
United States due to the security clearance process. He worked at an Ethiopian hospital 
between March 2017 and March 2018. He has been unemployed since March 2018. (Tr. 
11-13, 21, 34-36) 
 
 Applicant is in the process of relocating his wife and children to the United States. 
In October 2016, he applied for I-130 status with U.S. Immigration. At the hearing, 
Applicant submitted documentation demonstrating his wife’s visa application was 
approved in May 2018. She is waiting for an interview in Ethiopia before she can move to 
the United States. They communicate every other day via phone applications. (Tr. 16-18, 
36-38; AE A; AE B).  
 
 Applicant’s mother is a green card holder, but returned to Ethiopia in 2003 due to 
her advancing age. He communicates with her monthly. His wife and children reside with 
her and they are all supported financially by his sister. (Tr. 20-21, 30, 36) His sister and 
                                            
1 Applicant’s mother lived in the United States from 1992 until 2003. (Tr. 38) 
 
 
 
 
3
her family live in United States, he currently lives with them, and they have been 
financially supporting him since approximately October 2016. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant’s two brothers are citizens of the United States. One of his brothers is a 
physician who works and resides in Ethiopia between three to six months each year. 2 
This brother also provides financial support to Applicant, their mother, and Applicant’s 
wife and children. (Tr. 31) Applicant’s wife’s parents and six siblings are all citizens and 
residents of Ethiopia. He communicates with his parents-in-law every three months. (Tr. 
25-27, 37, 39-40)  
 
 None of Applicant’s family members are associated with the Ethiopian government 
or military. (Tr. 27-28) He has no financial assets, including a bank account, in the United 
States or Ethiopia. He does not provide child support to his son who resides in the United 
States. (Tr. 28, 32, 39)  
 
Ethiopia 
 
Ethiopia is a federal republic located in the Horn of Africa. It is predominantly an 
agricultural economy and remains largely impoverished. The government is engaged in 
fighting against terrorist groups, including al-Shabaab, in Somalia and within its borders.  
Al-Shabaab has vowed to carry out attacks in Ethiopia, and two hotel explosions in 2017 
have raised concerns about future violence. The largest city and capital Addis Ababa is 
considered a high-threat location for terrorist-activity and crime directed at or affecting 
official U.S. Government interests. Political instability in Ethiopia could present an 
attractive target for future attacks.  
 
The United States State Department has issued travel warnings to U.S. citizens to 
avoid certain areas of Ethiopia because of the potential for civil unrest and arbitrary 
detention. Security forces have been responsible for hundreds of deaths in 2016 as a 
result of excessive use of force against protestors. In addition, there have been reports 
of arbitrary killings, disappearances, torture, harsh prison conditions, and other societal 
violence, including violence based on ethnicity and attacks against government security 
force members.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                            
2 Applicant’s brother, the physician, sponsored Applicant’s green card and citizenship. (Tr. 38) 
 
 
 
 
4
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
    
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
 
 
 
 
5
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant has ongoing familial connections with his wife, children, mother, and his 
wife’s relatives. These relationships create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because of the risk of terrorism. The evidence and Applicant’s 
admissions are sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
The guideline includes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns under AG 
¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
 
 
 
6
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Although none of Applicant’s foreign contacts are employed by the 
Ethiopian government, the instability and risk of terrorism in Ethiopia present an 
unacceptable risk that Applicant may be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, or government and the 
interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s ties to the United States are not substantial. During the past 
fifteen years, he has lived and worked primarily in Ethiopia. He does not own 
property or maintain a bank account in the United States. Nor does he provide 
child support to his son who resides in the United States. Applicant maintains close 
relationships with his mother, wife, and children in Ethiopia, to whom he is bound 
by affection or obligation. His wife’s parents and six siblings are all citizens and 
residents of Ethiopia. He has not overcome the presumption of a non-casual 
relationship with these immediate family members. Although he is in the process 
of applying for a green card for his wife, at the time of the hearing, she was still a 
citizen and resident of Ethiopia. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(c) are not applicable in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
7
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns at issue. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the interests of national security of the United States to grant him eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.-1.f.:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
                                        
         
    ___________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
