 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03898  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
                                     
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case  
 
On October 18, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective January 8, 2017.     
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 17, 2018 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 27, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
that same day, scheduling the hearing for September 7, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  The Government offered five exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
offered three exhibits referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant called one witness and testified on his own behalf. 
 
2 
 
The record remained open until close of business on September 21, 2018.  Applicant 
submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, 
which was admitted without objection.  The record then closed.  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 17, 2018. 
 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old.  He has a Master’s degree in Project Management with 
a concentration in Aerospace.  He holds the position of Business Operations Analyst for 
a defense contractor.    
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
engaged in conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations that can raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Army from 2002 to 2015 
when he took a medical retirement due to injuries sustained in Afghanistan.  Applicant 
has been working for his current employer since October 2016.   
 
 During his prior employment, while working for an employer located on an Air 
Force Base, Applicant was accused of being involved in and displaying erratic and 
irregular behavior, demonstrating unsound judgment, over the course of several months 
that became alarming to his coworkers and management.  An incident report outlining 
these concerns was documented by the company security department.  Applicant was 
ultimately terminated from his employment, removed from the site, and his CAC card 
was retained.  (Government Exhibits 2 and 4.)   
 
 In addition to displaying erratic behavior, Applicant made a series of threatening 
remarks, namely four separate strange and menacing statements to either his program 
manager or coworkers that raised serious concerns about his mental stability.  Applicant 
admits to making each of the statements, but contends that he meant them in a far 
different context than how they were received.  Applicant also believes that false claims 
were made against him for whistleblowing as outlined below.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit A.)     
 
 In March 2016, Applicant reported two employees for timecard fraud.  Applicant 
had noticed for a period of time that these two employees were missing work, not 
clocking in properly, and they were still taking their regular days off.  Applicant reported 
them to his management.  The following day, Applicant noticed that those two 
employees have been upset with him from that point on.  When the matter was 
investigated, it was determined that the two employees were not keeping their time 
accurately.  Both employees were disciplined, their times and schedules were adjusted, 
and they were counseled for timecard fraud.  (Tr. p. 42.)   
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that before he reported these two employees for timecard 
fraud, he worked a flex schedule without problems, and had a friendly and close 
working relationship with them.  After he reported them, his schedule was adjusted, and 
he was no longer allowed to work flex time.  He believes that this was done in retaliation 
for reporting them for timecard fraud.  He also believes that those upset up with him 
began fabricating a false story about his unverified erratic behavior.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit A.)  
 
 On or about June 9, 2016, Applicant was instructed by his supervisor to come to 
work on time and leave work on time, in an email.  Applicant sent an email back to the 
Contracting Officers Representative stating that he would “comply and adjust fire.”  
Applicant explained at the hearing that this comment was made in an attempt to convey 
a willingness to do the right thing and adjust course.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 
A.)     
  
 On or about August 16, 2016, Applicant was disciplined by his program manager 
for attempting to take a flex time schedule.  Applicant told his program manager that he 
believed his flex schedule only became a problem out of retaliation for the 
whistleblowing he did concerning the timecard fraud.  Applicant states that he signed 
the disciplinary notice only to be compliant.  (Government Exhibit 5.) 
 
 On or about August 17, 2017, Applicant filed a harassment complaint.  The 
program manager previously related that he had received information from the Applicant 
that he was seeking legal counsel.  During an interview with Human Resources, where 
Applicant and the program manager were present, Applicant was asked if he had 
sought legal counsel.  Applicant informed Human Resources that he had not yet done 
so.  Applicant then walked out of the office with the program manager and stated to the 
program manager that, “misquoting me right now is dangerous.”  The program manager 
took Applicant’s body language and his tone as a threat.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  
 
 On or about August 18, 2016, Applicant made a statement to his coworker, who 
states that he observed Applicant behaving erratically at his cubicle, and commented to 
his coworker that he should, “Prepare to go to war in five minutes.”  Applicant claims 
that his exact words were, “prepare for battle, you will see in five minutes… the cleaning 
lady is here”.  He also claims that everyone was laughing.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit A.)  This alarmed the coworker enough to report the behavior to the customer.  
The customer notified the program manager who immediately headed to the Air Force 
base to terminate the Applicant’s employment and escort him from the building.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)     
  
 One witness, the operations manager who hired the Applicant in 2015, testified 
on Applicant’s behalf.  He stated that when Applicant worked with him, his performance 
with the government customer was exemplary.  Everyone was happy with him at that 
time.  He personally considers the Applicant to be an exceptional individual.  In fact, the 
witness, has been the individual responsible for helping the Applicant get his new job.  
(Tr. pp. 77 – 89.)      
 
 
4 
 
 Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s current supervisor, coworkers and 
Government customers are favorable.  They attest to Applicant’s strong work ethic, love 
for his country, professionalism and integrity.  Applicant is described as a hard worker, 
who is reliable and honest.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.) 
 
 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
      Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
  (2) Any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior. 
 
 Applicant’s statements, when viewed as a whole, were unacceptable, scary and 
dangerous.  His on-going threats clearly demonstrate inappropriate and questionable 
behavior that cannot be tolerated. The above disqualifying conditions have been 
established. 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 It is noted that Applicant was at one time in the military, and his vernacular of 
concern in this case is inconsistent with everyday civilian language.  Despite this 
excuse, Applicant’s misconduct is still unexplainable.  Applicant’s behavior has created 
a hostile work environment.  Working in the defense industry, as a civilian, while holding 
a security clearance is a critical mission that requires the highest sensitivity to one’s 
mental stability and sound judgment.  In order to properly protect the national interest, 
the Government must be strict about the rules that govern the defense security 
program, including what is said by its’ employees.  In this case, the Applicant made 
statements and comments that reflect poorly on his mental stability, and in turn effect 
his ability to properly protect the national secrets.  From the evidence presented, the 
culmination of these statements reflect a warped mind-set and demonstrate a serious 
lapse in judgment that cannot be taken lightly.  Given the inappropriate nature of these 
statements, not enough time has passed to show that Applicant’s misconduct will not be 
repeated.  He has not offered sufficient evidence to mitigate the Personal Conduct 
concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant demonstrated unsound judgment when he made a series of threatening 
remarks to his coworkers, while holding a security clearance, and while working in the 
defense industry.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   AGAINST Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   AGAINST Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   AGAINST Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
