       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)
   )    ISCR Case No. 17-04005
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.
Eligibility to access classified information is denied.
History of the Case
On December 27, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec.
Or.)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Security Executive Agent,
by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4). 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 24, 2018, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another judge on March 20, 2018, and was reassigned to me
on May 24, 2018. The Government’s case consisted of three exhibits that were
admitted without objection (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two 
exhibits that were admitted without objection (AEs A-B). The transcript of the
proceedings (Tr.) was received on June 12, 2018.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline  G, Applicant allegedly was arrested and charged with four
alcohol-related offenses between June 2004 and December 2015. Allegedly, he was
arrested for DUI in June 2004, December 2004, August 2009, and December 2015.
Under Guideline J, Applicant was allegedly arrested for various traffic and no proof of
insurance violations between August 2009 and November 2015.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alcohol-related and
traffic incidents with explanations. He claimed the DUI charges related to his December
2015 incident were dismissed. He claimed also that he did not have his insurance card
with him when he was arrested in November 2015 for no proof of insurance and
assorted traffic violations.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 53 year-old electrician for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                               
Applicant married in September 1986 and divorced in April 1988. (GE 1) He
remarried the same woman in December 1992 and divorced her in 2001 due to cited
irreconcilable differences. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 27-29) He has three adult children (ages 27,
25, and 21) from his first marriage. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 30-31) He earned a high school
diploma in May 1983 and reported some post-high school education credits. (GEs 1-2;
Tr. 32)  Applicant enlisted in the Navy in February 1985 and served over 14 years of
active duty. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 33-34) He received an honorable discharge in April 1999. (GE
1) He has held security clearances while employed by DoD. (GE 2) 
Since March 2016, Applicant has been employed by his current defense
contractor. (GEs 1-2) Previously, he worked for other employers, interspersed with
periods of unemployment. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 39-40) 
Alcohol-history
Applicant has some history of excessive drinking while in the Navy. He confirmed
that in 1995, while he was on active-duty Navy status, he was detained by Navy
security personnel for public drunkenness in a bar. (Tr. 34) He was subsequently
2
charged with public drunkenness and awarded non-judicial punishment (NJP). His NJP
punishment consisted of restriction, extra duty, forfeiture of one-half of a month’s pay
for two months, and reduction in rank. (Tr. 35) Applicant was also counseled by Navy
substance abuse counselors and characterized as an alcohol abuser. (Tr. 37) For
several weeks following his diagnosis, he quit drinking, but thereafter resumed his
consumption of alcohol. (Tr. 37-38)
Between June 2004 and December 2015, Applicant consumed alcohol regularly,
and at times in excess, and was arrested on four occasions and charged with DUI
offenses. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 27) Records document that he was first arrested and charged
with DUI in June 2004. (GE 2) He had run a road block and was stopped by police
officers. (GE 2) At the scene, he was administered a breathalyzer and recorded a
blood-alcohol content (BAC) of .2%. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 43-44) Applicant pleaded guilty to the
DUI offense and was placed on probation. As a part of his probation conditions, he was
court-ordered to attend a one-week alcohol education course, which he completed. (Tr.
43)
In December 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and probation
violation after consuming a few beers with friends. (GE 3; Tr. 44-45) At the scene, he
registered a 1.1 % BAC by arresting police. (Tr. 45) Appearing in court in March 2005,
he was court-ordered to complete a 42-day inpatient abuse treatment program. He
could not recall what diagnosis he was given, but acknowledged being advised not to
consume alcohol. (Tr. 47) After completing his 42-day inpatient stay in April 2005, he
quit drinking for six months before resuming his alcohol consumption in contravention to
the advice he received from his counselors. (Tr. 48) 
Applicant was arrested again in August 2009 and charged with DUI, speeding,
failure to yield, and no proof of insurance. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 42, 49-50) He pleaded guilty,
had his license suspended, and was ordered to attend a seven-day state approved
alcohol safety action program (ASAP). (Tr. 51-52) He continued to consume alcohol
after his 2009 incident, but generally not to excess. (GE 2; Tr. 51-53) Applicant is
credited with completing his ASAP.
In December 2015, Applicant was cited for DUI, failure to yield, improper
equipment, no proof of insurance, and fleeing arrest. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 54-55) He pleaded
guilty to the cited traffic offenses and was fined. The DUI charges, in turn, were
dismissed in December 2016. (GEs 1-2 and AE A; Tr. 55-57) Following his last alcohol-
related incident, Applicant has continued to drink at light to moderate levels. (Tr. 57-60)
He provided proof of insurance on his vehicle (effective December 2015).  (AE B) 
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any character references. Nor did he furnish any
evidence of performance evaluations, achievement awards and certificates, or civic and
community contributions. 
3
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(d) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
          Alcohol consumption 
The concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
4
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant comes to these proceedings with a considerable history of alcohol-
related incidents (four in all, not including his acknowledged 1995 alcohol-related
incident while in active-duty military status) over an extended period of time spanning
June 2004 and December 2015.  Principal security issues raised in this case center
on Applicant’s history of alcohol-related offenses. Additional security concerns are
also raised concerning his cited traffic-related offenses.
Alcohol consumption concerns
Applicant’s problems with recurrent alcohol-related incidents over an 11-year
period raise concerns over his risk of future alcohol abuse. On the strength of the
5
evidence presented, one disqualifying condition (DCs) of the AGs for alcohol
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the
individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol
abuse disorder.”
Applicant’s completion of his previously ordered counseling and inpatient
programs in 2004 and 2009 and generally light to moderate drinking since his
December 2015 DUI arrest entitle him to partial application of MC ¶ 23(a) of Guideline
G, “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment.” Applicant’s completion of
his ordered counseling programs, in addition to his maintenance of a generally light to
moderate rate of alcohol consumption for the past three years, are not enough at this
time, however, to facilitate safe predictions that he will avoid any abusive drinking in the
foreseeable future. His assurances alone are not sufficient to warrant the full application
of MC ¶ 23(a). 
Criminal conduct concerns
Security concerns are also raised with respect to Applicant’s cited traffic
offenses. Disqualifying conditions applicable to Applicant’s traffic-related citations
covered by Guideline J (criminal conduct) are twofold: DC ¶¶ 31(a), “a pattern of minor
offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely to affect a national security
eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment,
reliability, or trustworthiness,” and 31(b), “evidence (including, but not limited to, a
credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.”
None of these cited offenses are cross-referenced under Guideline G and are not
considered to be alcohol-related for purposes of Guideline J analysis.  
Applicable mitigating conditions covering Applicant’s cited traffic-related offenses
under Guideline J are as follows:  MC ¶¶ 32(a), “”so much time has elapsed since the
criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and 32(d), “there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.”  Passage of time since Applicant’s last traffic offense exceeds three years
and provide enough time to mitigate these non-alcohol related offenses.
Whole-person assessment
Applicant’s Navy service is both respected and appreciated. His service alone,
however, is not enough to dispel concerns about risks of recurrent abusive drinking
6
Considering his lengthy history of alcohol-related arrests and continued drinking against
the advice he received from his counselors, too much risk still exists over the potential
for recurrent abusive drinking to facilitate safe predictions about his ability to avoid
alcohol-related incidents in the foreseeable future. By contrast, Applicant’s covered
traffic-related offenses are mitigated by time. 
                                               Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):  AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:           Against Applicant
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT :            FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:           For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
