 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 17-03620 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence concerns raised by her father, stepmother, 
stepsister, grandparents, aunt and uncle, who are citizens and residents of China; as 
well as the concerns raised by her spouse, father-in-law, cousin, and friends who are all 
citizens of China residing in the United States. Her request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On December 30, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). On December 8, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B for foreign influence. The SOR further informed Applicant 
that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 9, 2018 (Answer), and requested that 
her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On April 6, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on April 10, 2018, and received by her on April 19, 2018. The 
FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant’s reply was due on May 19, 2018. On May 8, 2018, she submitted a 
two-page response to the FORM (Reply). She did not object to any of the Items, but did 
offer clarifications on Item 3. On July 26, 2018, the case was assigned to me. Items 1 
through 3 are admitted into evidence, without objection.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government and Applicant both requested I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to China. Department Counsel provided an 11-page summary of 
the facts, supported by 11 Government documents pertaining to China, marked as Item 
4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 The SOR alleged, and Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. 
She denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.e. Those admissions are incorporated into the 
following facts: 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. She was born in China. She immigrated to the United 
States with her mother in February 2002. She obtained U.S. citizenship in 2005, through 
the naturalization of her mother, as she was a minor. Applicant is a graduate of a U.S. 
high school. She earned a bachelor’s degree and master’s degree from the same U.S. 
university. She has been an employee of a government contractor since December 
2015. She is married and has one child, who was born in the United States and is a 
U.S. citizen. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant’s foreign family members and friends were listed on the SOR as raising 
security concerns under the guideline for foreign influence. She has indicated that none 
of them are connected to the Chinese government or military. They are “just ordinary 
people.” (Reply; Item 3.) Those family members and friends are discussed in greater 
detail, below. 
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of China. He works as a mechanical 
engineer. He lives there with his second wife, Applicant’s stepmother, and their 
daughter. Her stepmother is a homemaker. Applicant is not close to her father. He “was 
 
 
3 
 
 
hardly present” during Applicant’s life. (Answer; Item 3.) Her parents divorced in the 
mid-1990s and she moved to the United States with her mother in 2002. Applicant last 
talked to her father “a few months ago.” She does not maintain any contact with her 
stepmother or stepsister. Her stepsister is a student. (Answer; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s grandparents are citizens and residents of China. They are both in 
their 80s. Her grandfather has been retried for 20 years from his job as a university 
professor. Her grandmother is a retired middle school teacher. They did not work for the 
Chinese government. They are not aware of what Applicant does for a living. (Answer; 
Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant’s aunt and uncle are citizens and residents of China. Applicant admits 
that she is in contact with her aunt, but she does not contact her uncle. Her aunt is a 
homemaker. She knowns nothing about Applicant’s work, other than that Applicant is an 
engineer. Her aunt’s daughter (Applicant’s cousin) resides in the United States, and is a 
19-year-old freshman at a U.S. university. (Answer; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband is a citizen of China residing in the United States. He 
immigrated to the United States when he was in high school. His father, Applicant’s 
father-in-law, was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in July 2017. He works as a driver. 
Applicant contacts her father-in-law once a year via telephone. (Answer; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant has multiple friends who are Chinese citizens that reside in the United 
States. Her contact with them is causal and infrequent. She met these friends while 
working at a prior job, and she no longer is employed at the same firm. Similarly, those 
friends moved out-of-state to find better employment, and their bonds of friendship have 
not been maintained. (Answer; Reply.)  
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since she was 13 years old. She 
indicated that her values and standards matured here. She has chosen to live her life 
and start her family here. She is loyal to the United States and is grateful for the 
opportunities she has found here. She owns a home in the United States that she 
purchased in 2016. She has no property in China. (Answer; Reply; Item 3.) 
 
China 
 
 China is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the 
paramount authority. Human rights concerns include: illegal detention in unofficial 
holding facilities; torture and coerced confessions; and detention and harassment of 
journalists, lawyers, writers, bloggers, dissidents, and others whose actions are deemed 
unacceptable. There is a lack of due process and individuals have limited forms of 
redress against official abuse. Visitors may be placed under surveillance and may be 
searched without knowledge or consent. (Item 4.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 China has been identified as one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. 
economic information and technology. Those attempts represent a growing and 
persistent threat to U.S. economic security. China uses a variety of methods to acquire 
foreign military and dual-use technologies, including cyber activity and exploitation of 
Chinese nationals. There are numerous examples of individuals who have been 
convicted of conspiring to violate federal export control laws by illegally exporting 
defense equipment to China. (Item 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
  Applicant’s father, stepmother, stepsister, grandparents, aunt, and uncle are all 
citizens and residents of China. Her cousin and friends are citizens of China residing in 
the United States. She lives with her spouse, who is a citizen of China. There is an 
articulated heightened risk associated with having relationships with family members in 
or tied to China, due to China’s targeting U.S. economic information and technologies, 
as well as the persistent human rights abuses present there. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s emotional bonds to her relatives in China have decreased since she 
left China at the age of 13 and moved with her mother to the United States. Her bonds 
with her immediate and extended family in the United States have strengthened her ties 
here. She attended high school in the United States. She earned bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees at U.S. universities. She has adapted to the American way of life and 
plans to remain in the United States. She owns a home here. She is connected to her 
local community through work and friends. She demonstrated sufficient relationships 
with the United States, which outweigh any risks associated with her family in China or 
with Chinese citizenship. AG ¶ 8(b) provides mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant’s 
personal property and investments are located in the United States. She has adopted 
the American way of life and is thankful for the opportunities it has given her. I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without doubt as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. She met her burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
