 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03208 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 26, 2018. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4.1 Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There 
were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on August 6, 2018.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR to reflect correct debt balances alleged. 
The corrections are as follows: SOR ¶¶ 1.a-$21,980; 1.b-$15,420; 1.d-$13,745; and 1.e-
$3,705. There was no objection.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is not married. He has a two-year-old daughter for 
whom he pays child support. He has been cohabitating with his girlfriend since March 
2018. She owns a house, and they split all of the expenses. He attended college from 
2005 to 2009, earning a bachelor’s degree. He has been employed by the same 
government contractor since he graduated from college. He estimated his current salary 
is about $85,000.2  
 
 Applicant testified that he funded his college education through student loans. He 
obtained both federal and private student loans. After he graduated from college, he 
moved to a new state, and six months later began paying his student loans. He testified 
that he made consistent payments from 2005 to 2015.3 
 
 Applicant completed his electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) in May 2016. In December 2016, he was interviewed by a government investigator. 
During his interview, he told the investigator that his student loans were past due. He 
explained he obtained an attorney about 18 months prior to find a way to reduce his loan 
payments. He was instructed by the attorney to stop making payments, and he followed 
this advice and stopped paying his student loans in January 2016. He was told by the 
attorney that because these were private loans, each one was required to have his 
signature. Applicant told the investigator that he did not sign each loan, but rather the 
loans were carried over. Applicant told the investigator that he was attempting to get the 
loans reduced or removed. At the time of the interview, Applicant told the investigator that 
he owed approximately $93,000. He had been paying $980 a month for six years, which 
was mostly interest, and he was not making progress on reducing the balance of the 
loans. Applicant told the investigator that he did not disclose that the loans were past-due 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is the exhibit list and II is the Department’s discovery letter. 
 
2 Tr. 14-17, 51. 
 
3 Tr. 17-20. 
 
3 
 
 
on his e-QIP because he did not think about it. He further told the investigator that he 
intended to pay the loans, but wanted a fair amount without high interest rates.4 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant testified that the $980 monthly payments he had been 
making were only covering the interest on his student loans, and he was attempting to 
reduce the principal. He attempted to negotiate with the student loan creditor, but because 
he was earning a significant salary, it would not help him. So Applicant was looking for 
different ways to reduce his balance by negotiating with a different lender or consolidating 
the loans.5  
 
Applicant stated that in October or November 2015, he was contacting different 
banks to try and reduce or consolidate his student loans. He called a student help line 
and was given the phone number of an attorney. He testified that the attorney told him 
that the creditors of his loans may have used improper practices with their loan 
applications, and the attorneys were looking into it. When questioned further at his 
hearing about the specifics of the practices, Applicant said the impropriety was “by giving 
loans without having the students sign for the loans.”6 Applicant stated that he signed the 
first loan application, but not the others.7  
 
Applicant testified that he accepted subsequent loans, took the money, and used 
it to pay for his college. The attorney then advised him that there was a lawsuit against 
the loan company that Applicant received his loans from regarding its improper practices. 
Applicant testified that the attorney told him to stop making his monthly loan payments, 
which he did. Applicant agreed to pay the attorney $950 a month because the attorney 
was going to get his loans reduced or removed. Applicant testified that the attorney told 
him that in the end “they can either get the loans completely wiped off from my name, or 
that they can get it reduced to half of the amount and that if they couldn’t get it wiped out, 
that whatever money that I was paying them, it would be paid towards the loan. So, 
basically get it brought down.”8  
 
Applicant provided a copy of a limited power of attorney that he signed on March 
5, 2016. It stated: 
 
I hereby duty authorize, empower and appoint the [attorney, P.A.] including 
any of its attorneys, debt settlement negotiation staff and other parties it 
may designate as my Attorney-in-Fact, to communicate with any of my 
                                                          
4 GE 2. I have not considered any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR for disqualifying 
purposes. I may consider it when making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in a whole-person analysis. 
 
5 Tr. 29-30. 
 
6 Tr. 20-37. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 Tr. 20-37. 
 
4 
 
 
Creditors, Creditors’ Representatives and/or Collection Agencies and 
obtain any requested information regarding any accounts or debts I may 
owe, including but not limited to a complete account of my account, payment 
history, credit rating, verification of the account and any other information 
necessary to make satisfactory arrangements for the settlement and/or 
litigation of such accounts or debts. Also to make good faith settlement 
offers on my behalf to settle such accounts or debts.9  
 
 Applicant provided copies of letters by the attorney to one of the major credit 
reporting bureaus, all dated May 10, 2016, initiating a dispute for six student loans, 
claiming the each debt was inaccurate, not valid, and unenforceable, and requesting it be 
removed from Applicant’s credit report. Applicant provide a letter from his student loan 
creditor, dated May 31, 2016, replying to an inquiry made by Applicant’s attorney to it. 
The creditor indicated that because Applicant was represented by the attorney, all future 
contact would be made through the attorney. The letter also stated:  
 
Please be aware that you remain responsible for any payment due, even 
though we’re unable to communicate with you. Any delinquency on the 
account would continue to accrue unless you make the necessary 
payments to bring and maintain the account balance in a current status, 
even if we’re prevented from communicating with you. In addition, the 
account will continue to be reported to the national consumer reporting 
agencies.10 
 
 Applicant provided a letter from his attorney from November 2016, conveying to 
Applicant that the attorney had received a settlement offer from the student loan creditor. 
The letter stated: “The offer is for a lump sum settlement in the amount of $33,709 and a 
balance of $85,140.70. This settlement offer expires on November 20, 2016.”11 The letter 
also advised Applicant of his options: “You may decide to present them with a 
counteroffer, you can accept the offer, or you may decide to decline the offer.”12 
 
 Applicant did not accept the settlement offer. He stated he did not accept the 
settlement offer because it was not part of the original agreement he had with the attorney. 
He said he would still have to pay the attorney $950 until the loans were settled. He also 
could not afford to pay the settlement agreement. He testified he stopped paying the 
attorney in January 2017. When Applicant was asked why he stopped paying the attorney 
he said: “Well, through the process, I saw what you’re saying now. It sounds too good to 
be true, and I saw the effects that it did to not only my credit, but to everything that was 
                                                          
9 AE A. 
 
10 AE A. 
 
11 AE A. 
 
12 Tr. 41-44; AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
 
attached to my credit.”13 He contacted the law firm to express his dissatisfaction. He told 
the law firm that he was going to contact the state’s attorney general’s office to complain, 
and they laughed at him. When asked if he ever filed a complaint, he stated he did not.14  
 
 After Applicant stopped paying the attorney, he did not resume making monthly 
payments on his student loans. Applicant testified that he called a friend who is an 
accountant. The friend told him that because the student loans are “charged off” they are 
“no longer on their books”15 and the debts are sold to a third party that tries to collect the 
debt. Applicant testified he has not contacted the student loan creditors or done anything 
to resolve the delinquent student loans, even after receiving the SOR in October 2017. 
According to the credit reports, the student loans were not sold to a third party. Applicant 
acknowledged he did not tell his accountant friend that he was applying for a security 
clearance. He stated the credit reports show his student loan accounts have a zero 
balance. They are all charged off. He acknowledged he has not paid the loans. He 
acknowledged he was never a party to a lawsuit against the creditors.16  
 
 Applicant’s statements, admissions, and credit reports from August 2017 and 
August 2018 substantiate the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.17 
 
 Applicant testified that he has no other delinquent debts. He has been paying a 
federal student loan that is current with a balance of $10,500. He files and pays his taxes. 
He has had no financial counseling. He has a surplus of money at the end of the month 
after paying his expenses. He has about $10,000 in his checking and saving accounts. 
He has about $75,000 in a pension account. He owned a house, but sold it in February 
2017. He made about an $8,000 profit. He used that money to pay other debts he owed. 
He purchased a new car in February 2018, because his old one was in an accident. He 
saves about $200 to $500 a month, which fluctuates depending on incidental expenses 
that may arise. Applicant explained that when he was paying his student loans in the past, 
he was doing it with a credit card. He would then pay his credit card, but not the full 
amount. Applicant testified that he made a mistake and got scammed. Applicant did not 
testify that he intended to pay these delinquent student loans in the future.18   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
                                                          
13 38. 
 
14 Tr. 37-38, 48. 
 
15 Tr. 39 
 
16 Tr. 38-47, 53-56; GE 4, 5. 
 
17 Ge 2, 3, 4; Answer to the SOR. 
 
18 Tr. 47. 
 
6 
 
 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
7 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has about $71,557 of unpaid student loans that have been charged off 
and he has not taken any action to repay them since about 2016. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
8 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant admitted he received student loans to fund his college education. His 
monthly payments on the loans were only covering the interest on the loans and were not 
reducing the balance. Applicant attempted to find a solution to reduce his payments, but 
was unsuccessful. He accepted an attorney’s advice to stop paying the loans based on a 
belief that perhaps there was a lawsuit against the loan company for fraudulent practices, 
and if it was successful he might not have to pay the loans. Applicant paid the attorney 
$950 a month for about 18 months. The attorney was able to get a settlement offer from 
the creditor, but Applicant did not accept it because that was not the agreement he 
believed he had with the attorney, and he did not have the money. Applicant now believes 
because the loans are charged off he does not have to pay them. He did not provide any 
indication that he intended to repay them in the future. Applicant’s conduct is recent. His 
failure to resume paying his student loans after he terminated his contact with his attorney 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant may have been duped by the attorney, but once he realized it he did not 
take action to resolve his delinquent student loans. A review of the limited power of 
attorney that Applicant signed, shows the attorney had authority to negotiate settlements 
for Applicant’s debts. This may not have been what the attorney verbally told Applicant, 
but the document speaks for itself. When Applicant realized he was not going to get the 
results he had hoped for through the attorney, he stopped paying the attorney. He did not 
resume paying his student loans, but rather sought advice from a friend who is an 
accountant and was told the debts were charge off. Applicant offered no indication that 
he intended to pay these student loans now or in the future. The conditions that caused 
Applicant’s financial problem were not beyond his control. Even if he was the victim of a 
scam, when he stopped paying the attorney, he should have resumed paying his student 
loans, which he did not. He threatened to file a complaint against the attorney, but did 
not. I find he did not act responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not present evidence of a good-faith effort to repay his overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. There is no evidence of financial counseling or 
that his student loan debt is under control. Applicant admitted he accepted loan money 
from the creditor and used it to fund his college education. He later determined the terms 
of the loan were too difficult for him to pay, and he stopped making good-faith efforts to 
do so. His inability to repay the loans does not constitute a legitimate dispute. AG ¶¶ 
20(c), 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a college educated 32 year old. He funded his education through 
student loans. He paid them for several years. Because of the significant amount of the 
loans, his payments were only covering the interest and not reducing the balance of the 
loans. Applicant was presented with a plan that he might not be required to pay his student 
loans because of alleged fraudulent practices by the creditor. He then stopped paying the 
loans. His attorney received a settlement offer, but Applicant did not accept it because he 
felt it was not what the attorney had agreed to do for him. Applicant stopped paying the 
attorney and never resumed paying his student loans. There is no indication from 
Applicant that he intends to pay the loans in the future. There is no question that Applicant 
received the money from the loans to pay for college. He now does not like the terms of 
the repayment agreement. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant  
   
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
