 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03757 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 26, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigative Processing (e-
OIP) dated November 2, 2016.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 9, 2018, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline K, Handling Protected Information; 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 22, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on August 28, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on September 26, 2018. The Government 
 
2 
 
offered eight exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 8, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits at the hearing.  He testified 
on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 4, 
2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old.  He is married with one biological child, and three 
children through the marriage.  He has a Bachelors’ degree.  He holds the position of 
Engineer for a defense contractor.  He seeks to retain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline K – Handling Protected Information  The Government alleges 
that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because of his deliberate failure to comply 
with rules and regulations for handling protected information-which includes classified 
and other sensitive government information, and proprietary information, which raises 
doubt about his trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to 
safeguard protected information.  
 
Paragraph 2 Guideline M – Use of Information Technology   The Government alleges 
that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has failed to comply with rules, 
procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to information technology systems, 
which raise security concerns about his ability to properly protect sensitive systems, 
network and information.    
 
Paragraph 3 Guideline E - Personal Conduct   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because his conduct involves questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant has worked in the defense industry for the past thirty-five years, and 
has held a security clearance for almost that entire time.  He began working for his 
current employer in 2002.  For the last 15 years, he has worked daily with classified 
information.  Between 2013 and 2016, Applicant committed at least six separate 
security violations, five of which are alleged in the SOR.  On each occasion, he was 
counseled and disciplined by his company for his misconduct.   
 
 His first security violation occurred in November 2013.  While working with his 
current employer, he failed to comply with his company security manual requirements 
by failing to set the alarm for Closed Area (HB-322A), a classified area where he 
worked.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  His second violation occurred in December 2014.  
Again, Applicant failed to comply with his company security manual requirements and 
failed to set the alarm for Closed Area (HB-322B), a classified area.  After each security 
violation, Applicant was counseled, written up, and disciplined for his misconduct.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)   
 
3 
 
 The third security violation occurred in February 2015.  This time, Applicant failed 
to comply with his company’s Approved Trusted Download requirements by authorizing 
a trusted download to be conducted in an unauthorized format, in violation of the 
requirement.  Applicant explained that he was authorized to conduct approved trusted 
downloads.  On this occasion, he reviewed a document that one of his co-workers 
wanted to convert from Secret to unsecured.  Applicant neglected to remember that he 
is prohibited from performing a trusted download on a word document where there is no 
potential for metadata to be hidden.  The security violation was reported and written up. 
Applicant was counseled and disciplined for his misconduct.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  
 
 Applicant’s fourth security violation occurred in November 2015.  This time, 
Applicant authorized an unclassified PowerPoint presentation that was later discovered 
to include classified information.  He emailed the document to several Boeing 
employees at two Boeing locations.  This resulted in a data spill in violation of Federal 
and company security regulations.  From the investigation, the program security team 
determined that the classified information was compromised.  Government Exhibit 8 and 
Tr. p. 30.)  The security violation was reported and written up.  Applicant was counseled 
and disciplined for his misconduct. 
 
 In December 2015, Applicant committed another security violation that was not 
alleged in the SOR, but which has important ramifications here.  This violation was 
similar to the one he committed in November 2015, where Applicant believed the 
document to be an unclassified PowerPoint that he sent to a few co-workers.  In this 
case, it was later determined by the company program protection security team that the 
document contained classified information.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  Applicant stated 
that the reason he did not question his actions is because he wrote the document, and 
felt that he had sufficient expertise and knowledge of the subject.  (Tr. pp. 31 - 21.)  The 
security violation was written up.  Applicant was counseled and disciplined by his 
company for this misconduct.   
 
 In January 2016, Applicant committed his sixth and most recent security 
violation.    This time, once again, he failed to set the alarm for Closed Area (HB-322B), 
the classified area where he works.  The security violation was written up.  Applicant 
was counseled and disciplined by his company for this misconduct.  (Government 
Exhibit 6.) 
 
 In February 2017, Applicant’s security clearance was suspended.  Applicant 
contends that since his last security violation he has made significant changes to his 
behavior.  He admits that he had been over confident and foolish about his ability to 
accomplish his responsibilities without mistakes.  To reduce the risk of mistakes in the 
future, he has given up the responsibility of opening and closing the classified 
laboratories, which means that he no longer has the responsibility to alarm the 
laboratories.  He has also given up performing trusted downloads.  He believes that he 
has learned his lesson from these security violations.  Applicant states that he is 
embarrassed and humiliated about his clearance suspension as it is an important part of 
his job. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K – Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for Handing Protected Information is set out in AG ¶ 33, as 
follows: 
 
 Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for handling 
protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive government 
information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an individual’s 
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such 
information, and is a serious security concern. 
  
34.  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 34. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to unauthorized 
persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business contacts, the media, 
or persons present at seminars, meetings, or conferences;  
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise handling 
protected information, including images, on any unauthorized equipment or 
medium; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
information; 
 
(h) negligence to lax security practices that persist despite counseling by 
management; and  
 
(i) failure to comply with rules and regulations that results in damage to the national 
security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
 The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35, are applicable.  (a) The 
behavior was recent and happened frequently, and casts doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  (b) Applicant has not responded 
favorably to counseling (c) the security violations were not due to improper or 
inadequate training or unclear instructions, and (d) the violations was not inadvertent 
and there is evidence of compromise.    
 
 Applicant’s recent carelessness and negligent conduct resulted in the 
commission of six security violations within a short period of time.  He failed to lock his 
classified work area on four separate occasions, and on two others, he made serious 
errors when performing approved trusted downloading.   The most recent of these 
security violations occurred in January 2016.  Until recently, his over confident attitude 
 
6 
 
toward these violations made it difficult, if not impossible, for him to see his faults or to 
realize the seriousness of his mistakes.  On each occasion, he was counseled and 
disciplined by his company.  On two occasions, it was determined by his company that 
he had compromised classified information.  This misconduct is unacceptable.  At this 
time, Applicant has not demonstrated sufficient reform and rehabilitation at this time to 
meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.   
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern for Use of Information Technology is set out in AG ¶ 39, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information.  Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information.  This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. Five are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) unauthorized modification, destruction, or manipulation of, or denial of 
access to, an information technology system or any data in such a system;   
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified , sensitive, proprietary, 
or other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system; 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any  information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized;    
 
(g) negligence or lax security practices in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management; and 
  
(h) any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, 
that results in damage to the  national security. 
 
 The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 are applicable: (a) the behavior 
was recent and casts doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
 
7 
 
judgment; (b) the security violations were not minor and were not done solely in the 
interest of organizational efficiency and effectiveness; (c) the conduct was not 
unintentional or inadvertent and was not followed by a prompt, good faith effort to 
correct the situation, and by notification to appropriate personnel; and (d) the misuse 
was not due to improper or inadequate training or unclear instructions. 
 
Applicant’s history of negligence resulting in six security violations is recent, 
repetitive, serious, and concerning.  His over confidence has been a risk to the national 
security, as it was determined that on two occasions he compromised classified 
information.  The six security violations outlined in detail above show that he has not 
established sufficient mitigation under this guideline.     
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows:  
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise question about an 
individuals’ reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 Conditions that may be disqualifying under AG¶ 16 include: 
 
  16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  This includes, but is not limited to 
consideration of:      
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or government protected information; and 
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 The evidence above is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are applicable.  (a) the individual 
did not make prompt, good faith efforts to correct the problem; the failure to cooperate 
was not caused by advice from legal counsel or another advising individual; (c) the 
offenses were not minor, but recent, the behavior was not infrequent, nor did it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it does cast 
doubt on the individuals reliability, trustworthy, or good judgment; (d) the individual 
acknowledged the behavior, but counseling has not been helpful; (e) the individual has 
taken some steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
 
8 
 
duress, but it is not sufficient to mitigate this security concern; (f) and (g) are not at all 
applicable.  Given Applicant’s extensive work history in the defense department, and his 
experience working with classified information, his history of six recent security 
violations that occurred between 2013 and 2016 is personal conduct that demonstrates 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply 
with company and DoD rules and regulations.  This pattern of repeated security 
violations is inexcusable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline K, Guideline M, and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the Handling Protected information, Use of Information Technology and 
Personal Conduct security concerns  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
