 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 17-02006 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 25, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 19, 2016, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On June 29, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on June 8, 
2017.  
 
Applicant signed his Answer to the SOR (Answer) on July 5, 2017, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1 at 8.) 
On August 7, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was 
provided to Applicant, who received the file on August 14, 2017.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted additional 
information, which included medical information. Department Counsel had no objection, 
and the additional information is admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibit A. The 
case was assigned to me on December 18, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 67 and married with five children. He has been employed by a 
defense contractor since February 2016, and seeks to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment. This is his first application for a security clearance. 
(Item 2 at Sections 17 and 18; Item 3 at page 2.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleged in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this paragraph, with the 
exception of subparagraph 1.d, which he denied. The total amount of money Applicant 
allegedly owed on all SOR-listed debts is approximately $200,000. The existence and 
amount of the debts is supported by credit reports dated February 10, 2016; May 5, 
2016; and May 11, 2017. (Items 4, 5, and 6.)  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant stated that his debt situation was due to a serious health 
issue that occurred in approximately March 2014. At that time Applicant required major 
heart surgery, which resulted in the placement of six stents. From 2000 until that time 
Applicant had been self-employed as an insurance salesman. Applicant was 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 3 is inadmissible. It is 
the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on March 15, 2017. Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, 
or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation (ROI) 
summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
(See Executive Order 10865 § 5.) In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item 3 is also cumulative. Applicant 
is not legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s FORM footnote 1, which 
described the potential admissibility of Item 3. I therefor reviewed it for any potentially mitigating 
information that Applicant might have thought would be considered. Any such mitigating information will 
be discussed later in this decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
unemployed for over a year, having to exhaust his savings while pursuing employment 
with no income coming in. (Item 1 at 7; Applicant Exhibit A.) 
 
 The status of the debts, based on record evidence including Applicant’s 
admissions and explanations, is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a mortgage company $85,000 for a charged-off 
home equity loan. Applicant stated in his Answer, “Attorney having removed due to lack 
of equity.” No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 4.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing the same mortgage company $14,697 for a second 
charged-off home equity loan. Applicant stated in his Answer, “Attorney having removed 
as house was sold.” No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
(Item 1 at 4.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a credit union $28,668 for a charged-off automobile 
loan. Applicant stated in his Answer, “Attorney having removed as car was sold.” No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant denied owing a credit union $20,195 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this creditor changed its name, and this debt is the 
same as 1.e, below. Applicant is correct. This allegation is found for Applicant as it is a 
duplicate account. (Item 1 at 5.)2 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $20,195 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a bank $18,888 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing a bank $10,448 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $10,222 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
                                            
2 A news release confirming this name change is at: Scient Federal Credit Union, Ledge Light Federal 
Credit Union Changes Name to Scient Federal Credit Union, https://www.scientfcu.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2013/11/Ledge-Light-Federal-Credit-Union-Changes-Name.pdf (October 9, 2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $9,182 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $8,348 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $8,104 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.l. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $3,126 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.m. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,812 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 5.) 
 
 1.n. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,355 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 1.o. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $566 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 1.p. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $556 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 1.q. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $325 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 1.r. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $203 for a collection account. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No further information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 1.s. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $970 for an account that is 120 days or 
more past due. Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 1.t. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $407 for an account that is 120 days or 
more past due. Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 1.u. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $100 for an account that is 120 days or 
more past due. Applicant stated in his Answer that this is an “unsecured debt.” No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. (Item 1 at 6.) 
 
 As stated, Applicant provided medical information showing that he had severe 
health issues in the 2014 through 2016 time frame. However, Applicant submitted no 
documented financial information, such as a budget, from which to make a conclusion 
that he is now financially stable.  Applicant also did not submit any evidence 
concerning the quality of his job performance. He submitted no character references or 
other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Applicant, based on documentary evidence, had twenty delinquent accounts 
totaling approximately $200,000 that he could not or chose not to resolve. As stated, 
allegation 1.d is found for Applicant. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to Applicant to demonstrate mitigation. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems have been in existence for many years. In addition, he 
provided no information to show that his current financial situation is stable. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant states that his debt problems were caused by his documented medical 
issues. While true, Applicant did not submit any evidence showing that he had taken 
any responsible conduct with regard to the debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), and (e) do not have applicability to the facts of this case. 
 
It is Applicant’s burden to show with sufficient evidence that he has mitigated the 
security concerns of his financial situation. He has not done so, for the reasons set forth 
in this decision. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial difficulties are 
recent, voluntary, and occurred when he was a mature adult. Rehabilitation was not 
demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. Overall, the record evidence as 
described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
