 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03467 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 20, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 22, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for July 10, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, called four witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, 
which were admitted without objection.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He worked for a 
defense contractor from 2002 through 2015, when he was hired by his current employer 
to work at the same location. As discussed below, he was terminated by his current 
employer in December 2015 and rehired in July 2016. He seeks to retain a security 
clearance, which he has held since the 1990s. He attended college for a period, but he 
has not earned a degree. He is divorced without children.1 
 
 Applicant is an admitted alcoholic with a history of alcohol adversely affecting his 
life. He had an operation in 1990, and was told by a doctor that his “drinking days are 
over.” He began drinking again in 1995, and he entered an alcohol treatment program 
the same year. He completed the program and attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings for a period. He remained sober until 1999. He entered another alcohol 
treatment program in 2000, where he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. In 2002, a 
DOHA administrative judge determined that Applicant’s alcohol consumption was 
mitigated and continued his security clearance.2 
 
 Applicant remained sober until August 2015, when his undiagnosed depression 
worsened, and he suffered a relapse. His drinking affected his job, and he missed work. 
He received written warnings for taking unscheduled leave as a result of his drinking. 
He would stop drinking for a week or two and then resume. He self-reported his drinking 
to his employer.3 
 
 Applicant’s employer arranged through their employee assistance program (EAP) 
for him to attend a three-day inpatient alcohol detoxication program on December 21, 
2015. He was released from the facility on December 24, 2015, with instructions to 
enter an outpatient program. Applicant did not like the facility. He was housed with 
people with mental illness, and the facility did not emphasize recovery.4 
 
 Applicant did not remain sober. During a night of heavy drinking in late December 
2015, he fell, cut his head, and received a black eye. When he reported to work the next 
morning, he was still under the effects of alcohol. His employer terminated him.5 
 
 In January 2016, Applicant realized he had hit bottom and needed help. A long-
time friend drove him to a 30-day inpatient rehabilitation program in a neighboring state. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 79-80, 83, 107; GE 1; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 94-98, 101-103; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 24, 56-57, 82, 98-99, 102; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 24, 56-57, 84; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-34, 57-58, 63-65, 99-101; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant paid $32,000 for the treatment. While at the facility, he was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependence and depression. He was placed on medication for his depression.6 
 
Applicant completed the program and focused on sobriety and his health. He still 
regularly attends AA meetings and has fully embraced the 12 Steps. He has a sponsor, 
and he is a sponsor. He is compliant with his depression medication. He has not had a 
drink since before he entered the facility in January 2016. He realizes the seriousness 
of his actions and the consequences if he returns to drinking.7 I found him to be 
forthcoming and sincere. 
 
 Applicant was rehired in July 2016 by the company that terminated him. He is 
highly regarded, as reported by witnesses and documents submitted on his behalf. He 
is praised for his excellent job performance, responsible handling of classified 
information, work ethic, loyalty, patriotism, dedication, honesty, diligence, dependability, 
conscientiousness, reliability, trustworthiness, leadership, and integrity.8 
 
 Applicant was examined by a forensic psychiatrist in May 2018 for the purposes 
of his security clearance. His diagnostic impressions were substance use disorder, 
alcohol dependency, in remission; and major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate 
(no suicide ideation). The psychiatrist felt that Applicant’s undiagnosed and untreated 
depression significantly contributed to his 2015 relapses.9 He concluded: 
 
At this juncture, [Applicant] has been on the job, valued by his employer, 
and has made significant adjustments in his psychosocial range and 
maintains treatment for his depressive disorder. He is fully restored and 
more apt to deal with future challenges without relapse. 
 
I see no impairment that would prevent him from thinking, making 
judgements, taking supervision, fulfilling his duties or processing 
information. I do not find him vulnerable to untoward influence due to an 
addiction or a mental problem.10 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 71, 76, 83-86, 100-105; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, I. 
 
7 Tr. at 84-94, 101, 105-108; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, D. 
 
8 Tr. at 21-34, 54-76; GE 1; AE A, E-N. 
 
9 Tr. at 35-53; AE B, C. 
 
10 AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing 
the welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder;  
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.  
 
Applicant is an admitted alcoholic whose battles with alcohol are well 
documented. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant received alcohol treatment in 1995, 2000, December 2015, and 
January to February 2016. He remained sober from 1995 to 1999 and from 2000 to 
2015, but he relapsed and returned to uncontrolled drinking. His company arranged for 
him to attend a three-day inpatient alcohol detoxication program on December 21, 2015. 
He was released from the facility on December 24, 2015, but Applicant was unhappy 
with the program and yet again returned to uncontrolled drinking. During a night of 
heavy drinking in late December 2015, he fell, cut his head, and received a black eye. 
His employer terminated him the next morning when he reported to work still under the 
effects of alcohol.  
 
 In January 2016, Applicant realized he had hit bottom and needed help. He paid 
for his 30-day inpatient rehabilitation program in a neighboring state. While at the 
facility, he was diagnosed with depression and placed on medication. Applicant and the 
forensic psychiatrist felt that Applicant’s undiagnosed and untreated depression 
significantly contributed to his 2015 relapses.  
 
 Applicant has been sober since January 2016. He is compliant with his 
depression medication. He regularly attends AA meetings. He has a sponsor, and he is 
a sponsor. He realizes the seriousness of his actions and the consequences if he 
returns to drinking. I found him to be forthcoming and sincere. I am cognizant that 
Applicant has been through this process before. Nonetheless, I find that he established 
a pattern of abstinence, and alcohol consumption no longer casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), and 23(d) are 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s excellent 
character evidence and that the company that terminated him in December 2015, 
rehired him in July 2016, and completely supports him. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
