                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )       ISCR  Case No.  17-02208          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se        
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On June 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security
Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 10, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 30, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on June 6,
2018. The Government’s case consisted of four exhibits  (GEs 1-4) that were admitted
without objection. Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript
was received on June 14, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented settlement of his
first mortgage and filed tax returns for tax years 2013-2017. For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was
afforded seven days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant advised of (a) ongoing efforts to reconstruct
his wife’s business records to forward to his tax preparer and (b) preparation of his house
for sale. He provided no follow-up documentation of his filing his back returns, paying his
taxes owed for the past years, or resolving his delinquent mortgages. Applicant’s email
exchange and correspondence from his first mortgage were admitted as AEs A-B. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated twp delinquent debts
exceeding $199,000; (b) failed to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2013-2015; and
(c) failed to pay federal income taxes for at least tax years 2013 and 2014, as required.
Allegedly, Applicant’s back taxes owed for tax years 2013-2014 remain unpaid. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations with
explanations. He claimed income losses from his wife’s real estate business and financial
support for his wife who encountered severe medical problems that contributed to his
delinquencies. He further claimed he was unable to obtain debt consolidation loans due to
the loss of equity in his home attributable to the economic recession. He claimed his
home has recovered in value, and he has repaid $52,000 to non-SOR creditors, but still
has no funds besides the equity in his home to address his mortgage and consumer
debts. And he claimed he is a proud graduate of a distinguished military academy with a
25 plus year Air Force (AF) career who would never compromise his integrity while
safeguarding the nation’s classified information. 
Addressing the tax allegations, Applicant claimed filing delays due to his lack of
funds to pay any past-due taxes and his wife’s having no accurate and timely records
from her business. He acknowledged laziness for his procrastination in filing his back tax
returns, and he claimed to have tax professionals in place to work with the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) to determine what returns are still due, what net amount of taxes
are owed, if and, whether any penalties are eligible for waiver due to mitigating
circumstances.
.
2
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 74-year-old master test engineer for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR were not admitted by Applicant
and are reserved for fact-finding based on the developed evidence at hearing. 
Background
Applicant married in August 1967 and has two adult daughters (ages 46 and 43).
His wife passed away in October 2017 following a long illness with Type II diabetes and
non-alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver. (Tr. 33) Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree from a
distinguished military academy in June 1966 and a master’s degree in June 1974 from an
Air Force (AF) technology school. (GE 1) Applicant served in the active-duty AF between
June 1962 and March 1987 and was honorably retired in March 1987.
Since August 2005, Applicant has been employed by his current defense
contractor. (GEs 1-2) Previously, he worked for other defense contractors.
Applicant’s finances
Applicant purchased his current home jointly with his wife in December 2005 and
financed his purchase with a $400,000 first mortgage. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 32) Payments
approximated $3,100 a month. He missed a few payments on his first mortgage in 2014
due to medical bills related to his wife’s liver disease illness, but has been current with his
payments since 2014. (GEs 2-4) 
In August 2006, Applicant obtained a $200,000 home-equity line-of-credit with
SOR creditor 1.a and secured the credit line with a second mortgage on his home. (GEs
3-4)  Beginning in 2009, Applicant encountered difficulties keeping up with his mortgage
payments due to his wife’s loss of income from her real estate business and his providing
financial support to his eldest daughter who had major medical problems and could not
work. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 32-33) Although both he and his wife were fully employed at the time,
they did not have enough equity in their home to obtain a consolidation loan. (Tr. 28-30, 
32-34) Currently, Applicant has a delinquency balance of $200,000 on his second
mortgage with SOR creditor 1.a. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 30, 36-38) 
Between 2009 and 2018, Applicant accumulated over $50,000 in delinquent
mortgage debt before the second mortgagee charged off the debt in October 2013. (GEs
1-2; Tr. 51) He admits to making no mortgage payments on his second mortgage (SOR
creditor 1.a) between 2010 and 2018, except for a couple of payments. (Tr.  27, 39-40)
Still, he continues to receive daily phone calls from SOR creditor 1.a seeking to enlist him
to pay the balance owing. (Tr. 40) While creditor 1.a has offered to settle its mortgage
debt for $99,000 in 2017, and more recently for $130,000, Applicant has to date declined
the offer and is currently exploring opportunities to sell the home (currently valued at
$600,000) to provide the proceeds to pay off the second mortgage with a lump-sum
payment. (AE A; Tr.  22-23, 32-36, 41-43) 
3
In an interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in May 2016, Applicant promised to address his mortgage delinquencies, but to
date, he has made no substantive progress. Results from his efforts to consolidate his
loan or sell his home to satisfy his mortgage debt have not materialized. (AE B) 
Besides his second mortgage debt, Applicant incurred a delinquent credit card
debt on a line-of-credit he obtained from the lender in August 2006. (GEs 3-4) Creditor
1.b closed this account for non-payment in July 2013, and the account remains unpaid
and unresolved.
Records confirm that Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax
years 2013-2015, as required. (GE 2; Tr. 51-52) He attributed his filing failures to
concerns he could not cover any tax amounts owed at the time and procrastinated in
establishing communications with the IRS. (GE 2) Applicant has been working with tax
professionals for the past two years to file his tax returns for tax years 2013-2015, but to
date, he has not provided any proof of substantive progress in filing tax returns for the tax
years in question. (GE 2 and AE B; Tr. 56-57)  Records also confirm that Applicant failed
to pay his federal taxes owed for tax years 2013-2014, as required. (GE 2) He has no
knowledge at this time as to how much he owes in back taxes for 2013-2014. (Tr. 51-52)
He attributed his tax payment  problems to the financial support he has had to provide to
his eldest daughter, who only recently returned to work. (Tr. 47-48) Altogether, Applicant
pays out $1,900 a month for her house payments and $900 a month for her car
payments. (Tr. 55) 
Applicant maintains a monthly adjusted gross income of $11,000, inclusive of his
military retirement. (Tr. 28-34, 57-58) Although he currently has a $1,000 monthly
remainder, he has no money set aside to pay his mortgage delinquency and back taxes
and needs to sell his house to clear enough equity to repay the balances owing on his
second mortgage and whatever might be owing on his federal taxes. (Tr. 40-44) 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
4
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of dependence. An
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to
engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . .
.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
5
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent
mortgage and consumer debts, his failure to file his federal tax returns for tax years
2013-2015, and his accrual of delinquent taxes due for tax years 2013-2014.
Financial Concerns
           Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent mortgage and consumer debts, his failure
to file federal tax returns for multiple years (2013-2015), and his accruing of delinquent
federal taxes for tax years of 2013-2014 warrant the application of three of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”;
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations”; and 19(f), “failure to file or
fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay
annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.”
Between 2010 and 2018, Applicant accumulated over $50,000 in delinquent
mortgage debt on his second mortgage. (SOR debt ¶ 1.a) He incurred an additional
debt on a line of credit with SOR debt ¶ 1.b, and the creditor charged off the debt in
2013. Neither of these debts have been addressed or resolved by Applicant, and they
remain outstanding. Further, Applicant’s acknowledged failure to file federal tax returns
for tax years 2013-2015 and pay or otherwise resolve owed taxes for tax years 2013-
2014 have not been addressed by Applicant.
6
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in failed tax filing and debt cases 
Historically, the timing of filing federal tax returns and resolving federal and state
tax delinquencies are critical to an assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness,
reliability, and good judgment in following rules and guidelines necessary for those
seeking access to classified information or to holding a sensitive position. See ISCR
Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App.
Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited extenuating circumstances (i.e., medical issues
affecting both his wife and daughter) provide the basis of some mitigation credit for his 
failure to file his federal tax returns and address owed federal taxes, as well as his
delinquent mortgage and consumer debts Based on his cited circumstances, MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances,” has some application to Applicant’s situation
Based on Applicant’s  cited circumstances, however, the “acting responsibly”
prong of  MC ¶ 20(b) has only limited application and cannot excuse his past failures to
timely file his tax returns and address his delinquent tax, mortgage, and consumer
debts. Applicant’s failure or inability to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2013-
2015, address his delinquent tax, mortgage, and consumer debts, and demonstrate a
good track record for managing his finances precludes him from fully availing himself  of
the  benefits of MC ¶ 20(b).  See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 26,
2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). For similar reasons, MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated and is adhering to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” is not available to mitigate his federal tax return filing lapses
and incurring of federal tax delinquencies (still unresolved) and other debts over an
extended number of years. 
Whether Applicant is entitled to the full mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 20(g), “the
individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the
amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,” is unclear at this point.
See ISCR Case No. 16-02246, at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 8, 2017). Applicant provided no
documentation at hearing or in permitted post-hearing submissions of his demonstrated
commitments to address his tax filing and payment delinquencies, as well as his
mortgage and consumer debts with the resources currently available to him. In
evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance of a
“meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely filing of tax
returns. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  In Applicant’s case,
his failure to address his federal tax filing failures and his tax, mortgage, and consumer
7
debts with the resources currently available to him preclude him from taking full
advantage of any of the mitigating conditions potentially available to him under
Guideline F.
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing his federal tax returns for tax years 2013-2015, or in
paying or otherwise resolving his outstanding tax, mortgage, and consumer debts.
Applicant’s general contributions to the U.S. defense effort through his many years of
Air Force service and his work in the defense industry are considerable and merit a
good deal of respect and appreciation. 
Applicant’s positive credits are insufficient, though to surmount historical trust
and judgment issues associated with his failure to file his federal tax returns over the
course of several years (i.e., 2013-2015, as referenced in the SOR) and failure or
inability to better address his major federal tax, mortgage, and consumer debt
delinquencies with more timely and sustained filing and payment efforts to establish a
strong track record of responsible financial management. Overall, Applicant’s actions to
date in addressing his finances reflect too little evidence of restored financial
responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable doubts about his trustworthiness,
reliability, and ability to protect classified information or occupy a sensitive position. See
AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that his finances are insufficiently stabilized at this
time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance.  Eligibility
to hold a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case is
inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:                       Against Applicant
 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
  
10
