 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03306 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
10/12/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 27, 
2018, scheduling the hearing for September 13, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and offered Exhibits (AE) A and B. I held the record 
open until September 27, 2018, for additional documentation. Applicant presented a 
 
2 
 
packet of documents (receipts), which I marked AE C, and admitted into the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 24, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 42, is married and has no children. He graduated from high school, 
and has obtained certificates related to his job as a security technician. He has been 
employed with his current employer for less than three years. (Tr. 14) Applicant completed 
his security clearance application on September 18, 2016. He has never held a security 
clearance. (GE 1)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has delinquent debt in the approximate amount of 
$3,112, for a collection account. (SOR 1.a) The SOR also alleges a past-due amount on 
a mortgage account in the approximate amount of $12,699, with a total loan balance of 
$61,751. (SOR 1.b) Applicant denied the first allegation and admitted the second 
allegation. He provided explanations for each account. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial situation. He was unemployed after his 
company reduced his hours in 2014 for about four months. He did not receive 
unemployment benefits and used his savings to pay bills. When he began his new 
employment, he received a lower hourly rate of pay. In addition, he also experienced 
medical issues which resulted in many bills. (Answer to SOR) 
 
Applicant devoted the full measure of his financial resources to one debt at a time. 
He presented documentation and explained during his OPM interview that he paid other 
non-SOR debts. He did not wish to file for bankruptcy. His plan was to eliminate one debt 
at a time. He explained that he paid the debt alleged in SOR 1.a and provided 
documentation to show that he began the payment plan in late 2016. He made monthly 
payments of $600. The last payment of $725 was made on September 25, 2017. The 
balance is zero. (AX B) The debt is resolved.  
 
Applicant explained that he suffered a pulmonary embolism in June 2018. He 
presented documentation that he paid many medical bills amounting to about $2,000. 
(AX) C.  He has health insurance, but he has to pay the remainder. He will probably have 
more medical tests in the future. At the same time, he remained current on his first home 
mortgage loan and paid his homeowner association bill in the amount of $1,500. He 
disclosed on his SF-86 that he also paid other credit cards bills. His earlier credit bureau 
report confirms his many accounts that are pays as agreed.  When he had a reduction in 
salary and no work, he volunteered to the investigator that he did not file his 2013 or 2014 
Federal income tax return. He filed both years returns in March 2016. He believes he 
asked for an extension. At the hearing, he answered that he is current with all federal and 
state tax returns. He does not owe the IRS any money. (GE 2, 4)  
 
 As to SOR 1.b, the past-due amount on his second home mortgage loan, 
Applicant explained that he has made several payments of $1,000 to the lender after he 
became delinquent due to unemployment. (AX A) He was credible when he explained 
 
3 
 
that this is his last delinquent account. He is in the process of refinancing or attempting 
to roll both loans into one. He has an interest rate of 8.75.  He has never been late on the 
first home mortgage loan. He stopped paying his monthly amount due to unemployment. 
(Tr. 40)  He believes he has made sporadic payments. He admits that he needs some 
financial help to make the correct choice about paying the second mortgage. He was 
following his plan of paying debts one at a time, when suddenly in 2018 he had the 
medical issues.  
 
Applicant currently earns about $32 an hour.  He works 40 hours a week and 
sometimes he has overtime. The overtime might earn him an hourly rate of $48. (Tr. 17) 
He believes his net monthly income is $950. He explained that until he obtained his 
current job, he was making about $25 an hour. (Tr.20)  Applicant’s wife also works. Her 
earnings are about $2,000 a month. He was saving money, and since 2017, he has a 
retirement account. His car loan is paid. He is current on his daily expenses and has no 
other delinquent debts, aside from the second mortgage on his home. That monthly 
payment is $432. (Tr. 24) Again, Applicant was credible when he explained that he would 
have moved much quicker on this last delinquent account, but he suffered a pulmonary 
embolism, which set him back.  
 
Applicant explained that he has, due to circumstances beyond his control, been 
dealing with financial delinquencies. He believes he has adhered to a plan to pay his 
debts. He volunteered information about his earlier unfiled tax returns, which are now 
resolved. He was honest on his SF-86 about his homeowner association bill, which he 
has paid. He also explained that they had seized his bank account for a period of time 
and he has taken care of that debt. He also paid several non SOR debts. Pointing to his 
credit reports, he explained that there is a track record of paying his debts. His priority 
was the Federal tax debt, credit cards, medical bills and current first mortgage. He has 
accomplished that in spite of having a serious medical issue appear in 2018. He tried to 
refinance the second mortgage note, but it was rejected for lack of information. He 
contacted the bank but did not receive any real assistance. His plan is to continue to 
remain current on all other bills, medical included, and find a company to refinance both 
home loans so that he will not be spending more on his mortgage than necessary. He 
knows he signed a mortgage and is in the process of completing his plan to pay the last 
delinquent debt. (Tr. 48) 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
 
4 
 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
 
5 
 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”)  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are the result of unemployment and underemployment. He also 
incurred major medical bills. He paid many debts since returning to employment and a 
good-paying job in 2016. He paid many non SOR debts. He was left with one credit 
collection account, which was satisfied in 2017. He had a plan and the only delinquent 
account remaining is his second home mortgage loan. He is in the process of resolving 
the situation. His earlier credit reports show that he has many accounts that reflect pay 
as agreed. He is saving now and presented documentation that the medical bills are paid. 
He has not yet obtained financial counseling, but is aware of his need to do so. To date 
he is making genuine progress and acting responsibly under the circumstances. He 
volunteered information on his SF-86 and to the investigator about his 2013-2014 federal 
tax issues which has been resolved. He established a track record of financial 
 
6 
 
responsibility. He was credible in his explanations. He presented sufficient evidence to 
establish that he has been responsible under the circumstances.  AG ¶ 20(a) is partially 
established.  AG ¶ 20(b) is fully established.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. AG 20(d) is partially established. Applicant resolved 
all delinquent debts and is now working on his last delinquent account.  Not all debts need 
to be resolved for mitigation. I have no doubts about his trustworthiness. Applicant met 
his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the SOR. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including his honesty in disclosing all his prior financial issues, which 
had been resolved before the issuance of the SOR, and the debts that Applicant has paid 
given his unemployment and medical condition, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant carried 
his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
