 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 17-02747 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 11, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had several arrests between 2007 and 2015. She has changed her 
lifestyle and convincingly showed she will not engage in such conduct in the future. Based 
on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, national security eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on June 3, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On October 3, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the 
Department of Defense after June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on November 8, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on December 8, 2017. The case was assigned to me on December 11, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
January 25, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 13, 2018. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits A 
through E, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 21, 2018.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 32, single, and has one child. She is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in connection with her work with the DoD.  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J: Criminal Conduct)  
 
 The Government alleged in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for national 
security eligibility because she has engaged in conduct of a criminal nature. Applicant 
admitted subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f. She denied subparagraph 1.e. 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that in March 2007 she was charged with Aggravated 
Unlicensed Operation of a Motor Vehicle, and Criminal Possession of Marijuana. She had 
just turned 21 years old, “And I started hanging out with the wrong people.” Applicant 
freely admitted the arrest was her fault. She pled guilty and was fined $250. (Government 
Exhibits 2 at pages 7-8, and 3 at pages 4-5; Tr. 17, 20-22.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that in November 2010 she was arrested and charged with 
Driving While Intoxicated. Before this offense was adjudicated Applicant committed the 
offense set forth in allegation 1.c, below. (Government Exhibit 2 at page 6, and 3 at pages 
5-6; Tr. 22-24.)  
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that in August 2011 she was arrested and charged with 
Driving While Intoxicated. She was convicted of Operate Motor Vehicle with .08 of 1% or 
More in Blood. The sentence for this offense was combined with that for allegation 1.b, 
above, and consisted of a fine, probation for three years, attendance at an alcohol 
program, and her license was revoked. Her probation ended early, after eighteen months, 
in August 2013. This was Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident. (Government Exhibit 1 
at pages 37-40, Exhibit 2 at page 6, and Exhibit 3 at pages 5-7; Tr. 24-27.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted that she was charged in April 2012 with Unlicensed 
Operator and No Interlock Device. Applicant admitted this was a very foolish decision on 
her part. She drove a friend’s car when her license was revoked, and was seen by a 
police officer who knew Applicant did not have a license. No alcohol was involved in this 
incident. Applicant paid a $300 fine for this offense. (Government Exhibit 1 at pages 4-
41, and Exhibit 3 at 6; Tr. 27-32.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant denied that she had been charged in August 2013 with Unlicensed 
Operator and No Interlock Device. As further discussed below, Applicant had moved to 
another state as her probation was ending. Once her probation ended she legally 
obtained a driver’s license in her new state of residence, which she had on the date of 
the offense. Applicant submitted documentation from the court showing that the case was 
dismissed in October 2013 after she went to court and showed them the proper 
documentation. This allegation has been mitigated. (Government Exhibit 2 at pages 6-7; 
Applicant Exhibit A.)  
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted being arrested in June 2015 for Assaulting a Law 
Enforcement Officer, and Obstructing or Resisting an Officer Without Violence. A friend 
was driving Applicant’s car when they were stopped by police. Alcohol was not involved, 
but Applicant became belligerent with the police and was arrested. She pled guilty In 
Absentia to Disorderly Conduct and paid a $525 fine. Applicant has not been involved 
with the police since that time. (Government Exhibit 4; Tr. 18, 33-43.) 
 
 Applicant decided to change her life as her probation was ending in August 2013. 
She moved to another state and began taking classes to receive her associate’s degree, 
which she received cum laude in 2015. During her time in school, Applicant received 
scholarships. She has successfully worked for her present employer since 2015, being 
deployed several times. Applicant is in training to obtain a private pilot’s license. Applicant 
realizes that she has made poor decisions in the past, and stated that she has matured 
and wants to be a good mother to her teenage child. (Applicant Exhibits B and C; Tr. 19, 
44-49.)   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
 
 
4 
 
 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J: Criminal Conduct) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions apply: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant had five criminal incidents between 2007 and 2015. The 2007 incident 
involved marijuana. Two of them, in 2010 and 2011, were alcohol-related. The evidence 
is sufficient to apply the above disqualifying conditions, thereby requiring Applicant to 
provide evidence to mitigate them. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense;  
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant admitted that she made poor decisions in the period between 2007 and 
2012, during which time she had four criminal incidents. In 2013 Applicant’s probation 
ended and she moved to another state. During the next few years she obtained an 
associate’s degree with honors, and began working for her current employer. The 2015 
incident was an aberration, and it was not viewed seriously by the court since Applicant 
only received a fine. When the record closed, Applicant had not had any police 
involvement in almost three years. Applicant evinced a credible intent not to engage in 
 
 
6 
 
 
such conduct in the future. AG ¶¶ 32(a), (c), and (d) apply. Guideline J is found for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the security significance of 
her past criminal conduct. Overall, the record evidence does not create substantial doubt 
as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for national security eligibility and a 
security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
