1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
REDACATED ) ISCR Case No. 17-04126 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has been married since October 2015 to a Russian citizen whose 
daughter, parents, and half-sister are resident citizens of Russia. Applicant’s spouse co-
owns an apartment in Russia with her daughter. The risk of undue foreign influence cannot 
be ruled out, despite Applicant’s lifelong ties to the United States. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On December 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The SOR explained why the DOD CAF 
was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
10/15/2018
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 12, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
On April 18, 2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On April 23, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for May 16, 2018. 
 
At the hearing, two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) were admitted. A March 15, 
2018 letter forwarding the proposed GEs to Applicant, a March 15, 2018 Request for 
Administrative Notice–Russian Federation, and a list of the GEs were marked as hearing 
exhibits (HEs I-III) for the record but not admitted in evidence. At the Government’s 
request and without objection from Applicant, I agreed to take administrative notice of 
several facts pertinent to the Russian Federation (Russia). Seven Applicant exhibits (AEs 
A-G) were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and his spouse testified, as 
reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on June 5, 2018. 
 
I held the record open after the hearing, initially for three weeks, for Applicant to 
submit facts for administrative notice and additional evidence. At Applicant’s request, I 
twice extended the due date for submissions. On June 22, 2018, Applicant timely 
submitted corrections to the transcript and two documents consisting of his comments on 
the oral testimony (AE H) and summaries of six decisions of DOHA administrative judges. 
On June 25, 2018, the Government expressed no objection to the clarifications to the 
transcript, but indicated that the decisions of DOHA judges in other cases are not binding 
precedent. I accepted the comments on the oral testimony as AE H, but informed the 
parties that I would consider the case summaries as a supplement to Applicant’s closing 
argument.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Russia, as set forth in an Administrative Notice request dated March 15, 2018. 
The Government’s request was based on excerpts of U.S. government publications, 
statements for the record before Congress, and press releases and statements from U.S. 
government entities as referenced in the document.1 
 
Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most current political 
conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 12, 2007)), I informed the parties of my intention to take administrative notice, subject 
to the reliability of the source documentation and the relevance and materiality of the facts 
proposed. Applicant confirmed his receipt of the Government’s Administrative Notice 
                                                 
1 The Government’s request for administrative notice was based on a May 11, 2017 statement for the record 
by the Director of National Intelligence before the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (I); on the 
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive’s Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection 
and Industrial Espionage, 2009-2011, dated October 2011 (II); on press releases and press statements 
from the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. State Department, and the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security (III-XII); on the State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016-Russia, 
and its crime and safety reports for Moscow for 2016 and 2017. I was provided extracts of the documents 
and the web addresses for the full articles. 
 
 
3 
request with extracts of the source documents. Applicant filed no objections to the facts 
set forth in the Government’s Administrative Notice request. He accepted an opportunity 
to propose additional facts for administrative notice, but did not submit any facts for 
administrative notice other than some comments included in AE H. 
 
 Concerning the press releases of reported criminal activity of Russian agents and 
spies and of export violations on Russia’s behalf, they were presented by the Government 
apparently to substantiate that Russia engages in espionage against the United States 
and actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and proprietary information. Neither 
Applicant, his spouse, nor any of her family members were implicated in that criminal 
activity. With that caveat, the facts administratively noticed are set forth below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s spouse is a Russian citizen 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); that Applicant’s stepdaughter (SOR ¶ 1.b), parents-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.c), and 
two sisters-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.d) are resident citizens of Russia; that Applicant provides 
financial support to his stepdaughter in Russia (SOR ¶ 1.e); and that Applicant’s spouse 
has an ownership interest in property in Russia (SOR ¶ 1.f). When he responded to the 
SOR allegations, Applicant admitted the foreign ties, but he also explained that his spouse 
has U.S. permanent residency, and that she submitted the paperwork required to 
continue her green card. He indicated that while both of his spouse’s sisters are Russian 
citizens, one of her sisters has been a resident of the United States since 2008 and has 
U.S. permanent residency. Applicant explained that his stepdaughter is employed as an 
elementary school teacher in Russia, and he no longer provides her any financial 
assistance. Applicant admitted that his spouse shares ownership of her former residence 
in Russia with her daughter, but she intends to transfer full ownership to her daughter. 
Applicant explained that his spouse will have to renew her internal Russian passport to 
transfer the property, which she intends to do when they travel to Russia to see her 
daughter in 2018. (Answer.) 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old computer systems engineer with a bachelor’s degree in 
electrical engineering awarded in 1983. During his senior year of college, Applicant was 
in a U.S. military engineering program. On his graduation, he honorably served on active 
duty in the United States military until September 1987. He held a security clearance for 
his military duties and was trained to recognize potential threats from foreign sources. He 
was discharged from the inactive reserve in 1994. Applicant then spent his career in the 
commercial sector before commencing his current employment with a defense contractor 
in May 2016 after receiving an interim security clearance. (GEs 1-2; AE E; Tr. 131-136, 
144-145.) 
 
Applicant was married to his first wife from 1989 to 2009. He has two sons ages 
26 and 16 and two daughters ages 23 and 19 from that marriage. He bought his present 
 
 
4 
home in 1990. (GE 1.) He started dating about six years after his divorce, but he traveled 
too much for the women he dated, some of whom he met on U.S. online dating sites. He 
then viewed several dating websites based abroad, including Asian, South American, 
Ukrainian, and Russian websites. (Tr. 147-149.) 
 
In late July 2014, Applicant voluntarily resigned from his job to take a one-year 
break from employment to travel, including with his son, who was serving in the U.S. 
military. (Tr. 163.) In September 2014, Applicant began corresponding with his current 
spouse, a native Russian citizen, whose profile he accessed on a British dating website. 
She was born in 1971, when the country was part of the Soviet Union. She never joined 
the Communist party but was a member of a conservative youth organization while 
growing up. Her parents were teenagers when she was born, and they divorced when 
she and her twin sister were in elementary school. After her parents’ divorce, Applicant’s 
spouse and twin sister lived in their grandparents’ home, initially with their mother. Their 
mother, who twice remarried, lived with them on and off. At times, she resided in the same 
city, and Applicant’s spouse and her sister were able to visit their mother. Their father 
was out of their lives until they were in high school, and he began to tutor them in 
mathematics to prepare for their university studies. Their father had remarried and had a 
family of his own. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 46-48, 56-57, 70-71, 75-76, 100.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse was an exchange student in the United States during the 1990 
to 1991 academic school year. After graduating from a Russian university with a degree 
in mathematics, she married in 1992, and had a daughter a year later. She and her first 
husband divorced in 2001. Her ex-husband is an electrical engineer and works for a 
manufacturing company. Applicant’s spouse focused on raising her daughter and working 
as a senior manager in the commercial sector. In March 2013, Applicant’s spouse and 
her daughter purchased the apartment in Russia in which her daughter currently resides. 
Applicant’s spouse owns a 40% interest in the property. (GEs 1-2; AEs D, H; Tr. 53-56, 
77, 80.) 
 
After some email exchanges and Skype contact with his spouse, Applicant traveled 
to Russia to meet his spouse in person in October 2014. Because he stayed in her private 
home, he and his spouse registered his stay with the local police as was required by 
Russian law.2  She showed Applicant around Moscow, and they had dinner with her 
daughter during that trip. After that visit, in November 2014, Applicant applied for a fiancée 
visa for his spouse to immigrate to the United States in case they developed a lasting 
relationship. She was reluctant because she wanted to stay in Russia until her daughter 
                                                 
2 Information from the U.S. State Department indicates that U.S. citizens traveling on U.S. passports are 
required to have a current U.S. passport and appropriate visa for entry to Russia, and to obtain a visa, there 
must be a Russian sponsoring organization or individual. Foreigners entering Russia are fingerprinted. 
Stays in Russia exceed seven days require registration of both visa and migration card with the General 
Administration for Migration Issues of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and passports and migration cards 
must be carried at all times while in Russia. The migration card is provided by border officials on entry into 
Russia.  See U.S. State Department’s publication Quick Facts—Russia, update on March 30, 2018, which 
may be accessed at www.state.gov. Applicant’s spouse as a Russian citizen presumably sponsored 
Applicant’s entry.  
 
 
 
5 
had graduated from college and started a career, but agreed after Applicant promised to 
support her daughter until her daughter graduated from college. Applicant’s intention was 
not to pressure his spouse. He wanted to start what he believed would be a multi-year 
process. (GE 1; AE G; Tr. 57-61, 106, 137-138.) 
 
 In January 2015, Applicant’s spouse came to the United States on a tourist visa 
to see Applicant and meet his family.3 She traveled on her Russian passport valid to 2020. 
In March 2015, she returned to the United States and stayed with Applicant for 
approximately six months. Applicant sent $3,000 in financial support to his stepdaughter 
in college in Russia during that time. His stepdaughter was initially able to find only a part- 
time job on her graduation from college in June 2015. In September 2015, Applicant’s 
spouse returned to Russia to complete the requirements for her fiancée visa. She 
immigrated to the United States on that visa in early October 2015, and she and Applicant 
married later that month. In December 2015, Applicant and his spouse sent her daughter 
$600 as a Christmas gift. In March 2016, Applicant’s spouse acquired U.S. permanent 
residency status valid for two years. (GEs 1-2; AEs A, C; Tr. 58-61, 91-92, 111, 114-117, 
137, 164.) She began working part time as a receptionist at a school. (Tr. 63.) 
 
In December 2015, Applicant lost his job in a layoff. In late March 2016, Applicant 
completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) for a position with his employer that was contingent on him obtaining an interim 
security clearance. He disclosed that his spouse and her twin sister are Russian citizens 
residing in the United States with U.S. permanent residency, but that his spouse’s 
daughter, parents, and a younger half-sister are Russian resident citizens.4 He indicated 
that his spouse’s daughter worked at a government school in Russia. She started that job 
in January 2016. (AE B.) Applicant explained that he had met his stepdaughter during his 
trip to Russia in October 2014. Applicant also indicated that his spouse’s mother, who is 
retired, had visited him and his spouse in the United States in July 2015. Applicant had 
not met his spouse’s father, who was employed by a Russian university. Applicant had 
limited contact with his spouse’s half-sister in Russia and knew nothing about her 
employment. Applicant disclosed that his spouse has a foreign financial interest 
consisting of a 40% share in property worth about $38,000 USD co-owned with her 
daughter in Russia. Applicant also disclosed that he had provided approximately $3,400 
in financial support for his stepdaughter before she graduated from college in 2015, but 
has since then only sent birthday and Christmas gifts. Applicant listed his foreign trip to 
Russia in October 2014 to meet his spouse. (GE 1.) 
 
In April 2016, Applicant and his spouse traveled to her native city in Russia for ten 
days to visit her relatives, including her mother, half-sister, and paternal grandmother. 
(AE H; Tr. 61.) They spent most of their time there and went to a restaurant with her 
                                                 
3 Applicant’s spouse apparently had a three-year tourist visa, which she obtained to visit her twin sister who 
has lived in the United States since 2008. (Tr. 116.) 
 
4 Applicant’s spouse testified that her younger sister is her mother’s daughter from her third husband. (Tr. 
51.) 
 
 
 
6 
family, including her father and half-brother, to celebrate their October 2015 wedding. 
They stayed with his spouse’s half-sister when in Russia. None of his spouse’s relatives 
asked them for information that would be of possible interest to the Russian government, 
including its intelligence services. At Applicant’s request, they went to his stepdaughter’s 
school where he answered questions for some of the students.5 Applicant’s spouse 
translated for him because he does not speak Russian apart from a few words. Later that 
day, they met with some high school students who asked Applicant questions, primarily 
in English, about life, schools, and culture in the United States. (AE H; Tr. 61-68, 107-
108, 142.)  
 
In January 2017, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant explained that he met his spouse 
through an online dating website, and in October 2014, he traveled to Russia to meet her 
in person. He listed in-person contact with his spouse in November 2014, January 2015, 
and from March 2015 to September 2015, before their marriage in the United States in 
October 2015. Applicant indicated that he had in-person contact with his stepdaughter 
three times, and contact with her by social media weekly. Applicant denied having met 
his father-in-law in person, and that he had any contact with his father-in-law.6 He related 
that he had social media contact on a weekly basis with his mother-in-law in Russia and 
with his spouse’s twin sister in the United States. As for his spouse’s half-sister in Russia, 
Applicant indicated that he had in-person contact with her in June 2015, and contact by 
social media once a quarter. He denied any knowledge of her occupation or of her 
employment. Applicant indicated that his spouse still co-owned her former residence in 
Russia. (GE 2.) 
 
In mid-January 2017, Applicant sent his stepdaughter $1,350, of which $1,000 was 
a combined birthday and Christmas present for her. The $350 was Applicant and his 
spouse’s contribution to the cost of a burial headstone for his spouse’s grandmother. (AE 
C; Tr. 155-156.) In May 2017, his stepdaughter was awarded her master’s degree. (AE 
B.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse has been employed full time since early 2017 for a commercial 
company. (Tr. 63.) She does not intend to return permanently to Russia. (Tr. 89.) She 
applied to renew her U.S. permanent residency, and on January 2018, the United States 
extended her conditional resident status for one year authorizing her continued 
employment and travel in the United States pending a decision on her petition to remove 
the conditions on her U.S. residency. (AE A; Tr. 90.) She has not notified the Russian 
                                                 
5 Applicant indicated in his Answer that his stepdaughter started permanent employment as an elementary 
school teacher in January 2016. Applicant’s spouse testified that her daughter does not have a teaching 
degree. She is “a psychologist with the sake of kids.” (Tr. 83.) It is unclear whether her daughter teaches 
or is a school psychologist at the government-owned elementary school. 
 
6 This denial of any in-person contact with his father-in-law as of January 2017 contradicts other evidence. 
At his hearing, Applicant and his spouse acknowledged that they traveled to Russia in April 2016. Applicant 
had not met his father-in-law when he completed his SF 86 in March 2016. He met his father-in-law at the 
party with her family at a restaurant in Russia in April 2016. (Tr. 107-108.) 
 
 
 
7 
authorities of her current address in the United States or of her permanent residency 
status in the United States.7 (Tr. 110.) She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship in the 
future. (Tr. 118.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse exchanges greetings with her daughter in Russia every day. 
They have a very close relationship and engage in longer conversations every two weeks. 
She converses with her daughter in Russian. Her daughter knows little English. Applicant 
and his spouse plan to travel to Russia to visit her daughter in October 2018. Her 
daughter, who is still employed by the elementary school, has no plans to move to the 
United States and has never traveled to the United States. Two or three times, her 
daughter applied for a visa to travel to the United States to visit her mother and was 
denied. Applicant’s spouse believes the United States denied a visa to her daughter 
because she is in “a risk category” in that she might not leave the United States were she 
to visit. Applicant’s stepdaughter and her boyfriend live in the apartment that she co-owns 
with her mother. Since her daughter plans to stay in Russia, Applicant’s spouse intends 
to transfer full ownership to her daughter. Applicant’s spouse had a Russian internal 
passport that expired in January 2003. She understands that the best way to transfer her 
ownership share is to renew her Russian internal passport, and she must be in Russia to 
renew it. The Russian internal passport is the primary form of identification for Russian 
citizens in Russia. It expired when she turned age 45 in 2016. Applicant’s spouse has no 
other financial assets in Russia. (AE A; Tr. 78-82, 86, 92-99, 108-110, 51, 157-160.) Her 
Russian passport for international travel bears an old address in Russia. She has not 
made any effort to update her residency information with Russian authorities. She does 
not believe that she has any requirement to notify the Russian Embassy. (Tr. 110-111.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse has a “pretty good relationship” with her mother. They 
exchange messages almost daily, usually about her mother’s activities. Her mother has 
had no difficulty obtaining and renewing a visa for travel to the United States. She has 
visited Applicant and her daughter several times in the United States. She came to the 
United States most recently in December 2017 and stayed in Applicant’s home for a 
couple of months. (Tr. 76-77, 140, 152-153.) 
 
Applicant’s spouse’s contact with her father, who speaks English, has never been 
that frequent, and it has lessened over the years as she moved away. After her father’s 
second wife died, Applicant’s spouse called her father two or three times a year. She 
called her father only once in 2017. He does not contact her. He is a mathematics 
professor at a state-owned university in Russia. Her father publishes internationally in 
English and attends conferences abroad. To Applicant’s spouse’s knowledge, her father 
is unaware of Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor. Applicant has had in-
person contact with his father-in-law and spouse’s half-brother on one occasion, at the 
wedding party in Russia in April 2016. (AE H; Tr. 50, 71-74, 99-102, 107.) 
 
                                                 
7As of March 2018, the U.S. State Department reported that Russian citizens who are legal permanent 
residents of the United States must register their foreign residency with Russian authorities. See 
www.state.gov.  
 
 
8 
Applicant’s spouse’s twin sister has lived in the United States since 2008. She has 
Russian citizenship but U.S. permanent residency with no conditions. She is married to a 
U.S. native citizen, who is a Vietnam veteran and works as a computer programmer. She 
has a 10-year-old son who is a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s spouse contacts her twin sister 
on a regular basis. Her sister does not work outside the home. Applicant and his spouse 
have visited her sister, but she has not visited them in their home. To Applicant’s 
knowledge, his sister-in-law is the only one of her spouse’s relatives who knows that he 
has applied for security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 83-84, 103, 153, 160-162.)  
 
Applicant’s spouse has a good relationship with her much younger half-sister in 
Russia.8 They are in communication with each other once or twice a month. Her half-
sister is unmarried but has a boyfriend. She speaks English. Applicant’s spouse has a 
half-brother (her father’s son from his second marriage) with whom she has contact twice 
a year. She has had communication with her father through her half-brother, who also 
speaks English. (Tr. 51-52, 85-87, 107.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledges that he cannot rule out the possibility of him being 
improperly approached for sensitive information in the future. He cites his intelligence, 
patriotism, and training, including on his reporting responsibilities, as evidence that he 
can be counted on to fulfill the obligations of the secret clearance needed for his 
employment. He recently completed refresher training about the behavioral indicators of 
someone who could be a potential threat to the United States. He does not discuss his 
job outside of the workplace. (Tr. 142-146.) He testified that he and his spouse are not a 
perfect couple in that they have their disagreements and struggle at times to blend their 
two cultures. (Tr. 164.) 
 
Applicant received good to excellent ratings in all categories of performance rated 
for the period February 2017 through January 2018. (AE F.) Applicant’s current salary is 
$120,400 annually. His net worth in the United States is approximately $400,000. 
Applicant estimated that his spouse’s apartment in Russia was worth $50,000 as of May 
2018. (Tr. 158-159.) 
  
Administrative Notice 
 
 Russia is a highly centralized, authoritarian political system dominated by 
President Vladimir Putin. Its bicameral federal assembly lacks independence from the 
executive branch. The United States and Russia established diplomatic relations in 
December 1991 following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The United States has long 
sought a full and constructive relationship with Russia and supported Russia’s integration 
into European and global institutions and a deepened bilateral partnership in security 
cooperation to reinforce stability and predictability. In response to Russia violating 
Ukraine’s sovereignty in 2014, the United States downgraded the bilateral political and 
military relationship and suspended most bilateral engagement with Russia on economic 
                                                 
8 Applicant’s spouse testified that her half-sister was born in 1989 and is closer in age to her daughter. (Tr. 
85.) Applicant gave a birth year of 1980 on his SF 86 for his spouse’s half-sister. 
 
 
 
9 
issues. In addition to ongoing Russian aggression in Georgia and Ukraine, Russia is 
engaged in a campaign to undermine core Western institutions, such as NATO and the 
European Union to weaken faith in the democratic and free-market system. There is 
currently a low level of trust between the United States and Russia.9 
 
 In December 2014, Russia’s Supreme Court issued a ruling recognizing the 
Islamic Group of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, aka ISIS) as a terrorist organization and 
banning its domestic activity. In response to Russia instituting military operations in Syria 
in September 2015, ISIL and affiliated terrorist organizations have vowed retaliatory 
terrorist attacks in Russia. In response, Russian security services enhanced security 
measures at many public venues in Russia, including tourist sites. In October 2015, a 
Russian charter plane exploded in mid-air over Egypt due to an improvised explosive 
device attributed to a terrorist act. The Russian Federation continued to remain a target 
of international terrorist groups in 2016. As of February 2017, the U.S. State Department 
assessed Moscow as being a critical-threat location for crime and a high-threat location 
for terrorist activity directed at or affecting official U.S. government interests. 
 
 Serious human rights abuses persisted in Russia in 2016 and 2017 as Russia 
continues to train and equip pro-Russian forces in regions of eastern Ukraine since the 
occupation and “annexation” of Crimea in March 2014.10 The United States considers 
Russia’s actions in Crimea to be unlawful and in violation of Ukrainian and international 
law, and, in July 2018, called on Russia to end its occupation of Crimea. In 2016 and 
2017, Russian authorities conducted politically motivated arrests, detentions, and trials of 
Ukrainian citizens in Russia. Russian authorities continued to restrict the ability of 
Russia’s citizens to choose their government through free and fair elections and to 
exercise freedoms of expression, assembly, association, and movement. The 
government selectively employed repressive laws to harass, discredit, prosecute, 
imprison, detain, fine, and suppress individuals and organizations critical of the 
government. Other human rights problems included discrimination against minorities and 
persons with disabilities; allegations of torture and excessive force by law enforcement; 
substandard prison conditions; pressure on the judiciary by the executive branch; lack of 
due process; extensive official corruption; violence against women; and trafficking in 
persons. 
 
 Russia has a history of espionage against the United States. In July 2010, ten 
individuals, nine of whom admitted to being Russian citizens, were expelled from the 
United States after pleading guilty to conspiring to serve as unlawful agents of the Russian 
government within the United States. In January 2011, a former employee of the Central 
Intelligence Agency serving a prison sentence for a 1997 espionage conviction was 
sentenced to eight more years for passing information to Russia and receiving cash 
payments from agents of Russia through his son from 2006 to December 2008. In May 
2016, an agent of Russia’s foreign intelligence agency (SVR) working under non-official 
                                                 
9 See the U.S. State Department’s Fact Sheet, U.S. Relations with Russia, dated April 23, 2018, which may 
be accessed at www.state.gov. 
 
10 The State Department’s Russia 2017 Human Rights Report can be accessed at www.state.gov. 
 
 
10 
cover as a bank employee in Manhattan was sentenced to 30 months in prison for 
attempting to collect economic intelligence and recruit New York City residents as 
intelligence sources for Russia. He conspired with a trade representative of the Russian 
government in New York from 2010 to 2014 and with an attaché to Russia’s Permanent 
Mission to the United Nations from 2012 to 2013. In July 2016, a dual citizen of the United 
States and Russia was sentenced to ten years in prison for acting as an unregistered 
Russian government agent and leading a scheme to illegally export controlled 
microelectronics technology with military applications to Russia.  
 
Russian civilian and military intelligence services have been implicated in a 
decade-long campaign of cyber operations directed at the U.S. government and its 
citizens, which include spear-phishing campaigns targeting government organizations, 
critical infrastructure, think tanks, universities, political organizations, and corporations; 
theft of information; and public release of some of this information. Russia has recently 
assumed a more assertive cyber posture based on its willingness to target critical 
infrastructure systems and conduct espionage operations. The U.S. intelligence 
community is confident that the Russian government attempted to interfere with the U.S. 
presidential election in 2016 and directed the hacking of emails of U.S. political 
organizations and disclosure on sites like DCLeaks.com and WikiLeaks. In December 
2016, the U.S. State Department declared persona non grata 35 Russian officials 
operating in the United States who were acting in a manner inconsistent with their 
diplomatic or consular status. This action was taken in response to Russia’s interference 
in the U.S. election and a pattern of increased harassment of U.S. diplomats overseas 
over the past four years, including a significant increase in the last 12 months. The 
harassment involved arbitrary police stops, physical assault, and the broadcast on state 
television in Russia of personal details about U.S. personnel that put them at risk. The 
U.S. intelligence community believes Russia will remain a major threat to U.S. 
government, military, diplomatic, commercial, and critical infrastructure. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
11 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that 
is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a Russian citizen, who immigrated to the United States in 
October 2015 on a fiancée visa sponsored by Applicant. Her U.S. conditional residency 
status was renewed for one year in January 2018 while the United States considers her 
 
 
12 
petition to remove the conditions on her U.S. permanent residency. She has a close and 
continuing relationship with her daughter, who is a Russian resident citizen employed at 
an elementary school. She and her daughter co-own the apartment in which her daughter 
resides with her boyfriend in Russia. Her twin sister is a Russian citizen, who has resided 
in the United States since 2008 and has U.S. permanent residency. Her mother is a 
Russian resident citizen, who is retired and has visited her and Applicant in the United 
States on several occasions, most recently from December 2017 to approximately 
February 2018. Her father is a Russian resident citizen employed as a mathematics 
professor at a Russian university. She has a half-sister from her mother’s third marriage, 
who is also a native Russian citizen, and close in age to her daughter.  
 
  Review of Applicant’s contacts and connections to these foreign citizens through 
marriage is warranted to determine whether they present a heightened risk under AG ¶ 
7(a) or AG ¶ 7(e) or create a potential conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). Those 
disqualifying conditions provide: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Not every foreign contact or tie presents the heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a). The 
“heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of the family ties or 
other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are relevant in assessing 
whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government; a family member is associated with, or dependent on, the foreign 
government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United 
States. In considering the nature of the foreign government, the administrative judge must 
take into account any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case 
No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
Applicant has bonds of affection and obligation to his spouse, who, because of her 
Russian citizenship, is required by Russia to enter and exit the country on a Russian 
 
 
13 
passport. Her U.S. residency gives her some protections when she is in the United States, 
but the risk is heightened when she is in Russia to visit her family. When in Russia, she 
is fully accountable to Russian authorities for all obligations of a Russian citizen, and she 
plans to renew her Russian internal passport to transfer her share of the property co-
owned with her daughter. 
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of his or her spouse. See e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 11-12659 (App. Bd. May 30, 2013). Applicant has had limited in-person contact with 
his spouse’s daughter, which was only during his trips to Russia in October 2014 and 
April 2016. However, he maintains weekly contact by social media with her, despite the 
language barrier. He provided her some financial support in 2015, although not in an 
amount likely to raise the attention of Russian authorities. His spouse has an 
understandably very close relationship with her daughter, whom she contacts every day. 
Her daughter has tried and failed several times to obtain a visa to travel to the United 
States to visit her mother. Applicant’s spouse believes that her daughter’s age and risk 
that she would remain in the United States are the reasons for the visa denials, although 
the evidentiary record does not include any U.S. government documentation explaining 
the denials. 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law had no trouble obtaining a visa, and she visited Applicant 
and his spouse in the United States several times, including as recently as December 
2017 to approximately February 2018. Applicant’s spouse messages her mother almost 
daily. Applicant’s spouse also has a close relationship with her twin sister in the United 
States. Her sibling enjoys the protections of U.S. permanent residency when she is in the 
United States. She would have to comply with the obligations of her Russian citizenship 
when in Russia, but it is unclear whether she has any travel plans to Russia.   
 
Applicant had in-person contact with his father-in-law only during the trip to Russia 
in April 2016. He has had similarly limited in-person contact with his spouse’s half-sister. 
Applicant has no ongoing contact with his father-in-law. He has quarterly contact by social 
media with his spouse’s half-sister, who has a good relationship with his spouse. Despite 
being hosted by this half-sister when in Russia in April 2016, Applicant is unaware of her 
occupation or employment. Applicant’s spouse does not have a very close relationship 
with her father. In recent years, she contacted him only two or three times a year. She 
testified that she had contact with her father only one time in 2017. 
 
Applicant and his spouse have traveled to Russia to visit her family, and they are 
likely to continue to do so to visit her daughter. They have travel plans for October 2018, 
and his spouse intends to renew her Russian internal passport when in Russia to facilitate 
the transfer of her ownership share of the apartment to her daughter. 
 
With its mixed human rights record, and political, economic and military rivalry with 
the United States, it is conceivable that Russia would target any Russian citizen or former 
citizen living in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information from the 
United States. Russian intelligence operatives seek classified or economic information 
 
 
14 
from U.S. businesses and/or government agencies. Applicant’s foreign relationships and 
contacts through his marriage are sufficiently close to create a heightened risk and a 
possible security concern about his desire to help these relatives living in Russia and/or 
his spouse by providing classified information. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) are established. 
 
Applicant and his spouse have sent her daughter monetary gifts since 2015, but 
they are no longer sending her any financial support. Applicant’s spouse’s 40% share of 
the apartment co-owned with her daughter in Russia triggers disqualifying condition AG 
¶ 7(f). At a current value of $50,000, his spouse’s share would be only about $20,000. 
However, the property is clearly important to her daughter as a financial asset and 
because it is her residence. AG ¶ 7(f) applies. It provides: 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence, or exploitation, or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
The burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate the risk of undue foreign influence that 
exists because of his familial ties through marriage to Russia, a country known to target 
U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information. AG ¶ 8(a) provides for mitigation 
as follows: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Russia’s long history of aggressive espionage from 
within and outside the United States targeting classified and sensitive military and 
technological information, and its recent cyber hacking of emails of U.S. citizens and 
political entities, increase the risk that Applicant could find himself in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of his foreign family members and the interests of the 
United States. There is no evidence that Applicant’s spouse’s family members in Russia 
are politically involved. Her father is a professor at a state-owned university, and her 
daughter works at a government-owned elementary school. There is little risk that her 
daughter’s work with children would be of interest to the Russian government, military, 
security, or intelligence services. There is no evidence that her father has any connection 
to the Russian military. However, her father’s academic position at a state-run Russian 
university; his published work in theoretical mathematics; and his attendance at 
international academic conferences are factors that could raise the attention of Russian 
authorities. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has any loyalty or affiliation to Russia or its 
institutions, but it is difficult to conclude that the bonds of affection and obligation to his 
 
 
15 
spouse and her immediate family members, including her only child and her mother, are 
so minimal to satisfy the first part of AG ¶ 8(b), which provides: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant’s relationships and loyalties in the United States may still be so deep and 
longstanding that he can be counted on to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In that regard, he is a native U.S. citizen who served honorably on active duty in the U.S. 
military, albeit over 30 years ago now. While he enjoys travel and adventure, the U.S. has 
been his home. He raised four children, all native U.S. citizens, during his first marriage. 
He has owned his current residence since October 1990 and has had a stable career in 
the United States with a succession of employers. He has no foreign assets. His spouse 
intends to reside permanently in the United States, and as evidence of her intention in 
that regard, she applied to renew the conditions on her U.S. permanent residency. Yet, it 
is also clear that Applicant and his spouse are likely to continue to have strong ties to her 
daughter, who intends to reside permanently in Russia and has already been repeatedly 
denied a tourist visa to come to the United States for reasons that are not clearly apparent 
in the record. Conceivably, Russian authorities could bring some pressure on his 
spouse’s family members to gain influence or information from Applicant. People act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a family 
member.11 
 
There is nothing untoward about Applicant’s relationships and contacts with his 
spouse’s family members in Russia. He has no ongoing contact with his spouse’s father. 
AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has 
limited applicability nonetheless, given the close bonds of affection and regular contact 
that Applicant’s spouse has with her daughter and mother.  
 
AG ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual,” warrants some 
consideration. The apartment that Applicant’s spouse co-owns is not of significant 
financial value to Applicant. It is routine in nature. However, to facilitate transfer of her 
ownership share of the asset to her daughter, Applicant’s spouse intends to renew her 
Russian internal passport when she is next in Russia. It could generate some inquiry by 
Russian authorities about her marital status and residency. The foreign influence security 
concerns are not fully mitigated.  
                                                 
11 As stated by the DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 08-10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009), “Application 
of the guidelines is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people 
may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a 
family member.” 
 
 
16 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).12 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence case, 
the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still pose 
a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that an 
applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to classified 
information. Even good people can pose a security risk because of facts 
and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
Although Applicant’s spouse is employed in the United States, and she intends to 
reside here permanently, she has lived in the United States only since 2015. She has 
strong family, legal, and cultural ties to her native Russia. Applicant could be placed in an 
untenable situation of having to choose between the interests of his spouse or her family 
members and those of the United States. Perhaps at some future date, Applicant’s family 
situation may present less of a risk. At this time, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
                                                 
12 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
17 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
