 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03332 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 21, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 25, 2018. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 8.1 Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and 
D. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted into evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 2, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 1994, a bachelor’s 
degree in 1996, and enrolled in a master’s program in approximately 1999. He completed 
about 18 months of study and needed one class to complete the degree, but has not done 
so. He obtained student loans to fund his master’s classes. He married in 2008. He has 
a 17-year-old stepdaughter and a 9-year-old son.2 
 
Applicant has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since January 
2018. He was employed by another federal contactor from October 2013 to January 2018. 
From December 2012 to October 2013, he worked for a nongovernment employer. From 
October 2008 to December 2012, he was employed by a federal contractor. Before then 
he was unemployed for about six months. He worked in the education field from about 
2000 to 2007. His wife decided to leave her job in January 2018 and go back to school 
seeking a new profession.3  
 
In the past year, Applicant’s grandmother gifted Applicant and each member of his 
immediate family $14,000. His wife used her gift to pay tuition for school. The children’s 
money is in savings for college. In the previous six years, Applicant received another 
$13,000 gift each year from his grandmother. Applicant testified he used his money to 
pay living expenses.4  
 
Applicant testified that when he obtained his student loans, he did not understand 
the mechanics of how to pay them. He received notices from the lenders when the loans 
were due, but could not afford to pay them due to insufficient income. He acknowledged 
the loans were in default, and the lenders repeatedly contacted him over the years to get 
them out of default. He said he received statements from the lenders, but the loans were 
beyond his ability to pay. He said he applied for “financial hardship” modifications that 
were denied.5  
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the exhibit list and II is the discovery letter. HE III are emails from Department 
Counsel noting he had no objections to AE C though F.  
 
2 Tr. 19-23. 
 
3 Tr. 19-23. 
 
4 Tr. 23-27, 69, 86. 
 
5 Tr. 30-32. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that he “deprioritized” the student loans, meaning that he did not 
give them a high priority to be paid.6 He did not contact the lenders. He said, “Honestly, I 
took kind of a head in the sand approach.”7 He did not make an effort to negotiate a lower 
monthly payment with the lenders until his earnings increased. He said when he began 
earning more, he tried to get into a repayment program, but said he was unable to make 
affordable payments. Applicant testified that he believed over the years he made 
inconsistent payments to the lenders that would have satisfied the original principal of the 
loans. He said he believed he made about 50 payments of $500 each.8  
 
Applicant testified that in 2008 he was earning $38,000 and his wife was earning 
approximately $40,000 to $50,000 as a personal trainer. After the economic downturn, 
she returned to her job as a physical therapist. She worked part-time. In 2009 or 2010 
she worked full-time. Applicant stated that when she began full-time, her annual earnings 
started at about $80,000 and when she stopped working in December 2017, she was 
earning $88,000 annually. She was paying her student loans during this time. Applicant 
estimated that in 2012 his annual income was about $72,000. In 2013, he earned about 
$80,000 and had incremental raises over the years. In 2016, he earned $117,000. His 
2018 annual salary is $130,000.9 
 
When Applicant was questioned why he did not start paying his student loans when 
his income increased, he said because he was paying other debts. Also each year he 
owed a significant income tax debt that had to be paid. He said in 2012, he was unable 
to obtain a security clearance, so he began to pay his other debts, leaving his student 
loans for last. He said paying his other debts took time. He stated, “I was not necessarily 
living beyond my means. I was basically “robbing Peter to pay Paul,” so I accrued a lot of 
credit card debt, which I have subsequently paid off entirely.” He again acknowledged 
that his student loans were not a priority.10  
 
 In 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance. He completed a security 
clearance application (SCA) in March 2011. He disclosed in it that he had financial issues, 
to include delinquent student loans. He stated, “Currently trying to bring student loans 
current. Debt is still pending.”11 He also listed other delinquent debts that he was working 
to resolve.12  
                                                          
6 Tr. 31.  
 
7 Tr. 32.  
 
8 Tr. 30-45. 
 
9 Tr. 30-45, 66. 
 
10 Tr. 45-46, 67-68. 
 
11 GE 1. 
 
12 GE 1. Any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR will not be considered for disqualifying 
purpose. It may be considered when making a credibility determination, in applying the mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 
 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He was 
confronted with his delinquent student loans. He told the investigator that his student 
loans had been in forbearance several times and that over the past years he had done 
his best to make payments, but often went months without paying the loans. He told the 
investigator that he had set up a rehabilitation plan with the creditors and that $300 to 
$400 was automatically withdrawn from his salary every two weeks, and he was current 
with the plan. He said he was making all of the payments and intended to satisfy his 
student loans when the plan was completed. Applicant had other delinquent debts that 
were discussed with the investigator at the time. He attributed his financial problems to a 
failed business and a decrease in income when he began teaching. He told the 
investigator that he was on the right path to satisfying all of his debts and financial 
obligations. He was doing everything to put himself back in good financial standing. At 
the time, he had not had financial counseling, and he did not intend on accumulating 
future debt.13 
 
 In April 2012, Applicant was sent government interrogatories, which he signed and 
dated, verifying receipt. He failed to respond to the interrogatories, and his security 
clearance was denied. Applicant testified that he could not recall receiving the 
interrogatories.14 
 
 In November 2016, Applicant submitted a new SCA. In it he disclosed he owed 
approximately $73,000 for delinquent student loans. He stated he was in the process of 
consolidating the loans so he could make manageable monthly payments that “will allow 
me to finally make good on my responsibility.”15 He indicated he would make monthly 
payments until his obligation was completed. In the SCA, he also disclosed he had owed 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) approximately $14,000 for 2013 and 2014 federal 
income taxes, and he was working on paying local property taxes that were owed for 
2015. He said he prioritized the debt to the IRS and was addressing his delinquent 
property taxes.16  
 
 In March 2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He told 
the investigator that when his student loans became due, he was unable to make the 
payments because he was not earning sufficient income. He said in the past, he 
attempted to negotiate payment plans, but the creditors refused to settle for a reduced 
amount. He said he attempted to get an agreement where he could pay one loan at a 
time, but the creditors refused. He said he made payments in various amounts throughout 
the years, but due to the interest, he was unable to reduce the loans. In March 2017, he 
said he began a consolidation process, but was unable to estimate at that time how much 
the payments would be. He told the investigator that his debt to the IRS and the property 
                                                          
 
13 GE 7. 
 
14 Tr. 88-90; GE 8. 
 
15 GE 1. 
 
16 GE 1. 
 
5 
 
 
tax issues were resolved.17 Applicant testified that it was not until after he completed his 
2016 SCA that he felt comfortable financially to begin paying his student loans 
consistently. 18 
  
 Applicant said from about 2012 to 2018, about every third month he made a 
student loan payment. He said in October 2017, he applied to consolidate his student 
loans. He made his first payment in January 2018. He provided documents to show that 
as of July 2018, he owes a balance of $71,927. His documents reflect payments of $853 
each month in February, April, May, June (two payments) and July 2018. 19 
 
 Applicant testified he and his wife purchased his grandmother’s house in 2011. He 
contributes to a retirement fund. In 2016, they purchased a used SUV for $19,000 and 
made several payments. It is now paid off. In 2017, he purchased a used vehicle for 
$19,000. He made a down payment of $5,000 and makes $400 monthly payments. In 
March 2017, for their daughter’s 16th birthday, they purchased her a car for $12,000. They 
paid cash for the vehicle. Applicant vacationed in Europe in 2005 and 2007, but said he 
expended minimal money because other relatives paid his expenses.20  
 
Applicant filed an extension for filing his 2017 federal income tax return. He had 
no idea what his tax liability might be. He stated that if his tax bill is more than $5,000 he 
would have to make arrangements pay it. He and his wife have $3,000 in their savings 
account and $3,000 in their checking account. He testified that at the end of the month 
after their expenses are paid, they have minimal excess income. They are trying to reduce 
their expenses since his wife went back to school. He has not had financial counseling. 
He said they spend most of their money at restaurants, which they have reduced. He took 
a consulting job in December 2017 to earn additional money. He received a flat fee of 
$10,000.21  
 
 Applicant provided three character letters. In them he is described as professional, 
diligent, punctual, reliable, dependable, impressive, ethical, and trustworthy. He is a well-
rounded family man who has a strong work ethic and is a leader.22 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
                                                          
17 GE 6. 
 
18 Tr. 52. 
 
19 Tr. 61-65; AE C. 
 
20 Tr. 55-60, 70-71. 
 
21 Tr. 77-85. 
 
22 AE B.  
 
6 
 
 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
7 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent student loans totaling approximately $72,000 that have 
been owed for more than 15 years. There is sufficient evidence to support the application 
of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant obtained student loans in approximately 2000. They became due in 2002 
or 2003. He recently began to pay the loans, but given his past history and delay in 
addressing his financial obligations, I am unable to conclude that financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. His failure to responsibly address his student loans for years, casts doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his failure to pay his student loans to underemployment. This 
may have been a circumstance beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly. He did not. Applicant ignored notices from the 
lenders when his loans became due. He stated he “deprioritized” them. There is 
insufficient evidence that he arranged a payment plan to address the delinquent loans as 
his income increased. After he applied for a security clearance in 2011, he told the 
investigator that he had made arrangements to pay the student loans. He was to make 
payments of $300 to $400 every two weeks. There is insufficient evidence that plan was 
executed. Applicant’s income increased over the years. The past seven years his 
grandmother gave him substantial monetary gifts. In March 2017, he paid $12,000 for a 
car for his stepdaughter. It appears that when Applicant has had more money, he chose 
not to prioritize payments on his student loans. It was not until after he applied a second 
time for a security clearance in 2016 that Applicant decided to establish a payment plan 
to address the student loans. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant stated in 2011 that he began a payment plan for his student loans. There 
is insufficient evidence that occurred. He started a payment plan in January 2018 and has 
made consistent payments. At this time, there is insufficient evidence, based on 
Applicant’s past financial track record, to conclude that he will consistently make the 
payments. I cannot find under the circumstances that Applicant’s recent action constitutes 
a good-faith effort to repay his lenders, and there is insufficient evidence based on his 
past conduct to conclude he will adhere to the plan. Applicant has not had financial 
counseling and without an extended period of compliance with his repayment plan, I 
cannot find there are clear indications his financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a college-educated 45-year-old man. He obtained student loans in 
approximately 2000. He failed to pay them for years. He stated he made some payments 
over the years. He attributed his failure to pay the loans due to underemployment. After 
his income increased, and his wife was also earning a substantial income, he focused on 
paying other debts. He has been on notice since 2011, when he first applied for a security 
clearance that his delinquent student loans were an issue. It was not until after he applied 
for a security clearance a second time that he began to take action. He has an unreliable 
financial track record. Applicant’s ongoing conduct raises questions about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
