1 
 
                                                            
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00727 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
While Applicant’s inability to resolve his delinquent debts was the result of his 2010 
divorce, he failed to act reasonably under the circumstances and did not mitigate the 
security concerns raised by his finances. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 1, 2016. 
On April 11, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations). The 
DOD acted under Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR, through counsel, on May 19, 2017, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready 
2 
 
to proceed on June 15, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on December 14, 2017. 
On February 14, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for March 8, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through AA, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 19, 2018.  
  
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision is based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 46, is an information technology operations manager currently 
employed by a defense contractor since September 2015, and in the defense industry 
since 2001. He earned an associate’s degree in 2002, a bachelor’s degree in 2005, and 
a master’s degree in 2008. He and his first wife married in 1995 and divorced in 2010. 
They have two adult children and one minor child. He and his second wife married in 2012 
and divorced in 2014. He has held security clearance for more than 10 years. (GX 1; AX 
B; Tr. 19.)  
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 12 debts totaling $26,432 and a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharged in 1999. Applicant admits each of these allegations. The 
delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s February 2016 credit bureau report (CBR) 
and discussed during November 2016 personal subject interview (PSI). (GX 3; GX 4.) 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to his 2010 divorce from his first wife. 
Specifically, when he and his ex-wife separated in 2008, Applicant was required to pay 
child support, alimony, and the mortgage-loan payment for his marital home. Upon his 
divorce, Applicant was ordered to pay $600 biweekly in child support, $500 a month in 
alimony for 30 months, and the monthly mortgage loan payment of $575 for 30 months. 
Applicant stated that the payments from the time of separation took 60% of his salary and 
he was unable to maintain his financial obligations. (GX 2; Tr. 25; AX M.) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant asserts that 10 of the 11 SOR debts are marital debts from 
his first marriage. He states that “the judge ordered that I pay all marital debt except for 
one account,” a specific cell phone account. (Tr. 44.) However, while the divorce decree 
designates 12 of the 22 listed debts as marital debts, including 8 of the SOR debts, it also 
states: “Regarding marital debt, the Court recognizes this marital debt is burdensome for 
both Parties . . . The court is aware that the Parties may consider bankruptcy as one of 
the options for resolving marital debt. The Court admonishes the Parties to cooperate in 
any efforts to reduce or resolve marital debt.” The divorce decree does not state that 
Applicant was solely responsible for the marital debt. (AX M.) 
 
3 
 
Applicant listed one debt on his e-QIP, a non-SOR 2012 judgment for $2,574, for 
which Applicant entered a stipulated payment agreement with the creditor and the 
judgment was satisfied and dismissed in January 2016. On November 14, 2016, 
immediately prior to his PSI, Applicant obtained two CBRs, neither of which listed any 
currently delinquent accounts, to include the SOR debts. (GX 2; Tr. 36-37.) Based on 
these CBRs, he told the background investigator that he had no additional financial issues 
to report. The investigator was in possession of a February 2016 CBR obtained at the 
time that Applicant submitted his e-QIP, which listed 17 derogatory accounts. The 
investigator confronted Applicant with these accounts, and Applicant acknowledged them 
as his. Applicant stated that he had intended to pay the delinquent accounts, “but then 
the debt fell off his credit report and he [did] not think he [had] to pay the debt.”  He further 
stated that the collection accounts were listed on his CBRs through the summer of 2016.  
 
Additionally, Applicant stated that he had not wanted to file bankruptcy “due to his 
security clearance.” Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to separation and divorce- 
related costs, including legal fees, additionally stating that “he stopped paying on his 
credit cards due to now living beyond his means with his new girlfriend.” Applicant did not 
assert during his PSI that his delinquent accounts were due to the fact that he was ordered 
to pay all the marital debt. (GX 2.) Applicant attributes the 1999 bankruptcy to having 
been newly married and living beyond his means. (GX 2.) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant stated in response to 11 of the alleged debts: 
 
I accepted this debt as it was part of my first divorce when I was ordered to 
pay a large amount of alimony and child support and I was unable to make 
payments on this account. It was sent to collections while I was still trying 
to get to a point that I can afford to pay back the debt and then was removed 
from my credit report while I was updating my latest investigation. I thought 
at that time that the debt was forgiven and I did not pursue it any further. 
 
Applicant testified that in approximately 2010, he contacted the creditors to notify 
them that he was unable to pay the debts. The creditors were not willing to work with him. 
At that time, Applicant also notified the creditors of his new address, and Applicant 
received bills from the creditors. Applicant stated that his divorce attorney advised him to 
use his financial resources to pay the court-ordered alimony, child support, and mortgage-
loan payments, and to stop paying his consumer debt until he was able to do so. (Tr. 45-
48.) Applicant testified that after he received the SOR, he contacted the creditors of the 
SOR debts, but that none of the creditors was able to identify any accounts belonging to 
Applicant. (Tr. 34-39.) Applicant testified that he had intended to begin paying his 
delinquent debts three years after the divorce when he was no longer required to pay the 
mortgage loan payments and his child support would be reduced. However, he was 
financially unable to do so. (Tr. 49-50.) Applicant has not paid any of the SOR debts. 
 
 Applicant submitted five letters of recommendation. His friends, coworkers, and 
colleagues collectively highly recommend Applicant for a security clearance, citing his 
integrity, trustworthiness, and patriotism. Applicant’s is well-regarded in the workplace 
4 
 
and is considered to have invaluable leadership qualities. (AX L.) Applicant has 
completed numerous training certifications to enhance his knowledge and skills. (AX B.) 
His 2016 and 2017 employee performance reviews show that, overall, Applicant 
frequently exceeded performance expectations and that his work was outstanding. (AX 
G; AX Z.) 
 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement that he completed in May 2017 
that shows a monthly net remainder of $235. (AX C.) Applicant testified that his net 
remainder has increased to about $500, but the personal financial statement is overall 
accurate. (Tr. 41; Tr. 31.) In May 2017, Applicant completed an online credit-counseling 
session. (AX I.) In August 2017, Applicant borrowed $37,844 as a personal loan. (AX N; 
AX O.) Applicant used the money from the loan to pay off multiple credit cards and two 
other personal loans with higher interest rates, as advised during his credit counseling 
session. (Tr. 39-42; AX Q - AX U.) He has made five $822 monthly payments on this 
account with the recent balance of $35,404.  
 
 Applicant’s balances on his six revolving accounts total $18,018. (AX AA.) 
Applicant testified that he maintains a budget, but did not submit a written budget. (Tr. 
27.) Applicant testified that he cosigned a $47,522 car loan for his daughter. (Tr. 48-49.) 
However, the loan is listed as an individual account in Applicant’s name and he listed the 
$713 monthly payment on his personal financial statement. The balance on the account 
is approximately $40,000. (AX AA; AX C.) Applicant borrowed $11,258 in January 2017 
to purchase a car. The Monthly payment is $216 and the balance on the account is 
approximately $9,000. (AX AA.) He has not incurred any significant recent delinquent 
debt, and is current on his student loan payments. (AX AA.) He has a savings account of 
approximately $1,000 and a 401(k) with the balance of approximately $13,000. (Tr. 31.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. 
6 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
   
The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant incurred significant delinquent debt and filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
1999. By the time he and his ex-wife separated in 2008, Applicant had again incurred 
significant debt. While Applicant’s inability to pay the SOR debts arose as a result of his 
separation and later divorce in 2010, he did not act responsibly regarding the debt. The 
$26,432 of SOR debt remains outstanding. Regardless of whether the marital debt was 
divided between the parties, or Applicant was required to pay all of it, he had a legal 
obligation to resolve the accounts and did not do so. Applicant opted not to seek relief 
through bankruptcy out of concern for how it would affect his security clearance. However, 
he did not take any other affirmative steps to resolve the debt. Applicant’s first effort to 
contact the creditors to attempt to resolve the delinquent accounts was after he received 
the SOR, by which point the delinquent accounts no longer appeared on his credit bureau 
reports. “[R]eliance upon the non-collectibility of a debt does not constitute a good-faith 
7 
 
effort to resolve that debt within the meaning of the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 07-06841 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2008). 
  
 Although Applicant does not have any recent delinquent accounts, he recently 
borrowed approximately $37,000 to pay down his credit-card debt and two other personal 
loans. His consumer debt, including two car loans and $18,018 owed on six revolving 
accounts, totals more than $67,000. Despite completing an online credit-counseling 
course, there is no indication that Applicant’s finances are under control. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but I have also 
considered the following: 
  
 Applicant has held a security clearance for more than 10 years. He is considered 
to be trustworthy and is respected by his colleagues and friends. However, while he has 
not incurred any significant recent delinquent debt, the unresolved delinquent SOR debts 
remain a concern.  
  
 After weighing the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
