 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03645 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns raised by family members 
in Iraq. His past behavior demonstrates he can resolve any potential conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. His undivided allegiance to the United States is 
corroborated by his dependability and performance while exposed to possible harm. He 
also mitigated the financial considerations concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 16, 
2016. An investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed him 
on January 5, 2017. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) on December 27, 2017, issued him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on February 
14, 2018, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
May 15, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on May 21, 2018, and submitted a two-
 
2 
 
 
page letter with attachments to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns, dated 
June 15, 2018. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. Lacking any objections, 
I admitted and considered both the Government’s proposed evidence and Applicant’s 
submissions.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
January 5, 2017. (FORM, Item 4) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered, or that he could 
make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered. Applicant responded to the FORM and raised no objections. I admitted the 
FORM’s proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Neither Department Counsel nor Applicant requested I take administrative notice 
of facts concerning Iraq. Because the circumstances of Iraq and its relationship with the 
United States are required for the foreign influence concern analysis, I took 
administrative notice of facts about Iraq outlined in U.S. Department of State recent 
publications. The noted facts are incorporated in my findings of fact. Statements about 
the United States’ relationship with Iraq from the Department of State are admissible. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-00318 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 2004). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations under Guideline B (¶¶ 1.a through 
1.g), and Guideline F (¶¶ 2.a through 2.h). His SOR and FORM admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old linguist and translator. He has worked for U.S. forces 
and federal contractors on and off since 2005. He was offered a full-time linguist 
position with a federal contractor contingent on his eligibility for a clearance in 
September 2016. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and attended high school in Iraq, graduating in 2003. 
He has never been married and has no children. He worked for federal contractors 
supporting U.S. military personnel in different Middle East countries from 2005 to 
September 2009. He did not serve in the Iraqi army. Applicant’s eight letters of 
reference, provided by U.S. military personnel (a sergeant, a sergeant first class, three 
captains (company commanders), one lieutenant, one lieutenant colonel, and a colonel) 
most of whom served with Applicant under dangerous conditions, establish that he 
earned the trust and confidence of the U.S. military personnel.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant is considered to have served courageously, often times placing himself 
in danger to accomplish the mission and to help U.S. interests. He “constantly faced 
danger,” and on numerous occasions came under enemy fire while working with U.S. 
special forces teams. He demonstrated exceptional skills and ability as an interpreter 
and proved to be extremely valuable to the U.S. forces. He was lauded for his integrity, 
trustworthiness, dedication to duty, and for being a team player. (Applicant’s reference 
letters are included in his Answer to the FORM.) 
 
In light of Applicant’s performance, a U.S. Army colonel recommended him for a 
special immigration visa. The visa was granted and Applicant immigrated to the United 
States in September 2009. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2015, and the 
colonel attended his naturalization ceremony. Applicant was unemployed between 
September 2009 and March 2010. He worked as a shipping clerk between March 2010 
and April 2012, and as a driver between April 2012 and September 2016. Applicant 
stated in his June 2018 answer to the FORM that he was currently working for a federal 
contractor and recently deployed to the Middle East in support of U.S. special 
operations.  
 
Applicant’s mother is 50 years old, and she has been a homemaker all her life. 
She is a citizen and resident of Iraq. As of 2016, he was having weekly telephonic 
contact with his mother. Applicant denied owning any property or financial interests in 
Iraq. He has been sending about $200 a month to his mother since about 2010. His 
father was killed as a result of sectarian violence. Applicant’s five siblings are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. His two sisters, ages 30 and 21, are homemakers. He had weekly 
telephonic contact with his sisters. He has two brothers, ages 27 and 26, that are 
soldiers in the Iraqi army. His 14-year-old brother is a student living with his mother. As 
of 2016, he was having monthly telephonic contact with his brothers.  
 
Applicant’s two brothers-in-law, ages 32 and 31, and his sister-in-law (24), are 
resident-citizens of Iraq. One of the brothers-in-law (32) is in the Iraqi army. The second 
brother-in-law (31) owns a store. When completing his 2016 SCA, Applicant estimated 
his telephonic contact with both to be quarterly. His sister-in-law is a homemaker. He 
had monthly telephonic contact with her. 
 
Applicant was issued an Iraqi passport before he immigrated to the United 
States. The Iraqi passport expired and he surrendered it to his facility security officer for 
safekeeping and to avoid any security clearance concerns. He only used his Iraqi 
passport to travel to the United States. Applicant stated that he renounced his Iraqi 
citizenship on October 25, 2016. 
 
Applicant has not travelled to Iraq for personal reasons after 2009. He claimed he 
no longer has contact with any of his Iraqi friends. Applicant stated that after he became 
aware of the security concerns raised by him having frequent contact with family in Iraq, 
he stopped communicating with most of his family members, except for his mother, with 
whom he continues to have frequent contact. Applicant stated that neither his mother 
nor any of his other family members are aware of the work he does for his employers. 
 
4 
 
 
He does not discuss his work with his mother or anyone else. He understands that 
doing so may be detrimental to the security of the United States.  
 
Applicant does not intend to return to live in Iraq. He is happy to be living in the 
United States and wants to build a future here. He considers himself to be a U.S. citizen 
first and his loyalty is to the United States. He promised he would resolve any possible 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. He highlighted his prior service for the 
United States and noted that he has always put the protection of any information 
entrusted to him first as he understands that there are lives at stake as well as damage 
to U.S. interests if the information is released. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Iraq. The U.S. 
mission in Iraq remains dedicated to building a strategic partnership with Iraq and the 
Iraqi people. The December 2011 departure of U.S. troops from Iraq marked a 
milestone in our relationship as Iraq continues to develop as a sovereign, stable, and 
self-reliant country. Iraq is now a key partner for the United States in the region as well 
as a voice of moderation and democracy in the Middle East. Iraq has functioning 
government institutions including an active legislature, is playing an increasingly 
constructive role in the region, and has a bright economic future as oil revenues surpass 
pre-Saddam production levels with continued rapid growth to come. The United States 
maintains vigorous and broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, 
and security issues in accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement 
(SFA). 
 
The SFA between Iraq and the United States provides the basis for the U.S.-Iraq 
bilateral relationship. It covers the range of bilateral issues including political relations 
and diplomacy, defense and security, trade and finance, energy, judicial and law 
enforcement issues, services, science, culture, education, and environment. Efforts to 
implement the SFA are overseen by the Higher Coordinating Committee and several 
Joint Coordination Committees, which meet periodically. 
 
The U.S. State Department warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk for 
violence and kidnapping and advises U.S. citizens not to travel to Iraq. The current 
travel advisory level is Level 4: Do not travel.  
 
The ability of the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens 
outside Baghdad is limited given the security environment. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. Kidnappings and 
attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED) occur in many areas of the country, 
including Baghdad. Such attacks may take place in public venues such as cafes and 
markets.  
 
Iraq witnessed continued terrorist activity in 2016, primarily as a result of the 
actions of Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIL). In 2016, ISIL remained the greatest 
terrorist threat globally, maintaining a formidable force in Syria, including a large number 
of foreign terrorist fighters. ISIL’s capacity and territorial control in Iraq has dramatically 
 
5 
 
 
eroded in the past two years. According to estimates from the UN Assistance Mission 
for Iraq, acts of terrorism and violence killed more than 7,000 civilians and injured more 
than 12,000 in 2016. By the end of 2017, Iraqi Security Forces had liberated all territory 
from ISIL, drastically reducing ISIL’s ability to commit abuses and atrocities.  
 
In its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State reported that 
severe human rights problems were widespread. Sectarian hostility, widespread 
corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of government and society weakened 
the government's authority and worsened effective human rights protections. Iraqi 
Security Forces, members of the Federal Police, and the Peshmerga committed some 
human rights violations, and there continued to be reports of Popular Mobilization 
Forces killing, torturing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. ISIL committed the 
overwhelming majority of serious human rights abuses, including attacks against: 
civilians, (particularly Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL); members of other 
religious and ethnic minorities; women; and children. 
 
Other significant human rights-related problems include: harsh and life-
threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities; arbitrary arrest and lengthy 
pretrial detention, denial of fair public trial; insufficient judicial institutional capacity; 
ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; arbitrary 
interference with privacy and homes; child soldiers; limits on freedom of expression, 
including press freedoms; violence against and harassment of journalists; undue 
censorship; social, religious, and political restrictions in academic and cultural matters; 
limits on freedoms of peaceful assembly and association; limits on religious freedom 
due to violence by extremist groups; restrictions on freedom of movement; refugee and 
internally displaced persons (IDP) abuse; both forced IDP returns and preventing IDPs 
from returning home; discrimination against and societal abuse of women and ethnic, 
religious, and racial minorities, including exclusion from decision-making roles; 
trafficking in persons; societal discrimination and violence against lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) persons; seizure of property without due 
process; and limitations on worker rights. 
 
The facts gathered for this administrative notice section about Iraq are from the 
U.S. Department of State website, “U.S. Relations With Iraq,” Bureau of Near Eastern 
Affairs (Jul. 31, 2018); “Iraq 2017 Human Rights Report,” U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor; and “Iraq Travel Advisory,” (Oct. 18, 
2018). https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/6804.htm 
 
Regarding the SOR financial allegations, Applicant submitted documentary 
evidence showing that he paid off all the accounts: SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.f alleged the 
same account and it was paid on February 26, 2018; SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c alleged the 
same account and it was paid on August 10, 2017; SOR ¶ 2.d was paid on June 13, 
2018; SOR ¶ 2.e was paid on September 25, 2017; SOR ¶ 2.g was paid on February 
26, 2018; and SOR ¶ 2.h was paid on June 11, 2018.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant explained that as a new American assimilating from a different culture, 
the concept of credit was unfamiliar and a completely new experience for him. Because 
of his lack of understanding and his own mistakes, he accumulated the debts and his 
accounts became delinquent. To resolve his financial problems, Applicant sought a 
financial advisor who assisted him to establish a budget and pay all of the debts. 
Currently, he is debt free. Applicant believes that he is now financially responsible and 
able to meet future financial obligations. As a result of the clearance process, Applicant 
is now aware that to be eligible for a clearance, he has to demonstrate and maintain his 
financial responsibility. 
Policies 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
7 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.1 
 
 An individual is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
an individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must 
take into account the foreign government involved; the intelligence-gathering history of 
that government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.2  
 
 The United States and Iraq are allies in the war against ISIL and other terrorists 
and insurgents. However, the serious security threat posed by these terrorists and other 
elements hostile to the United States must be taken into account in assessing the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s familial connections in Iraq. Applicant’s 
                                            
1 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (internal citation omitted).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge must 
consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
8 
 
 
relationship to these foreign relatives, coupled with the facts administratively noticed, 
raise a heightened security concern.  
 
 In assessing the security concern raised by Applicant’s foreign contacts and 
interests, I have considered the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7, and 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology;  
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 An individual with family members and other connections in a foreign country 
faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”3 However, what 
factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant 
with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.4  
 
 In the present case, Applicant’s mother, five siblings, and his in-laws, are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. They have financial and property interests in Iraq, and have 
chosen to remain in Iraq with the rest of their families. Applicant used to maintain 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 23, 2014). 
 
 
9 
 
 
frequent contact and communication with most of his relatives in Iraq. Because of the 
clearance process, he has learned of the possible security concerns raised by his 
communication with relatives in Iraq. After 2016, Applicant chose to limit his contact and 
communication to only his mother. Applicant is aware of the threat and possible harm to 
him or his family if the wrong people find out about his job with U.S. forces. 
Notwithstanding, he has continued to serve the U.S. forces on other missions and would 
like to continue working for U.S. forces in the future.  
 
Applicant’s statement that he would report any attempted coercion or threats, 
and that he would resolve any potential conflict in favor of the United States, is 
supported by his track record. His undivided allegiance to the United States is 
corroborated by his dependability and performance while under enemy fire and possible 
harm for working with U.S. personnel. U.S. personnel who served with him in Iraq 
endorsed his eligibility for a U.S. visa.5 Additionally, Applicant has developed deep and 
long-lasting bonds in the United States, as evidenced by some of his references 
attending his naturalization ceremony, and Applicant’s desire to continue working for 
U.S. personnel in Iraq. 
 
Applicant’s past behavior demonstrates his ability to resolve any potential conflict 
of interest in favor of the United States even under threats and facing possible harm. 
Accordingly, after a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, and while 
remaining mindful of my duty to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of protecting 
national security, I find that Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
connections to and contact with his family in Iraq.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                            
5 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (“Generally, an Applicant’s statements, 
by themselves, as to what he would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled 
to little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the U.S. is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case. In this case, Applicant 
has served the U.S. military as a translator in dangerous circumstances in Afghanistan and has risked his 
life to protect American personnel there.) See also ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 
2006) (“As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior history of complying with 
security procedures and regulations significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct or 
circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in Guideline B 
cases, where the applicant has established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance with 
security procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in 
which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national security. The presence of such 
circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.”) (internal citations omitted).  
 
10 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are documented in the record. Between 2009 and 
2017, he accumulated six consumer accounts that he was unable to repay and became 
delinquent, were charged off, or placed in collection. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying 
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) 
inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The 
record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant paid off all of his delinquent accounts. His financial problems are 
resolved. Applicant explained that as a new American assimilating from a different 
culture, the concept of credit was unfamiliar and a completely new experience for him. 
Because of his lack of understanding and his own mistakes, he accumulated the debts 
and his accounts became delinquent. To resolve his financial problems, Applicant 
sought a financial advisor who assisted him to establish a budget and pay all of the 
debts. Currently, he is debt free. Applicant is now financially responsible and able to 
meet future financial obligations. Applicant is aware that to be eligible for a clearance, 
he has to demonstrate and maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s financial problems 
occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. He has learned his lesson. He acted 
responsibly under the circumstances by paying his delinquent debts. There is no 
evidence of any financial problems or additional delinquent accounts. His current 
financial situation is stable and he promised to continue to live within his financial 
means and to pay all of his debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems 
are resolved. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a)) I also considered the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, AG ¶ 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old linguist employed with a federal contractor. He worked 
for federal contractors and with U.S. personnel in Iraq between 2005 and 2009. He 
established an excellent reputation for his knowledge, cultural expertise, and linguistic 
abilities. He is considered to have good skills and abilities as an interpreter. Moreover, 
Applicant is considered to be a trusted employee, who is reliable, dependable, and a 
loyal American. Most importantly, he assisted U.S. forces on numerous occasions 
where he risked his life to help U.S. personnel accomplish their missions. (See footnote 
5, supra.) 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
