                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )         ISCR Case No. 17-00698
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.
Eligibility to access classified information is granted
 
History of the Case
On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
The Director of National Intelligence, by SEA Directive 4, App. A, National
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and
replaced the September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information
or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for
contractor personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the
updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs
that were in effect when the SOR was issued would not affect my decision in this case.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 27, 2017, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on July 25,
2018. The Government’s case consisted of two exhibits that were admitted without
objection (GEs 1-2). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and eight exhibits that
were admitted without objection (AEs A-G). The transcript of the proceedings (Tr.) was
received on August 3, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented completion of his
2014 court-ordered probation. (Tr. 73-76) For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted  ten days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded seven
days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant documented his completion of his
2014 court-ordered probation completion. Applicant’s submissions was admitted without
objection as AE I. 
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guidelines G and J, Applicant allegedly was arrested and charged with
four alcohol-related offenses between July 2007 and June 2014. Allegedly, he was
charged with probation violation in connection with June 2014 incident and served
approximately 14 days in jail and was placed on alcohol monitoring for approximately
19 days, and on probation for an additional three years following an alcohol monitoring
violation.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alcohol-related
incidents with explanations. He claimed he changed his alcohol consumption habits
following his June 14, 2014 DUI incident, and since January 2017 he drinks more
responsibly (one to three servings a month). He also claimed that he does not drive a
vehicle while under the influence since his last DUI and has successfully completed an
18-month DUI program that covers education, awareness, and prevention.  
Applicant further claimed that his monitoring violation stemmed from his
exceeding the time allotted for his leaving his home under the terms of his monitoring
program while attending his son’s Christening. Applicant claimed that he never received
any notification, or other communication, from his monitoring staff that he committed a
monitoring violation.
2
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 34 year-old information systems security officer for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
                               
Applicant has never been married and has one child (age four) from a prior
relationship. (GEs 1-2) He earned an associate’s degree in June 2014 and is currently
enrolled (beginning in January 2017) in a bachelor’s program at the same university.
(GEs 1-2 and AE D; Tr. 39-40) He has maintained a high grade average in school
(twice added to the Dean’s list) and expects to complete his academic requirements for
a bachelor’s degree in December 2018. (Tr. 39, 72)   
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in June 2006 and was honorably
discharged in June 2010. (GEs 1-2 and AE H; Tr. 38, 55) His service included multiple
deployments to Iraq and other areas of conflict. Between June 2010 and June 2014, he
served in the Inactive Reserve of the Marine Corps. (GEs 1-2 and AE H) 
During Applicant’s years of military service, he held a security clearance. (Tr. 40)
Decorations, awards, citations, and campaign ribbons he was awarded while in active-
duty military service include a Sea Deployment Ribbon (2  award), Iraq Campaignnd
Medal, Iraq Global war on Terrorism Service Medal, National Defense Service Medal,
Navy Unit Commendation, Certificate of Appreciation, Good Conduct Medal, and Rifle
Marksmanship Badge. (AE H)
Since January 2015, Applicant has been employed by his current defense
contractor. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 42 ) Between December 2012 and December 2014, he was
employed by another security firm. (GEs 1-2) He reported unemployment between June
2010 and June 2012.
Alcohol history
Applicant was introduced to alcohol at the age of 18. (AE 2; Tr. 54) He
consumed an average of one six-pack of beer a week for the first few years. (GE 2)
Between 2005 and January 2014, he consumed an average of six to eight beers on a
bi-weekly basis and sometimes two hard drinks monthly. He considered his
consumption of alcohol to be moderate during these years. (GE 2) 
Applicant maintained the same rate of alcohol consumption until June 2014,
after which he cut back significantly on his alcohol use. He has never felt that he
abused alcohol or developed a dependence on it. (GE 7) He has never received any
alcohol counseling outside of the alcohol monitoring program he completed in
November 2014. (AE F) 
3
Alcohol-related incidents
Between July 2007 and June 2014, Applicant was arrested for alcohol-related
incidents on four separate occasions. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 43-46) In July 2007, he was
arrested, while serving in the Marine Corps, for DUI and open container. (GEs 1-2)
Arresting police afforded Applicant the option of referring the incident to his command
for disciplinary action, which Applicant accepted. Arresting police further advised
Applicant that he would need to address the incident with his command once he
returned from his scheduled deployment in Iraq. (Tr. 48-49) Based on this arrest,
Applicant’s command issued a written reprimand and counseled him, but did not refer
him for non-judicial punishment. (Tr. 50-53) 
Two years later (in January 2009), Applicant was awarded non-judicial
punishment by his Marine Corps command for being drunk and disorderly in a local
restaurant. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 53-55) He admitted to consuming 10 to 12 servings of mixed
cocktails and beer. (Tr. 54) His awarded punishment included reduction in rank that was
suspended for a period of six months and never imposed.  (AE G; Tr. 36) 
In January 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI after consuming
three to four beers at dinner at a local restaurant. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 55-56) While driving
home, he was stopped by highway patrol officers who administered a breathalyzer on
him. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 56) He registered a .07 per cent blood-alcohol content (BAC) reading
and was arrested for DUI. (Tr. 57-58) 
Appearing in court to answer the January 2014 charges, Applicant pleaded no
contest to a reduced wet reckless charge and was placed on probation for two years by
the court with the following conditions: abstain from alcohol and attend and complete a
six-week first offender alcohol program. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 58) Applicant documented his
successfully completing his first offender program in June 2016. (AE C; Tr. 58-59)
In June 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and probation
violation for violating his monitoring requirements of his first offender program. The
monitoring violation stemmed from his exceeding the time allotted for his leaving his
home under the terms of his monitoring program while attending his son’s Christening.
(GE 2 and AE F; Tr. 64-65) Appearing in September 2014 for his sentencing following
several pre-trial hearings, the court sentenced him to 14 days in jail (13 days of actual
incarceration with one day of credit), placed him on alcohol monitoring for 19 days with
an alcohol-monitoring bracelet, and extended his probation to three years. (GEs 1-2; Tr.
63-69) 
Applicant has since completed his monitoring and probation requirements. (AE I
and AEs C and I; Tr. 69-70) He has had no further incidents of alcohol abuse since his
last incident in June 2014 and assures that he currently drinks responsibly and
infrequently (i.e., two to three drinks a month). (Tr. 69-71) Applicant’‘s assurances are
credible and accepted.
4
Endorsements
Applicant provided letter from the dean of his business school attesting to
reliability and trustworthiness as a bachelor’s degree candidate. (AE A; Tr. 40) His
documentation includes admission to an honorary fraternity while enrolled in his
associate’s degree program. (AE E; Tr. 39) He also provided certificates of appreciation
from his employer and a certificate of admission to an honorary  fraternity at his
university. (AEs B and E) 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
5
          Alcohol consumption 
The concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant presents with a considerable history of alcohol-related incidents (four
in all) over an extended period of time spanning 2007 and 2014. Probation conditions
6
associated with his last alcohol-related incident in June 2014 comprised completion of
an alcohol monitoring program and three years of extended probation. Principal
security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s history of alcohol-related
offenses.
Alcohol and criminal conduct concerns
Applicant’s problems with recurrent alcohol-related incidents over a seven-year
period raise concerns over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse. On the strength of the
evidence presented, one disqualifying condition (DCs) of the AGs for alcohol
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the
individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol
abuse disorder.”
Cross-referenced under Guideline J (criminal conduct) are each of Applicant’s
alcohol-related incidents. Applicable DCs under Guideline J are: DC ¶¶ 31(a), “a pattern
of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely to affect a national
security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt on the individual’s
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness,” 31(b), “evidence (including, but not limited to, a
credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted,”
and 31(d), violation or revocation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program.”
Applicant’s completion of his court-ordered first offender alcohol program in June
2016 and probation (competed in September 2017) entitle him to application of MC ¶
23(a) of Guideline G, “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”
Applicant’s completion of his ordered first offender alcohol program and probation
associated with his last alcohol-related incident in June 2014, in addition to his 
maintenance of an infrequent rate of alcohol consumption for the past four years, are
enough to facilitate safe predictions that he will avoid any abusive drinking in the
foreseeable drinking. His assurances are sufficient to warrant the full application of MC
¶ 23(a). 
Cross-referenced criminal conduct mitigating conditions are applicable as well.
MC ¶¶ 32(a), “”so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and 32(d),
“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, the passage
of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of
parole or probation, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement,” apply to Applicant’s situation. For the most part,
7
these cross-referenced criminal conduct allegations overlap the same allegations
alleged under Guideline G and do not require separate discussiohn.
Whole-person assessment
Appellant is well-regarded by his supervisors and has been highly successful in
his undergraduate studies. He is currently on track to earn his bachelor’s degree and
has earned contributed a good-deal to the nation’s defense efforts with his completed
military service. In recognition of his contributions to the Marine Corps, he was awarded
numerous decorations, medals, citations, and campaign ribbons.
Taking into account Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents away from
work, his counseling initiatives, his avoidance of any recurrent alcohol-related incidents,
his display of convincing probative evidence of a seasoned track record of generally
infrequent drinking over the past four years, his educational successes, his military
service contributions, the applicable guidelines, and a  whole-person assessment of his
reformed drinking practices, safe predictions can be made about his avoidance of
alcohol-related incidents in the foreseeable future.
                                               Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):   FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:           For Applicant
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT :            FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:           For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
