 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03840 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
(Exec. Or.); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2018, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on May 9, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
2 
 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on May 25, 2018. He responded in an undated, one-page 
note, which was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals on June 14, 
2018. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response, and it is admitted into 
the record. In his response to the FORM, Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
evidence, which was attached to Department Counsel’s FORM as Items 1 through 5. This 
evidence is admitted into the record and is referred to herein using Department Counsel’s 
numbering for each Item. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the allegation under Guideline E 
set forth in SOR ¶ 1.a, though he asserts that he does not recall the exact wording he 
used in connection with the threatening online remarks he admitted making in March 
2016. His admission included the allegation that his messages led to his debriefing and 
termination from his employer. Applicant denied in his SOR response the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, and he provided some explanations with his denials. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a U.S. Government contractor. He has been 
married twice, most recently in 1991. He and his current wife have three children. (Item 5 
at 8-9.) He was previously married in 1983. (Item 5 at 8.) It appears from the report of his 
August 4, 2017 background interview that Applicant and his former wife had two children, 
who are now adults. (Item 5 at 8.) Applicant reported in his background interview that he 
does not know the addresses of his ex-wife or any of his four sons. (Item 5 at 8.) He 
appears to be estranged from all five of them. 
 
 Applicant served 12-13 years in the Marines as an enlistee and another nine years 
in the Army National Guard. He received honorable discharges from both services. As a 
government contractor, he worked for a very brief period in 2013 in a remote site in a war 
zone. He quit his job and left the country after being accused of insubordination for 
questioning his supervisor. (Item 5 at 4-5.) 
 
 Applicant’s security problems arose out of an office relationship with a younger 
female colleague (the Colleague). Applicant often spent time during the workday with the 
Colleague at her workstation. This behavior was the subject of critical comments from 
other personnel. At one point, the government’s point of contact with Applicant’s employer 
counseled Applicant to stop spending so much time at the Colleague’s workstation. 
Applicant defiantly refused to change his behavior. Other personnel complained to the 
facility security officer (FSO) about Applicant’s behavior with the Colleague. The FSO was 
concerned about Applicant’s trustworthiness and integrity because she knew from her 
files that Applicant was married. (Item 4 at 1.) 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application, dated March 8, 2017 
(FORM Item 3), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 The Colleague was also friendly with another man, who used to work at the facility 
(the Former Co-Worker). By March 2016, Applicant and the Former Co-Worker developed 
a mutual dislike for each other and eventually words were exchanged between the two 
over social media. On March 7, 2016, the Former Co-Worker called the security officer 
and reported that Applicant had threatened him in an online message. The security officer 
reviewed the online communications between the two men. She attached a copy of the 
communications to a Memorandum for Record she prepared about the incident. (Item 4 
at 2-4.)  
 
 Applicant’s written messages were disturbing to the FSO for two reason: one, they 
contained a threat of violence against the Former Co-Worker; and two, they included 
outright admissions by Applicant that he was unstable and unpredictable. (Item 4 at 1.) 
Applicant commented in his messages to the Former Co-Worker that he was “10 times 
stronger” than his rival and that he “can carry a weapon.” (Item 4 at 1, 4.) Applicant, in 
fact, has a license to carry a concealed weapon. (Item 5 at 7.) In a response to a 
suggestion by the Former Co-Worker that Applicant’s threat may become a problem for 
his security clearance, Applicant wrote: “you should no (sic) better [than] to threaten 
someone who’s not all there . . . I hate life[.]” (Item 4 at 3.) The Co-Worker wrote that 
Applicant was “insane,” and Applicant responded with the comment that “7 years in Iraq 
and Afghanistan might do it.” (Item 4 at 2.) 
 
 Based upon her reading of these online messages between the two men and her 
knowledge of Applicant’s interest in the Colleague, the FSO became concerned about a 
possible escalation if Applicant felt his relationship with the Colleague was endangered. 
She was also concerned about the elevated access Applicant had to the facility’s 
classified computer systems. She took her concerns to the commanding officer, who 
decided to suspend Applicant’s access to classified information. His employer 
subsequently terminated him. The Former Co-Worker also sought a protective order 
against Applicant based upon Applicant’s emotional instability and threatening online 
messages. (Item 4 at 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s version of the events that led up to his termination is set forth in his 
responses to the FORM and to the SOR and in the report of his August 2017 background 
interview, which he adopted in his answers to Department Counsel’s interrogatories. He 
failed to disclose his debriefing or employment termination in his security clearance 
application (SCA). In his SOR response, Applicant admitted allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a that 
he was debriefed and terminated from his employment because he made threatening 
remarks to someone online, but he claimed he did not recall the exact words he used. He 
provided a lengthy explanation of the interactions he had with the Former Co-Worker and 
the Colleague in his background interview. Applicant advised the interviewer that he and 
the Colleague were being stalked by the Former Co-Worker, who was trying to provoke 
an altercation. He also said that before he wrote the messages, he had consumed alcohol 
and had taken a sleep aid. He said that the sleep aid impacted his actions. (Item 5 at 3.) 
 
 During his background interview, Applicant commented that he was interviewed in 
June 2017 by an investigator from another government agency (AGA Investigator). He 
 
4 
 
admitted that he initially misled the AGA Investigator, stating he told the investigator that 
someone must have hacked his online account and posted the messages. He reported 
to the background investigator that he ultimately decided to tell the truth and admit he 
sent the messages. He acknowledged that the AGA Investigator produced copies of the 
messages. It is unclear from the background investigator’s report whether this occurred 
before Applicant admitted his actions or after. (Item 5 at 7.) In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant clarified the timing by writing: “When shown [by the AGA investigator] what was 
said [in the messages], I admitted it looked like something I might say.” 
 
 Applicant again misled the government in his SCA by not disclosing his March 
2016 termination from his employer. The question in Section 13C of the SCA asks for this 
information and required the disclosure of his termination. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant denied that he intended to provide false information. He stated that he was 
confused how to answer this question because he claims he was not fired. He asserts he 
was let go because his clearance was suspended and he required the clearance to 
perform his duties. He also asserts that he was never told why he was “let go.” By 
answering this question in the negative, he claims he believed that he was providing the 
best answer. (Response to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant’s excuse for not disclosing in his SCA that he lost his job for security-
related reasons evidences that he was deliberately attempting to withhold derogatory 
information about his termination. This finding is supported by his initial attempt to mislead 
the AGA investigator in June 2017 claiming his online account was hacked. It is also 
supported by his false denial in his response to Section 25 of his SCA that he had never 
had his clearance suspended. 
 
 The SOR allegation set forth in ¶ 1.c states that the date of the SCA is September 
3, 2015, which is incorrect. That date precedes the dates of Applicant’s debriefing and 
termination, which occurred in March 2016. The correct date of the SCA in the record is 
March 8, 2017.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
 
5 
 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
6 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . (2) any disruptive, violent, 
or other inappropriate behavior; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish AG 
¶¶ 16(b) and 16(d) under this guideline with respect to the allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b. The record satisfies the Government’s burden of proving by substantial 
evidence that Applicant wrote threatening online messages to the Former Co-Worker and 
was debriefed and terminated. Furthermore, the evidence establishes that Applicant 
attempted to deceive the AGA Investigator by claiming that his online account was hacked 
before he was shown the messages and admitted sending them. Sending the messages 
to the Former Co-Worker was not a one-time mistake, as Applicant argues in his response 
to the FORM. The record evidence establishes a pattern of dishonest and inappropriate 
behavior. 
 
 The evidence in the FORM however, does not support the allegation, as written, 
in SOR ¶ 1.c because of the incorrectly alleged date of the SCA. Accordingly, I am 
constrained to find that the record evidence does not establish SOR allegation ¶ 1.c.  
 
 
7 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Neither of the above mitigating conditions are established with respect to the 
disqualifying facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s presented no mitigating evidence 
with respect to his threatening messages, except his excuse that the sleeping aid he 
claims he took the night of his messaging activities disturbed his judgment. Given the 
severity of the threats, that excuse cannot be given any significant weight. The incident 
is not minor, and insufficient time has passed. Applicant’s threats, which include a 
reference to a firearm and his mental instability, cast serious doubts on his judgment and 
reliability.  
 
AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply to the security concerns raised by the facts alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant initially tried to mislead the AGA investigator, and it was only after 
Applicant was shown the actual messages that he decided to tell the truth. An applicant 
who deliberately fails to give full, frank, and candid answers to the government in 
connection with a security clearance investigation or adjudication interferes with the 
integrity of the government’s industrial security program. ISCR Case No. 01-03132 at 3 
(App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established with respect to Applicant’s act of deception. These 
offenses are not minor, infrequent or dated. They cast serious doubts about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. 
 
Applicant’s behavior raised in the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and established 
by the record evidence reflect a pattern of dishonesty and inappropriate behavior. 
Moreover, his threatening messages, combined with the suggestion that he was not 
stable after his years of military service in war zones, made his threats even more sinister 
and raised serious questions about Applicant’s judgment and reliability. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
8 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed above, but another factor warrants additional comment. Applicant’s non-
alleged conduct of intentionally failing to disclose his termination in his March 8, 2017 
SCA is evidence I can consider in my whole-person analysis. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01941 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2015) (non-alleged conduct can be considered in 
performing a whole-person analysis and evaluating mitigation evidence). Applicant’s 
intentional falsification in his SCA addresses the issue of the frequency and recency of 
Applicant’s misconduct and undercuts his limited evidence in mitigation, particularly on 
the issues of his trustworthiness and reliability. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
