 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 17-04148 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement and 
substance misuse, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On March 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
(December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a notarized statement, dated April 3, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on June 14, 2018, and he was afforded 
an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, 
Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative Guidelines 
applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on June 19, 2018. His response was 
due on July 19, 2018. Applicant timely submitted several documents in response to the 
FORM, and they were admitted as Applicant exhibits without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on September 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to drug involvement and substance misuse of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.g.), but his comments related to the factual allegations pertaining to 
personal conduct were not responsive, and he failed to specifically “admit” or “deny” those 
allegations. Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as painter with his current employer since September 2003. He completed his high school 
education through a General Educational Development (GED) test in 2000. He has never 
served with the U.S. military. He has never received a security clearance. Applicant was 
married sometime after August 2016 to the woman with whom he had been cohabiting 
since December 2011. He has one son, born in 2012. 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, and Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant was a substance abuser who was both psychologically and physically 
opioid dependent. His choice of illegal or unauthorized substances was marijuana; 
Vicodin (hydrocodone bitartrate and acetaminophen) for which a prescription is required; 
Percocet (oxycodone and acetaminophen), for which a prescription is required; heroin 
(an illegal, highly addictive drug processed from morphine); and Suboxone 
(buprenorphine and naloxone), used to reduce symptoms of opiate addiction and 
withdrawal, for which a prescription is required. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
 During the period 2004-05, Applicant was motivated to sell marijuana because his 
friend was making a lot of money selling marijuana and he asked Applicant to sell it as 
well. Applicant knowingly and voluntarily started selling marijuana to friends and 
associates, making $500 per week, including $350 at work. In addition, supposedly to 
cope with personal issues, Applicant smoked marijuana recreationally.1 On September 
25, 2005, he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana – 1st offense, a 
misdemeanor.2 Upon his conviction, he was sentenced to community service and fined.3 
Because Applicant failed to complete his community service by a particular date, on 
October 31, 2006, he was arrested on a bench warrant.4 Applicant admitted that he was 
uncooperative and belligerent with the police, and he lied when he told them his mother 
was a judge and his father was a police chief. Neither the second arrest nor the results of 
that arrest were alleged in the SOR or indicated in the case file.5 
 
 During the period December 2013 through December 2014, Applicant started 
abusing opiates without a prescription. He obtained Vicodin from a co-worker for free for 
a brief period, because that co-worker wanted someone to use drugs with him, and then, 
because Vicodin gave Applicant more energy at work, he started frequently purchasing 
the substance for $10 per pill. He took from 1 to 15 Vicodin pills per day. At some point, 
although he sought to stop using Vicodin, he could not stop because he would get sick, 
nauseous, sweat, feel cold, and shake when he stopped taking it. After about three 
months, Vicodin was no longer working, so Applicant switched to another drug.6 
 
 Another co-worker was able to furnish him with Percocet. Applicant purchased the 
Percocet from his co-worker for cash, and his daily use of Percocet over a four-month 
period increased to as many as 20 Percocet pills. Because of such drug abuse, Applicant 
acknowledged that he was opioid dependent. In addition, because of the costs involved 
in obtaining those controlled drugs without a prescription, he experienced financial 
                                                          
1 Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 27, 2017), at 10-11; Item 2 (Answer to the SOR), 
at 2. 
 
2 Item 4 (Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated September 16, 2016). 
 
3 Item 5, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
4 Item 4, supra note 2; Item 5, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
5 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal 
Board. (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s unalleged arrest and 
other misconduct will be considered only for the five purposes listed above.  
 
6 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
4 
                                      
 
problems.7 Hoping to resolve his financial difficulties, he searched for and found a 
cheaper substitute. 
 
 That cheaper substitute turned out to be heroin. Turning to a long-time friend whom 
he knew as a drug dealer, Applicant purchased heroin for $5 per “hit, bag, or bundle” for 
$40 to $50 per gram. The heroin caused him to fall asleep. Once again, recognizing that 
he was an addict, he finally informed his girlfriend and decided to seek rehabilitation.8 
 
 In December 2014, Applicant voluntarily sought treatment at a substance abuse 
treatment center. He admitted that he lied to the staff about the length of his dependency 
period in order to get admitted into the program. During a nearly one-week period in 
December 2014, he received detoxification and a fast methadone taper treatment9 from 
a not-for-profit nationally recognized and accredited behavioral healthcare provider, 
specializing in the treatment and prevention of substance use disorders and co-occurring 
substance use and mental health disorders. The specifics of the treatment portion of the 
program, as opposed to the detoxification and fast methadone taper treatment portion, 
were not described. He was sent home with no medications, but with a referral to a 
Suboxone maintenance program. Applicant left the center thinking it was all the treatment 
he needed, so he never followed up on the referral. However, he felt so sick that he 
                                                          
7 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
8 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
9 Agonist and Antagonist therapies are effective evidence-based options in the medical treatment 
of drug addiction. An agonist drug attaches itself to receptors in the brain, which produces a chemical 
reaction. For example, heroin is an opioid agonist. It binds to opioid receptors that control pleasure and 
pain, the result being a feeling of euphoria and well-being. Other examples of opioid agonists, sometimes 
referred to as “full agonists,” are oxycodone, morphine and opium. Methadone is a full agonist used in the 
treatment of opioid addiction. 
In agonist therapy, patients are prescribed agonist drugs that attach themselves to the same 
receptors as the addicted substance. The agonist drug creates a similar high, essentially impersonating the 
more addictive drug. For instance, buprenorphine - a “partial agonist” - is commonly used in the treatment 
of heroin addiction, for while it binds tightly to opioid receptors in the brain, it does not have a “full agonist” 
effect like heroin. Because there is a ceiling effect to its action, patients using the medication do not develop 
a tolerance, but do become physiologically dependent. Agonist therapy can help relieve painful withdrawal 
and continuous cravings, allowing patients to focus on therapy and long-term recovery. The downside to 
agonist drugs is that patients can develop a physiological dependence and a tolerance to the medication 
during their treatment. 
While antagonist drugs also bind to receptors in the brain, there is not a similar high to the addictive 
drug. Antagonist drugs are used to block addictive drugs from activating the brain’s receptors. Antagonist 
therapy has several benefits. Patients receiving antagonist drugs, such as Naltrexone, which is used in the 
treatment of opioid addiction, do not develop a tolerance to the medication. Additionally, antagonist drugs 
are not addictive in and of themselves. Naloxone is often used to stabilize patients suffering from opiate 
overdose. Antagonist therapy does not alleviate the craving for the addictive substance. See 
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/effective-treatments-opioid-addiction/; see also 
https://www.inspiremalibu.com/agonist-antagonist-therapy-treatment/. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
thought he was dying.10 He then turned to his girlfriend’s father – a former addict – for 
help. That individual furnished Applicant Suboxone, without a prescription for Applicant, 
during the period December 2014 through March 2016, to ween himself off heroin. 
Eventually, not feeling right about the situation, Applicant again sought professional help 
with his opioid dependency.11 
  
 The time-line Applicant supplied for his next opioid dependency treatment is 
somewhat inconsistent. In March 2017, he told the investigator with the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) that he enrolled in a Suboxone treatment facility in March 
2016, and that he attended treatment for his drug addiction on a monthly basis, attended 
meetings, and that he routinely underwent a urinalysis.12 A physician with the treatment 
center stated that treatment commenced on May 10, 2016, and that Applicant was 
administered a urinalysis test on a monthly basis.13 However, the Partial Qualitative Drug 
Results (the urinalysis analysis results) furnished twice by Applicant – which he said 
constituted all of his drug tests – were only for August 28, 2017; September 25, 2017; 
October 19, 2017; November 16, 2017; January 11, 2018; and February 7, 2018. Those 
tests were all negative for the targeted drugs, with the exception of Suboxone.14 The SOR 
alleged that the treatment commenced in September 2016, and Applicant admitted that 
allegation. The unresolved question is when did Applicant actually commence his 
Suboxone treatment at the facility: March 2016; May 2016; September 2016; or August 
2017? 
 
 During his OPM interview, Applicant claimed to be attending Narcotics Anonymous 
(NA) meetings two or more times per week,15 but he did not submit any documents to 
furnish any explanation about the specifics of his particular activities with respect to the 
program. 
  
 While not alleged in the SOR, Applicant has engaged in a number of activities, and 
he has been involved in a number of incidents at work and elsewhere, which reflect an 
unwillingness to comply with the law, as well as rules and regulations: in January 2010, 
he was suspended for three days without pay for a safety violation; on an unspecified 
date, he was suspended for five days without pay for a second safety violation; in October 
2011, he was ticketed by police for driving on a suspended license, for which he was 
found guilty; in January 2016, he received a written warning for briefly exiting the 
                                                          
10 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12; Letter from Registered Nurse, undated, attached to Applicant’s 
Response to the FORM. 
 
11 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
12 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
13 Letter from Medical Doctor, dated March 26, 2018, attached to Applicant’s Response to the 
FORM. 
 
14 Partial Qualitative Drug Results, various dates, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM; 
Item 2, supra note 1, at 1-2. 
 
15 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
workplace grounds in violation of a stated rule; and in March 2017, he received a verbal 
warning for using his cell phone after his break time in violation of a stated rule.16  
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s area superintendent in the workplace has known, and worked with, 
Applicant for 13 years in multiple departments across the facility. He observed Applicant’s 
consistent delivery on difficult assignments, regardless of the deadlines or pressure, and 
he noted that Applicant has been entrusted with increasing levels of responsibility. He 
recommends Applicant for an unspecified position.17 Applicant’s pastor, family members, 
and friends, all commented on his hard work, trustworthiness, integrity, spiritual and 
emotional growth, and family orientation.18 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”19 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”20   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
16 Item 5, supra note 1, at 6-8. 
 
17 Character Reference, undated, attached to both Applicant’s Answer to the SOR and his 
Response to the FORM. 
 
18 Character References, various dates, attached to both Applicant’s Answer to the SOR and his 
Response to the FORM. 
 
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
20 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”21 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.22  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”23  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”24 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
21 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
23 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
24 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Abuse is set out in AG ¶ 24:       
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Furthermore, on October 25, 2014, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Memorandum ES 2014-00674, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana 
Use, which states: 
 
[C]hanges to state laws and the laws of the District of Columbia pertaining 
to marijuana use do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (Reference H and I). An individual's disregard of federal law 
pertaining to the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains 
adjudicatively relevant in national security determinations. As always, 
adjudicative authorities are expected to evaluate claimed or developed use 
of, or involvement with, marijuana using the current adjudicative criteria. 
The adjudicative authority must determine if the use of, or involvement with, 
marijuana raises questions about the individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with law, rules, and regulations, 
including federal laws, when making eligibility decisions of persons 
proposed for, or occupying, sensitive national security positions. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions under AG ¶ 25 that could raise security 
concerns in this case:  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of substance use disorder. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Applicant admittedly possessed, used, and sold marijuana; purchased and used 
Vicodin and Percocet without a prescription; used Suboxone without a prescription; and 
purchased and used heroin. He was arrested and convicted of possession of marijuana. 
He was diagnosed as opioid dependent by two separate qualified medical or mental 
health professionals. AG ¶¶ 25(a) 25(c), and 25 (d) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 26 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies and AG ¶ 26(d) minimally applies, but no other 
mitigating conditions apply. While Applicant has been candid in reporting his history of 
substance abuse, his detoxification efforts, and his eventual enrollment in a Suboxone 
maintenance program, there are other factors that minimize the overall significance of 
these mitigating conditions. Applicant identified two co-workers who supplied him with 
opioids without prescriptions, as well as the individual who supplied him with Suboxone 
for a lengthy period, also without a prescription. There is no evidence that the co-workers 
are no longer employed by the same employer, and there is evidence that Applicant’s 
Suboxone-supplier is now his father-in-law. While Applicant claimed to have no intention 
to use illegal substances or non-prescribed controlled medications in the future, it should 
be noted that he did not submit a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse 
is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.  
 
With respect to the satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
there is evidence that Applicant repeatedly participated in the detoxification process, but 
there is minimal evidence of completion of a drug treatment program, or anything about 
 
10 
                                      
 
those programs. Applicant’s initial detoxification program was completed, but he chose to 
ignore the recommended referral and ended up essentially relapsing by seeking a 
substance which was not yet prescribed for him. Applicant’s current status is tenuous at 
best, for while he is using one prescribed medication to reduce his addiction to other 
illegal substances, if he stops taking Suboxone without medical approval, he may return 
to the illegal substances. Furthermore, while Applicant’s purported abstinence from illegal 
or unauthorized substances is to be encouraged, that period remains unclear as 
discussed above. He either stopped such abuse in March 2016; or May 2016, but in either 
case, Applicant’s period of abstinence is too brief to establish a confidence that a relapse 
will not soon occur. Under the circumstances, Applicant’s actions continue to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of some conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
 
11 
                                      
 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
My discussions related to Applicant’s Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, 
are adopted herein. As noted above, Applicant admittedly possessed, used, and sold 
marijuana; purchased and used Vicodin and Percocet without a prescription; used 
Suboxone without a prescription; and purchased and used heroin – all activities that were 
 
12 
                                      
 
against the law. He was arrested and convicted of possession of marijuana. He was 
diagnosed as opioid dependent by two separate qualified medical or mental health 
professionals. He continues to maintain a relationship with his father-in-law, his 
Suboxone-supplier for a lengthy period, and any relationship with his two opioid-supplier 
coworkers is not known as it has not been described. AG ¶¶ 16(e) and 16(g) have been 
established. None of the remaining disqualifying conditions apply, especially AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
and 16(d), essentially because Applicant’s conduct in several different adjudicative areas 
are sufficient for an adverse determination under those other guidelines. 
 
The guideline also includes one condition under AG ¶ 17 that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from Personal Conduct:  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
AG ¶ 17(d) minimally applies. As noted above, after abusing two different opioids, 
marijuana, heroin, and Suboxone, Applicant finally sought treatment, and he was 
diagnosed as opioid dependent by two separate qualified medical or mental health 
professionals. He had one relapse. While the detoxification process was seemingly 
satisfactorily completed, the remaining aspects of the treatment programs are not known, 
and only the Suboxone maintenance program has been described. As noted above, the 
maintenance program does not alleviate the craving for the addictive substance. Under 
the circumstances, Applicant’s actions continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
 
13 
                                      
 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.25  
  
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 36-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving as painter with his current 
employer since September 2003. He is married, and he has one son. Recognizing that 
he was a drug addict, Applicant voluntarily sought treatment at a substance abuse 
treatment center where he received detoxification and a fast methadone taper treatment. 
After a relapse, he was enrolled in a Suboxone maintenance program, and it appears that 
he is still in that program. He has not used marijuana in over a decade; used heroin or 
abused Vicodin or Percocet since December 2014; or used Suboxone without a 
prescription since sometime in 2016. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant admittedly possessed, used, and sold marijuana; purchased and used Vicodin 
and Percocet without a prescription; used Suboxone without a prescription; and 
purchased and used heroin. He was arrested and convicted of possession of marijuana. 
He was diagnosed as opioid dependent by two separate qualified medical or mental health 
professionals.  
As noted above, in addition to his Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
concerns, although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant has also engaged in a number of 
activities, and he has been involved in a number of incidents at work and elsewhere, which 
reflect an unwillingness to comply with the law, as well as rules and regulations: two safety 
violations; driving on a suspended license; and violations of workplace stated rules, as 
recently as 2016 and 2017. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his Drug 
Involvement and Substance Abuse concerns, and his Personal Conduct issues. See 
SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
                                                          
25 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
