 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02566 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He has a long-standing history of financial problems or 
difficulties going back to a 2006 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. He intends to address his 
current financial problems—about $28,000 in delinquent debt—through another Chapter 
7 bankruptcy case. Although he has had periods of unemployment, he did not present 
sufficient evidence to mitigate his financial problems, which are ongoing and 
unresolved. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions, the official form used for personnel security investigations, 
on April 28, 2016.1 This document is commonly known as a security clearance 
application. Thereafter, on August 10, 2017, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1. 
 
2 
 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement 
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the action under the security 
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant answered the 
SOR on September 13, 2017; his answers were mixed; and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2017. The hearing took place as 
scheduled on April 10, 2018. Applicant appeared without counsel. Department Counsel 
offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 1-6. Applicant offered 
documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits A-D. No witnesses were called 
other than Applicant. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
matters. He made a timely submission of a letter from the law firm representing him in a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which is admitted as Exhibit E.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance for the first time. He is employed as a warehouse identification production 
specialist for a large company in the defense industry. He has been so employed since 
about mid-2016. He has a good employment record based on three spot awards 
received from his current employer.2 His formal education includes a high school 
diploma and some college. His first marriage ended in divorce in 2011. He lived with a 
cohabitant from about October 2011 to about January 2018, when they separated. He 
has three children, ages 6, 4, and 2, with the cohabitant. Applicant is not currently under 
a court-ordered child-support obligation, but he provides financial support to his former 
cohabitant on an informal basis.   
 
Applicant’s employment history includes two periods of unemployment within the 
last several years. He had longtime employment as an operations supervisor at a 
copper mine during 2005-2015, during which time he earned a salary as high as 
$65,000 annually. He was fired or terminated from that job in about August 2015 due to 
insubordination. He explained the circumstances surrounding his termination, which 
stemmed from his early departure from work to attend to a two-month old child who was 
hospitalized and his refusal to submit to a drug test the following day.3 He was 
unemployed from August 2015 to December 2015, a period of about four months. He 
next worked as a delivery driver during peak season for about two months. He was then 
unemployed from February 2016 until beginning his current job in mid-2016.  
 
Applicant does not dispute his history of financial problems, which includes a 
2006 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case.4 The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or 
                                                          
2 Exhibit D. 
 
3 Tr. 37-40.  
 
4 Tr. 72-73.  
 
3 
 
difficulties consisting of 24 delinquent debts ranging in amounts from $30 to $11,017 for 
a total of about $28,000. Several of the debts are for relatively small medical collection 
accounts. He admitted 21 of the delinquent debts, and he denied and disputed 3 of the 
delinquent debts in his answer to the SOR. He disclosed multiple delinquent financial 
accounts in his April 2016 security clearance application.5 He attributed the financial 
problems to losing his job at the mine in 2015. In sum, the 24 delinquent accounts are 
established by Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and credit reports from 
2016 and 2017.6 
 
The record evidence includes three adverse information reports submitted by 
Applicant’s current employer. A November 2016 adverse information report shows 
Applicant’s wages were subject to garnishment for collection of a judgment for $5,348 
obtained after repossession of a vehicle in October 2015, when he could no longer 
afford the loan payment.7 An August 2017 adverse information report shows Applicant 
self-reported that he intended to seek relief by filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, and 
included a detailed list of 18 delinquent accounts.8 And a November 2017 adverse 
information report shows that Applicant self-reported a misdemeanor traffic offense, 
knowingly displaying a false license plate, to which he pleaded guilty and paid a $350 
fine and court costs.9 
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted that the 24 delinquent debts in the SOR were 
unpaid or not successfully disputed or otherwise resolved.10 He estimated his current 
level of indebtedness at $30,000 to $40,000.11 His intention is to address his financial 
problems through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, but a petition had not yet been filed 
because he was still paying the law firm’s retainer. He initially made contact with the law 
firm in about June 2017.12 Post-hearing, an April 30, 2018 letter from the law firm 
indicates that he has paid the retainer of $1,200 and the firm would file a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy case within the next few days.13 
 
                                                          
5 Exhibit 1. 
 
6 Exhibits 4, 5, and 6.  
 
7 Exhibit A. 
 
8 Exhibit B. 
 
9 Exhibit C. 
 
10 Tr. 45. 
 
11 Tr. 31.  
 
12 Exhibit B; Tr. 64-66.  
 
13 Exhibit E. 
 
 
4 
 
In addition to his full-time job, Applicant works a part-time job as a loader at a 
large home-improvement store. With the assistance of his current employer, he has 
resumed his formal education with an online university. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.14 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.15 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”16 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.17 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.18 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.19 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.20 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.21 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.22 An 
                                                          
14 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
15 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
16 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
17 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
19 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
20 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
21 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
22 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
5 
 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.23 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.24 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . .25 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. Applicant has not made 
                                                          
23 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
25 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
forward progress in resolving the 24 delinquent accounts that altogether total more than 
$28,000. The facts and circumstances of Applicant’s financial situation raise questions 
about his ability or willingness to meet his financial obligations. His problematic financial 
history suggests he may be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and 
safeguarding classified or sensitive information.  
 
 With that said, Applicant’s financial problems are related to his job loss in 2015, 
when he was terminated from his good-paying job at a mine. The job loss and 
subsequent decline in income would result in financial stress and strain for most people 
in similar circumstances. But what is missing here is evidence of material forward 
progress in resolving his financial problems. Although he made initial contact with the 
bankruptcy law firm in June 2017, he had yet to finishing paying the retainer as of the 
April 2018 hearing. Assuming the bankruptcy case has since been filed and he was 
granted a discharge by the bankruptcy court, the “fresh start” associated with that 
discharge is not enough to conclude that Applicant is safely out of the woods. This is 
especially so considering this is Applicant’s second Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. In 
addition, it is reasonable to consider that Applicant is facing an additional financial 
obligation; namely, child support for the three children he had with his former 
cohabitant, which may include an arrearage. The trend line here is not in Applicant’s 
favor.  
  
 To sum up, Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. In doing so, I gave Applicant credit 
for disclosing and self-reporting his financial problems during the security clearance 
process. Nevertheless, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.x:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Eligibility denied.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
