 
  
  
1  
                                        
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )               ISCR Case No. 17-04323                                                                      
  )   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On January 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
(December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
 
  
  
2  
                                        
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 24, 2018. In a notarized statement, dated 
April 3, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on May 2, 2018. The case was assigned to me on June 18, 2018.  A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on July 11, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 27, 
2018. 
 
 During the hearing, 4 Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4, and 11 Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE K were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 8, 2018. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that opportunity and timely 
submitted one document, which was marked and admitted as AE K, without objection. 
The record closed on August 24, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments nearly all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.k., and 1.m.), and he denied the one remaining allegation. Applicant’s admissions and 
comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as an electronic technician with different employers on the same contract since 2014. A 
1978 high school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s of science degree in computer 
science in 2004. He enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in May 1979, and he served on active 
duty until he was honorably discharged on July 30, 1987 as a Staff Sergeant (E-5). He 
was granted a secret clearance in 1981, and again in 2005. Applicant was married in 
September 1979, and divorced in April 1987. He remarried in November 1990. He has 
two children and three stepchildren. 
Military Service, Awards, and Decorations  
  
During his military service, Applicant was awarded the Air Force Commendation 
Medal, the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award, the Air Force Good Conduct Medal (with 
one cluster), the Humanitarian Service Medal, the Air Force Overseas Short Tour Ribbon, 
the Air Force Overseas Long Tour Ribbon, the Air Force Longevity Service Award Ribbon 
  
  
3  
                                        
(with one cluster), the Small Arms Expert Marksmanship Ribbon, and the Air Force 
Training Ribbon.1  
 
 Financial Considerations2 
  
Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to several different issues that initially 
arose in or about mid-2015: his wife’s employer went out of business; his business 
relocation required that he move halfway across the country, and that relocation caused 
his wife to lose her part-time home-based business income of approximately $1,000 per 
month because she lost her customer base; the residence they moved from became a 
rental property, and eventually his tenants lost their own jobs and were unable to pay the 
rent and one of their utilities; Applicant came back to his old position so he could move 
back into the family residence where he could repair it, save it, and put it on the market 
to sell it; he was required to obtain health insurance under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) 
which cost him $1,800 per month – an amount he could not afford – so he removed his 
wife from coverage to save money, but incurred a federal tax penalty because she was 
no longer covered; and his wife subsequently required surgery without insurance 
coverage.3 Because of the additional unexpected expenses, insufficient funds caused 
some of his accounts to become delinquent.  
Applicant and his wife jointly work on a budget, but she has responsibility, with his 
input, over the finances. They have two lists of bills to pay each payday, and they pay 
whatever they can, either on-line or by phone.4 Applicant sought financial guidance from 
his employer, but his site manager was unable to furnish him any such guidance. With 
respect to the delinquent accounts, Applicant had three separate plans: plan A is to sell 
the house and pay off the delinquent debts before the end of the year; plan B is to engage 
the professional services of a certified credit counselor to assist him in attempting to 
resolve those delinquent accounts; and plan C is to attempt to resolve the delinquent 
accounts by himself. Applicant started plan B, but because of difficulties encountered with 
the credit counselor, he voided the engagement. Also, some of the creditors refused to 
work with his credit counselor for a variety of reasons, but some agreed to do so. Pending 
the completion of plan A, Applicant turned to plan C, and he has worked with some 
creditors to settle or pay off some of those accounts, and he has a list of other accounts 
which he intends to address as others are resolved. Applicant’s most recent proposed 
                                                          
1 AE L (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated July 30, 1987).  
  
2 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 1 (e-QIP, dated April 11, 2016); GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 8, 2017); GE 2 
(Personal Subject Interview, dated September 15, 2017); GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit 
Report, dated June 28, 2016); GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 4, 2017); AE A (TransUnion Credit Report, 
dated February 2, 2018); AE O (Experian Credit Report, dated September 22, 2017); and Applicant’s Answer to the 
SOR, dated February 13, 2018.   
  
3 Tr. at 27-38; Letter, dated September 15, 2017, attached to GE 2; AE J (Form 1095-B, Health 
Coverage – 2017, undated). 
 
4 Tr. at 37; AE G (Budget, various dates). 
 
  
  
4  
                                        
repayment plan reflected monthly payments to eight creditors and the credit counselor in 
the total amount of $457, but that repayment plan was not enacted.5  
The SOR identified 13 purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed for 
collection or charged off, as generally reflected by Applicant’s June 2016 credit report or 
December 2017 credit report. Those debts total approximately $20,606. The current 
status of those accounts, is as follows.  
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a bank-issued store charge account with an unpaid balance 
of $5,105 that was sold to a debt purchaser.6 Although Applicant has not yet made any 
payments on this account, the debt purchaser was originally scheduled to be paid $105 
on a monthly basis once the first set of delinquent debts has been satisfied.7 The account 
has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.j.): These are two separate listings of the same bank-issued 
credit card for an outdoor recreation retail specialty store with two separate snapshots of 
the changing unpaid balances of $2,583 and $3,083 that were charged off.8 The bank 
that issued the credit card was subsequently purchased by a larger bank.9 Applicant has 
been making monthly payments of at least $25 under a payment plan since either August 
2015 or April 2016, and he intends to increase that amount once another debt is resolved. 
While one of the credit report listings simply referred to the pay status as “charged off,” 
the other listing reported it as “current; paid or paying as agreed.”10 The account is in the 
process of being resolved.  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a bank-issued charge account for an automobile service 
center with an unpaid and past-due balance of $2,280 that was sold to a debt purchaser.11 
The debt purchaser was originally scheduled to be paid $47 on a monthly basis once the 
first set of delinquent debts has been satisfied.12 However, a claim was filed against 
Applicant in court in January 2018, and on February 13, 2018, Applicant paid the 
                                                          
5 AE I (Credit Counseling File, various dates); Tr. at 42-43. 
 
6 GE 3, supra note 1, at 16; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2; AE A, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
7 AE I, supra note 5, at 4. 
 
8 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
9 AE B (Letter, dated June 21, 2018). 
 
10 AE A, supra note 1, at 2-3, 13-14; AE B, supra note 9; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra 
note 1, at 1; Tr. at 43-45. 
 
11 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
12 AE I, supra note 5, at 4. 
 
  
  
5  
                                        
plaintiff/debt purchaser $2,280.31 that was borrowed from his mother. The lawsuit was 
voluntarily dismissed on February 23, 2018.13 The account has been resolved.   
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a bank-issued charge account for a retail home improvement 
store with an unpaid balance of $2,153 that was sold to a debt purchaser.14 The debt 
purchaser was originally scheduled to be paid $45 on a monthly basis once the first set 
of delinquent debts has been satisfied.15 Applicant anticipated making his initial payment 
in September 2018.16 The account has not been resolved.  
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): This is a bank-issued department store charge account with an 
unpaid balance of $1,382 that was charged off and sold to a debt purchaser.17 The debt 
purchaser was originally scheduled to be paid $42 on a monthly basis once the first set 
of delinquent debts has been satisfied.18 However, in April 2018, the debt purchaser 
offered to settle the account for $1,037.19, a savings to Applicant of $345.72. Applicant 
agreed to the offer, and on June 15, 2018, his final payment was received by the debt 
purchaser, and the account was considered settled with a zero balance.19 The account 
has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): This is a bank-issued furniture store charge account with an unpaid 
balance of $1,231 that was charged off and sold to a debt purchaser.20 Although Applicant 
has not yet made any payments on this account, the debt purchaser was originally 
scheduled to be paid $31 on a monthly basis once the first set of delinquent debts has 
been satisfied.21 The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): This is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of 
$1,017.22 Although Applicant has not yet made any payments on this account, he intends 
to make his initial payments once the first set of delinquent debts has been satisfied. The 
account has not been resolved. 
                                                          
13 AE C (Statement of Claim and Notice of Voluntary Dismissal, various dates).  
  
14 GE 3, supra note 1, at 17; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
  
15 AE I, supra note 5, at 4. 
 
16 Tr. at 47. 
 
17 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2; AE A, supra note 1, at 3-4. 
 
18 AE I, supra note 5, at 4. 
 
19 AE D (Letters, various dates). 
 
20 GE 4, supra note 1, at 2; AE A, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
21 AE I, supra note 5, at 4. 
 
22 GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
  
  
6  
                                        
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): This is an unspecified type of telephone account with an unpaid 
balance of $599.23 Although Applicant has not yet made any payments on this account, 
he intends to make his initial payments once the first set of delinquent debts has been 
satisfied. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): This is an Internet or cable television account with an unpaid balance 
of $181.24 Although Applicant has not yet made any payments on this account, he intends 
to make his initial payments once the first set of delinquent debts has been satisfied. The 
account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.): This is a power utility account that became over 120 days past due 
in the amount of $764 when Applicant’s tenants were evicted from his rental property for 
not paying him their rent and they departed without paying their utility bill.25 In order to 
switch service back into his name, Applicant was placed on a prepay basis. In accordance 
with that decision, 25 percent of each bill paid by Applicant is credited to the deferred 
arrearage.26 Applicant’s most recent payment for $100 was made on July 13, 2018, and 
the remaining unpaid balance was reduced to $621.50.27 The account is in the process 
of being resolved.  
(SOR ¶ 1.l.): This is an unspecified type of telephone account with an unpaid 
balance of $122.84.28 However, in May 2017, the collection agent offered to settle the 
account for $67.56. Applicant agreed to the offer, and on May 9, 2017, his payment was 
received by the creditor, and the account was considered settled with a zero balance.29 
The account has been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.m.): This is an unspecified type of utility account with an unpaid balance 
of $106.30 At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he had not yet addressed the 
account because he was focusing on other accounts. He stated an intention to call the 
creditor and pay off the balance.31 The account has not been resolved. 
                                                          
23 GE 3, supra note 1, at 17; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
24 GE 3, supra note 1, at 17; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
25 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
26 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1, at 1-2. 
 
27 AE E (Account Status, undated). 
 
28 GE 3, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
29 AE F (Letters, various dates). 
 
30 GE 3, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
31 Tr. at 54. 
 
  
  
7  
                                        
Applicant submitted a budget, prepared in July 2018. It reflected a monthly net 
income of $4,640; monthly expenses of $3,967; and a monthly remainder of $673 that 
might be available for discretionary spending or savings.32 Other than the delinquent debts 
listed above, Applicant is aware of only one other delinquent account. He pays his federal 
and state income taxes, and has received refunds. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. Nevertheless, Applicant has made significant progress in stabilizing his 
finances and avoiding other more recent financial delinquencies. Once he sells his house 
and relocates to his earlier location where the taxes and expenses are lower, he can focus 
on his delinquent accounts to resolve them under a combination of his plans A and C.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”33 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”34   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”35 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
                                                          
32 AE G, supra note 4, at 4; AE K (Church Contributions, dated January 19, 2018).  
  
33 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
34 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
35 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate 
to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. 
 
8 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.36  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”37  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”38 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
  
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:        
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
                                                          
Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less 
than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
36 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
37 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
38 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:   
  
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
  
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
  
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators.  
  
A number of Applicant’s charge accounts, credit-card accounts, and other 
commercial accounts became delinquent, and they were placed for collection, charged 
off, or sold to debt purchasers. There is no evidence that he was unwilling to satisfy his 
debts or that he had the ability to do so, and there is no evidence of frivolous or 
irresponsible spending, or consistent spending beyond his means. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
have been established, and AG ¶ 19(e) has been partially established. AG ¶ 19(b) has 
not been established.  
     
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;39 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
                                                          
39 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;40 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) all partially or fully apply, 
and ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose in or about mid-
2015, and they were exacerbated by other events over the ensuing two years: his wife’s 
employer went out of business; his business relocation caused his wife to lose her part-
time home-based business income; the residence they moved from became a rental 
property, and eventually his tenants lost their own jobs and were unable to pay the rent 
and one of their utilities; Applicant returned to the family residence so he could repair it, 
save it, and put it on the market to sell it; he was required to obtain health insurance under 
the ACA which cost him $1,800 per month – an amount he could not afford – so he 
removed his wife from coverage to save money, but incurred a federal tax penalty 
because she was no longer covered; and his wife subsequently required surgery without 
insurance coverage. Those factors were clearly beyond Applicant’s control. Although he 
was faced with insufficient funds to enable him to maintain his accounts in a current 
status, Applicant tried to take the honorable course and sought assistance from at least 
one credit counselor, but that relationship failed.  
  
Applicant had three separate plans to resolve his delinquent debts. While the plan 
involving the credit counselor failed, circumstances led him to try one plan (starting to 
                                                          
40 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
resolve accounts on his own) while preparing for the remaining plan (selling the residence 
to resolve the remaining debts). Of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, they can 
be separated into two groups. Applicant has either started making monthly payments, 
settled accounts at a reduced amount, or entirely paid off several of those accounts in the 
first group. While he has taken little action to resolve the remaining accounts in the other 
group, he has a list of those accounts, and he intends to address them as others are 
resolved.  
                                                          
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time.   
While there is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling, Applicant 
has made significant progress in stabilizing his finances and avoiding other major 
financial delinquencies. With a current monthly remainder of $673 that might be available 
for discretionary spending or savings, Applicant’s finances appear to be under better 
control. When confronted with the issues that caused his financial problems, and faced 
with insufficient funds to immediately remedy the situation, Applicant acted responsibly, 
first by seeking financial guidance, then by establishing several plans to resolve his debts, 
and finally by addressing individual accounts, one at a time.41 Once he sells his house 
and relocates to his earlier location where the taxes and expenses are lower, he can 
focus on his remaining delinquent accounts to resolve them under a combination of his 
plans.42 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.43  
  
                                                          
41 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 990462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
42 It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts 
in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting 
in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
43 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010).  
  
 
12 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.44  
  
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Commencing in 
mid-2015, a number of Applicant’s charge accounts, credit-card accounts, and other 
commercial accounts, totaling approximately $20,606, became delinquent, and they were 
placed for collection, charged off, or sold to debt purchasers.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor, serving as an electronic 
technician on the same contract since 2014. He received a bachelor’s of science degree 
in computer science in 2004. He enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in May 1979, and he served 
on active duty until he was honorably discharged on July 30, 1987 as a Staff Sergeant. 
He was granted a secret clearance in 1981, and again in 2005. Two of the larger accounts 
listed in the SOR are different versions of the same account. Applicant did not ignore his 
delinquent accounts. Instead, he set up three different plans to resolve them, and after 
ruling out the first plan, he devised a strategy of following up with a combination of the two 
other plans. Some of his delinquent accounts have been resolved or are in the process of 
being resolved. The remaining debts are expected to be resolved in the near future. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:45 
                                                          
44 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
45 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
Applicant has demonstrated a fair-to-good track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, resolving some of his debts, limited only by insufficient funds, and lining 
up the remaining debts for eventual resolution. Overall, the evidence leaves me without 
substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) 
through AG 2(d)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.m.: For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
