 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 17-02419 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns related 
to his delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
  
  Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2017, and requested his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). On  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
January 8, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by him on January 17, 2018. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit 
a response to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 7 are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned this case to me on July 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted 12 of the 16 alleged SOR debts. He denied the other four debts. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and divorced. He has been married twice.  He served on 
active duty from 1991 to 1993 while attending a military academy. From 1993 to 1999, he 
was in the inactive reserves. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1998. (Item 3, Item 5) 
 
 In January 2016, Applicant began a position with a defense contractor. He was 
unemployed the previous four months. He worked for other federal contractors from 2014 
to 2015, and from 2008 to 2010. He held clearances for some of those positions, including 
during his military education. (Item 5) 
 
 Based on Applicant’s admissions and credit bureau reports from April 2016 and 
July 2017, the SOR alleged 16 debts that became delinquent between 2012 and 2016, 
and totaled over $150,000. They include: an IRS judgment; a past due mortgage in 
foreclosure; traffic tickets; utility and cell phone bills; credit card debts; and medical bills.  
 
 Applicant stated in his Answer that he paid, settled, or satisfied the following debts: 
¶ 1.e for $1,603; ¶ 1.g for $383; ¶ 1.j for $75,3221; ¶ 1.k for $14,5562; and ¶ 1.n for $177. 
He provided no proof to confirm his assertions and document the current status of the 
debts. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant stated in his Answer that that he was negotiating settlements or was 
making payments on the following debts: ¶ 1.a for $51,3553; ¶ 1.b for $931; ¶ 1.c for 
$2,784; ¶ 1.d for $1,635; ¶ 1.l for $240; ¶ 1.m for $205; and ¶ 1.o for $66. He provided no 
proof to confirm his assertions and document the current status of the debts. (Item 2) 
 
                                                 
1This debt is owed to the IRS for a judgment filed in November 2016.  
 
2 Applicant submitted a copy of a promissory note, dated December 2015, in which he agreed to make 
monthly payments on the judgment, beginning in April 2016 and continuing until the judgment was paid. 
There is no signature on that note, or evidence that he made payments on this judgment filed by an 
apartment complex. (Item 2) 
 
3 This large debt is a past due amount owed on a mortgage. Applicant stated in his Answer that he was in 
the process of negotiating a short sale to resolve it. (Item 2) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant denied owing the following debts: ¶ 1.f for $611; ¶ 1.h for $104; ¶ 1.i for 
$41; and ¶ 1.p for $26. He provided no proof to confirm that these are not his debts and 
that he successfully disputed them with credit reporting bureaus. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant participated in a background interview with a government investigator in 
November and December 2016. During those interviews, he discussed the status of the 
alleged debts. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant did not provide a budget or other information related to his financial 
obligations from which to determine his current financial reliability or ability to maintain 
payments on the debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
 
4 
 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Four may be 
potentially disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
  
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.4 
                                                 
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Based on his admissions and CBRs, Applicant has a history of being unable or 
unwilling to meet his financial and tax obligations, which began in 2012 and continue into 
the present. The evidence raises security concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose between 2012 and 2016, and continue to date. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant did not explain what factors contributed to his 
financial problems. He did not provide evidence that he attempted to responsibly manage 
his financial obligations; thus, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence that he 
participated in financial or credit counseling, and there is insufficient evidence to conclude 
that the 16 delinquent debts are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does 
not apply. He provided no documentary evidence that he has payment plans in place and 
has been making good-faith efforts to adhere to those plans. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
Applicant did not provide evidence of a reasonable basis to dispute the four debts that he 
 
 
6 
 
 
denied owing. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. He did not submit evidence that he made 
arrangements with the IRS to resolve his tax debt and is incompliance with the agreement. 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual, who has worked for defense contractors and held 
clearances in the past. During background interviews in November and December 2016, 
Applicant discussed his financial and tax delinquencies. In the September 2017 SOR, the 
Government placed him on notice that his debts raised security concerns. After reviewing 
his Answer to the SOR, the Government notified him in the FORM that the evidence he 
submitted in his Answer was considered by Department Counsel to be insufficient to 
mitigate the financial allegations. Despite that notice, he did not provide additional 
evidence to confirm that he was resolving or had resolved debts as he stated in his 
Answer. At this time, he has failed to present sufficient evidence of mitigation, including 
a track record of responsibly managing debts and financial obligations. He failed to meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:      Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                 
   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
