 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03251 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 28, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) containing five Items, and it was received 
by Applicant on April 26, 2018.  
 
2 
 
 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. 
Items 1 through 4 are admitted into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me on July 27, 2018.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
In the FORM Department Counsel submitted Item 5, which requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (China). 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the request that are supported by source documents from official U.S. Government 
publications. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He was born in China. He earned bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees from a Chinese university in 1982 and 1985, respectively. He came to 
the United States on a student visa in 1987. He became a naturalized citizen of the United 
States in 1999. He has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 2015.2  
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in China. They were married in the United States in 1990. 
His wife became a naturalized citizen on an undetermined date. They have no children.3  
 
 Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of China. Applicant 
disclosed in his February 2016 security clearance application (SCA) that he has weekly 
electronic contact with his parents. He listed that his father worked for a sports 
commission, not affiliated with the government. His mother worked for a wholesale 
medicine company, not affiliated with the government. It is unknown if they receive any 
benefits or pension from the Chinese government. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he 
stated his parents were elderly and have health and memory issues. He stated both 
parents have U.S. permanent resident cards, and used to live in the United States. They 
returned to China in 2006, due to their health and the high cost of medical care in the 
United States. No other information was provided about Applicant’s parents.4  
 
Applicant disclosed in his SCA that his brother and sister are citizens and residents 
of China. His brother works at a research center, not affiliated with the government, and 
                                                          
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Items 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
his sister works for a public housing center, not affiliated with the government. He also 
disclosed in his SCA that he has monthly electronic contact with his siblings. In Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR, he stated that he does not have regular contact with his siblings and 
the only contact he has with them is an annual Chinese New Year’s greeting through 
social media.5 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he traveled to China to visit family and friends 
for 21-30 days in 2010, 2011, and 2013. In May 2017, Applicant was interviewed by a 
government investigator. At that time, he updated his travel information and disclosed he 
had gone to China in 2016 to visit family and friends.6  
 
 During Applicant’s May 2017 background interview, he disclosed that he has a 
niece, who is a Chinese citizen and has been attending college in the United States for 
the past four years. His niece is his brother’s daughter. Applicant has contact with her 
approximately every three months by telephone. She has gone on vacations with 
Applicant. Since 2013, he has provided her with about $10,000 to go on trips and for 
spending money. He forgot to list her on his SCA.7  
 
During Applicant’s interview, the government investigator asked him if he had ever 
made any large cash transactions. Applicant disclosed that in 2014 when he was 
returning from a visit to China, he transported $30,000 in cash from China to the United 
States, which was from his mother for his niece. The money was to help his niece with 
college expenses and spending money. Applicant explained to the investigator that it is 
complicated transferring or wiring money out of China because it has to go through the 
Chinese government. Applicant told the investigator that he declared the money to U.S. 
Customs when he entered the country. He deposited the cash in his account and then 
sent his niece a check. Applicant did not disclose the 2014 trip to China on his SCA.8  
 
The investigator inquired if Applicant had any additional large cash transactions 
and he responded “no.” He was then confronted with a cash transaction in July 2011 for 
$18,000. Applicant could not recall the nature or origin of that transaction. He was also 
confronted with cash transactions of $15,000 in August 2007 and another transaction in 
September 2010. Applicant agreed with the information presented to him by the 
investigator. He explained that this money was from Chinese accounts owned by his 
mother-in-law and father-in-law. The accounts were closed, and his spouse brought the 
cash back to the United States.9  
                                                          
5 Items 2, 3.  
 
6 Item 4. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
8 Applicant’s failure to disclose information in his SCA will not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but 
may be considered when making a credibility determination, in the application of the mitigating conditions, 
and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
9 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was also confronted by the investigator with additional cash deposits that 
were made in August 2013 for $20,000 and $30,000, and in July 2016 for $30,500. 
Applicant agreed with the transactions and amounts. He stated this money was used to 
help pay for his niece’s education and living expenses in the United States. He reiterated 
the transfers were done in cash to subvert the Chinese government from becoming aware 
and because of the difficulty in transferring money from China. When he or his wife got to 
the United States with the cash, they declared it with U.S. Customs, deposited it in their 
account, and wrote a check to the niece.10  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that his niece is attending graduate 
school and intends to remain in the United States after she graduates and become a U.S. 
citizen. Applicant did not provide any additional information or evidence.11  
 
China12 
 
The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China and Russia as the 
most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services frequently seeks to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family 
ties to China who can use their insider access to corporate networks to steal secrets using 
removable media devices and emails. Private companies and other entities in China also 
exploit Chinese citizens to steal information.  
 
 The U.S. Department of Defense reported that Chinese actors are the world’s most 
active and persistent collectors of economic espionage. It is anticipated that this conduct 
will continue at a high level and will be a persistent and continuing threat to U.S. economic 
security.  
 
 China uses a variety of methods to acquire foreign military and dual-use 
technologies including cyber activity and exploitation of the access of Chinese nationals, 
such as students or researchers. It is suspected that China uses other illicit approaches 
that violate U.S. laws and export controls to obtain key national security and export-
restricted technologies and materials unobtainable through other means.  
 
Computer systems around the world, including those owned by the U.S. 
Government, are target by China. It uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence 
collection against U.S. diplomatic, economic, and defense industrial based sectors. Its 
organizational network is able to access sensitive and dual-use technologies or 
knowledgeable experts under the guise of civilian research and development.  
 
                                                          
 
10 Item 4.  
 
11 Item 2. 
 
12 See Administrative Notice Request and supporting documents. 
 
5 
 
 
 There are numerous examples of individuals who have been convicted of 
conspiring to violate federal export control laws by illegally exporting defense equipment 
to China. There are also recent examples of Chinese nationals and others who have been 
involved in hacking into computer networks of major U.S. defense contractors and failing 
to report repeated contacts with Chinese foreign intelligence agents. 
 
Among the most serious threats by China is its effort at cyber and human infiltration 
of U.S. national security organizations. Reports of Chinese espionage against the United 
States has risen significantly over the past 15 years. China has a large and professional 
cyber espionage community demonstrating broad capabilities to infiltrate a range of 
national security and commercial operations. Many unofficial Chinese actors target the 
United States.  
 
 China is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the 
paramount authority. Repression and coercion or organizations and individuals involved 
in civil and political rights advocacy as well as in public interest and ethnic minority issues 
remained sever with limit forms of redress against official abuse. Public security official 
harass, intimidate, and take punitive measures against family members of rights 
defenders in retaliation for their work. The Communist Party controls the judiciary and in 
certain cases dictates the court’s rulings.  
 
 There are serious human rights concerns, which included illegal detention, torture 
and coerced confessions of prisoners, detention and harassment of journalists, lawyers, 
writers, bloggers, and others whose actions are deemed unacceptable by the authority. 
There is a lack of due process in judicial proceedings, closed trials, administrative 
detention and discrimination against women, minorities, and persons with disabilities. 
Citizens do not have the right to choose their own government and have limited forms of 
redress against official abuse. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms, meeting rooms, offices, cars, taxis, telephones, Internet 
usage, and fax machines may be monitored onsite or remotely. Personal possessions in 
hotel rooms, including computers, maybe searched without knowledge or consent 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
 
6 
 
 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
 
7 
 
 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
China is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and 
technology. Its intelligence services frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons 
with family ties to China, who can use their insider access to corporate networks to steal 
secrets using removable media devices and emails. China has serious human rights 
issues.  
 
Applicant’s father, mother, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of China. 
Applicant visited them in at least 2010, 2011, 2013, 2014, and 2016. He maintains 
electronic contact with them also. In his answer to the SOR, he minimized his contact with 
his parents and siblings; however, he visits them, and has carried large amounts of cash 
from China into the United States from his mother for his brother’s daughter. His niece is 
a citizen of China, attending school in the United States. He has provided her about 
$10,000 since 2013 for travel and other expenses. It is unknown how often she travels to 
China. It is unknown if Applicant’s siblings have traveled to the United States. Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
familial contacts in China and his contact with this niece create a heightened risk. AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
There is substantial evidence of the above disqualifying conditions, and the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. Three mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying security concerns 
based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s contact with his father, mother, brother, sister, and niece is more than 
casual and infrequent. He disclosed that he visits family and friends during trips to China. 
He has carried large sums of cash from his mother to the United States for the benefit of 
his niece. Applicant has weekly electronic contact with his parents. He provided conflicting 
information on his contact with his siblings, but he obviously has emotional ties as he 
provides his brother’s daughter financial support and has taken her on vacation. 
Applicant’s relationship with his family in China could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to conclude that there is no conflict 
of interest because his loyalty to his family is minimal or that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. It is too great of a burden to expect 
Applicant to be loyal to the interests of the United States and resolve any conflicts in favor 
of the United States over those of his parents and siblings, who are citizens and residents 
of China, and his niece, who is a citizen of China. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(c) do not apply.  
 
The Chinese government and private entities exploit Chinese citizens to steal 
information. China’s authoritarian government, treatment of its citizens by the 
government, and poor human rights protections raise concerns. Applicant told the 
government investigator that his mother and other relatives provided cash for him and his 
wife to transport to the United States so as to circumvent any Chinese government’s 
interference. This action could make Applicant and his family members in China 
vulnerable if the government should learn of their actions. Applicant continues to maintain 
significant ties to his family in China. I cannot find under these facts that it is unlikely that 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant or his family members would be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of their Chinese family members or the Chinese government and 
the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 56 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1999. 
Applicant has deep ties to his family in China and his niece currently living in the United 
States. He did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign influence security 
concerns. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
