 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04301 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 5, 2018. She elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 15, 2018. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-6 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 9, 
2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to any of the 
Government’s evidence. She submitted one document, which was admitted as exhibit 
(AE) A. Items 3-6 are also admitted. The case was assigned to me on September 18, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted some allegations in the SOR with explanations, and denied 
the remaining allegations. Her admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor as a project 
coordinator since August 2016. She is single, never married, with one child. She is a 
high school graduate and has taken some college courses.1 
  
 The SOR alleged Applicant owed on 45 delinquent collection accounts and a 
judgment in the total amount of approximately $14,000. Forty of the debts are for 
delinquent medical expenses. Many of those medical debts were for small amounts 
(several debts under $25). The allegations are supported by credit reports from October 
2016 and November 2017, Applicant’s statement to a defense investigator in August 
2017, and Applicant’s SOR admissions.2 
 
 In Applicant’s August 2017 statement to a defense investigator, she explained 
that the reason for her financial difficulties stemmed from being the only wage earner for 
her household. It was unclear how many lived in her household, but it at least included 
herself, her child, and a cohabitant. The record contains no evidence of financial 
counseling by Applicant. Other than a March 2018 credit report submitted by Applicant, 
the record does not contain evidence of Applicant’s current financial standing. Applicant 
claimed in her FORM response that she recently received a $25,000 pay increase, 
which she intended to use to pay her remaining debts. She did not provide 
documentation of this pay increase or payments.3  
  
 In addressing the SOR debts, Applicant stated in her answer that SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 
1.gg were paid. Documentation from her March 2018 credit report supports the payment 
for SOR ¶ 1.i, but the same credit report indicates that SOR ¶ 1.gg is past due $52 as of 
February 27, 2018. Applicant pointed out that several accounts were duplicated in the 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
3 Item 2, 4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR (¶¶ 1.l, 1.hh, 1.ii, and 1.jj). Those debts are found in favor of Applicant. For the 
remaining SOR debts that Applicant denied, she supported her denials by pointing out 
that those debts were no longer on her March 2018 credit report. She did not provide 
documentation showing payment of those debts. For the debts she admitted, she 
claimed she would pay them in the future once she completed a current payment 
arrangement. She did not provide documentation of any payments or payment plans for 
these accounts. According to her March 2018 credit report, Applicant has approximately 
$57,000 in deferred student loans. In her FORM response, she stated she now has 
eight accounts in collection (down from 14) and the balance of those accounts is 
$3,375. She failed to document what accounts those were and from where that balance 
came.4   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
4 Item 2; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid. I find all the above 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s debts are recent and 
remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s position as the 
only income earner in her household may be considered a condition beyond her control, 
however, she failed to take responsible actions to address her resulting debts. I find AG 
¶ 20(b) partially applies. Except for one debt, Applicant also failed to address her SOR 
debts through payments or establishing payment plans. Many of the debts were of 
minimal amounts, such as $1 or $9, indicating her failure to pay medical copayments. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. She 
failed to document any disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances that 
led to her financial difficulties. Applicant has not established a track record of financial 
stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.i:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j – 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.l:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.m – 1.gg:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.hh – 1.jj:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.kk – 1.ss:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.  
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
