 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 17-03092 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and criminal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and J (criminal conduct). Applicant responded to the SOR on December 8, 
2017. It was unclear from his response whether he wanted a hearing or have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 26, 2018, he clarified 
that he wanted the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on April 12, 2018. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 19, 2018. He 
responded to the FORM with documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
 
2 
 
and B. The case was assigned to me on September 26, 2018. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM and AE A and B are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He completed a trade school in 2009. He has never 
married, and he has one child.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal arrests. He was arrested in May 2007 and 
charged with assault on a family member. The charge was dismissed. Applicant stated 
that he had a fight with his brother. He was arrested in September 2007 and charged 
with unlawful purchase or possession of an alcoholic beverage. The charge was 
dismissed in November 2008. Applicant admitted that he possessed alcohol while 
underage.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 2009 and charged with disturbing the peace 
and what amounted to a trespassing charge. He stated that there was a minor 
disturbance outside a bar. He placed his hand on the shoulder of a police officer who 
was arresting his friend and asked the officer where he was taking his friend. Applicant 
was also arrested. He paid a small fine.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested for assault in December 2010. He was later charged with 
violating the conditions of his release. Applicant asserted that he was the victim of an 
assault by the ex-boyfriend of the woman he was with. He missed a court date, which 
resulted in the second charge. He paid restitution, and there was a guilty finding on the 
charge of violating the conditions of his release. The assault charge was dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in February 2011 and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI). In April 2011, he pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of 
reckless driving. He was sentenced to a $750 fine with $500 suspended; 30 days in jail, 
with 30 days suspended; probation for two years; attendance at an alcohol-safety 
program and a victim-impact panel; and his driver’s license was suspended for six 
months. A show-cause summons was issued in April 2012 to revoke the suspended fine 
and jail time because he had not completed the victim impact panel. Applicant appeared 
in court in June 2012 and established to the court’s satisfaction that he had completed 
the court’s requirements.5 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5. 
 
2 Items 3, 5, 6. 
 
3 Items 3, 5, 6. 
 
4 Items 3, 5, 6. 
 
5 Items 3, 5, 6; AE B. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that he was stopped on the freeway for speeding the morning 
after the Super Bowl. He woke up and was driving to work, but he still had some alcohol 
in his system from the night before. Applicant’s statement is partially corroborated by 
police and court records. He was arrested on the morning after the Super Bowl, but the 
arresting officer’s affidavit indicates Applicant was arrested after an accident. His blood 
alcohol content (BAC) was .09, which is above the legal limit.6 
 
 Applicant was arrested in November 2014 for assault on a family member. The 
charge was dismissed in June 2015. Applicant asserted that a female friend had been 
drinking and she bit and scratched him. They were both arrested. The charge was 
dismissed after he produced photographs of the scratches and bite marks.7 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2015. He reported the November 2014 arrest for assault, but he mistakenly 
listed it as occurring in January 2015. He answered “No” to questions that required him 
to report all additional arrests, charges, convictions, sentences, and probation within the 
previous seven years, and if he had “EVER been charged with an offense involving 
alcohol or drugs.” He also answered “No” to the alcohol questions under Section 24, 
which included the question: 
 
In the last seven (7) years has your use of alcohol had a negative impact 
on your work performance, your professional or personal relations, your 
finances, or resulted in intervention by law enforcement personnel. 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in November 2016. 
He discussed his arrests with the investigator. He stated that he did not know that he 
had to report charges that had been dismissed. He stated that he did not report the DUI 
arrest and subsequent conviction for reckless driving because he forgot about the 
incident when he submitted the SF 86. In his response to the SOR, he denied 
intentionally providing false information on the SF 86. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 Items 3, 5, 6; AE B. 
 
7 Items 3, 5, 6; AE A. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested on multiple occasions between 2007 and November 
2014. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
  Applicant denied committing several of the offenses, and many of the charges 
were dismissed. Those allegations are mitigated. The arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.e, and 1.f resulted in convictions. The last conviction was for reckless driving after a 
February 2011 arrest for DUI. That conduct was more than seven and a half years ago. 
I nonetheless have concerns about Applicant’s candor and truthfulness. He stated that 
his DUI arrest occurred after he was stopped on the freeway for speeding the morning 
after the Super Bowl. The arresting officer’s affidavit indicates Applicant was arrested 
after an accident. Additional candor issues are discussed below under personal 
conduct. If I cannot believe Applicant’s statements, I cannot find successful 
rehabilitation or that the conduct is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s criminal conduct is not 
mitigated.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
6 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant reported the November 2014 arrest for assault on his SF 86, but he 
mistakenly listed it as occurring in January 2015. He answered “No” to questions that 
required him to report all additional arrests, charges, convictions, sentences, and 
probation within the previous seven years, and if he had “EVER been charged with an 
offense involving alcohol or drugs.” He also answered “No” to the alcohol questions 
under Section 24, which included if his alcohol use resulted in intervention by law 
enforcement personnel.  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information on the SF 86. He told 
the background investigator that he did not know that he had to report charges that had 
been dismissed and that he forgot about the DUI arrest. It is not credible that Applicant 
forgot being arrested for DUI with all the court appearances and requirements to 
complete his sentence. I find that Applicant’s answers to the police record and alcohol 
questions on the SF 86 were intentionally false. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. 
 
  
 
7 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct is cross-alleged under Guideline E. That conduct 
reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 
16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 Applicant discussed his criminal conduct when he was interviewed for his 
background investigation in November 2016. However, I do not believe he was 
forthcoming to the investigator. His conduct continues to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Personal conduct security concerns are 
not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has a history of relatively 
minor criminal offenses. More importantly, he cannot be trusted to tell the truth. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
