 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02906 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 19, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 24, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 12, 2018. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-8 (Items 1-2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on March 
17, 2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections or submit any 
documentary evidence. Items 3-8 are admitted into evidence without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on August 28, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted SOR ¶ 1.c and denied the remaining 
allegations in the SOR. I adopt his admission as a finding of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of all the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He is married and has four children/stepchildren. He is 
seeking a position with a federal contractor. He served in the Navy for 20 years and 
retired with an honorable discharge. He has a bachelor’s degree.1   
 
 The allegations raised in the SOR include: (1) Applicant was laid off by his 
employer in November 2015 and after an internal investigation he was terminated in 
December 2015 for misconduct by charging the government for extra hours not worked. 
(See SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) Applicant falsified his security clearance application (SCA) when 
he answered “no” to questions concerning whether he left a job by mutual agreement 
following allegations of misconduct or left a job by mutual agreement following notice of 
unsatisfactory performance (See SOR ¶ 1.b); and (3) Applicant falsified his SCA when 
he answered that he was unemployed from May 2011 to December 2015 when he was 
actually employed during that period. (See SOR ¶ 1.c)  
  
 From September 2011 to November 2015, Applicant worked for a contractor 
(Contractor A). Applicant was laid off from his position in November 2015 (the reason 
for the layoff is unclear from the record). During November and December 2015, 
Contractor A initiated an internal investigation into whether Applicant engaged in 
mischarging his time to a government contract. A final report was issued on December 
17, 2015. The investigation determined that Applicant mischarged approximately 29 
hours to a government contract from September 10, 2015, to October 30, 2015. 
Applicant was given an opportunity to explain his actions, but failed to provide a valid 
explanation. The investigation also noted that Applicant was laid off on November 20, 
2015, and recommended that Applicant’s job loss be reclassified as a “termination.” 
Contractor A implemented that recommendation and characterized Applicant’s 
departure as a termination for misconduct/rules violation. There is no evidence in the 
record that Applicant was served with a copy of his revised termination decision, or that 
he was otherwise made aware of this decision.2 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 7. 
 
2 Items 2, 6-7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In December 2015, Applicant completed his SCA. Question 13A of the SCA 
asked Applicant to list all of his employment activities within the last 10 years. He listed 
“unemployment” from May 2011 to the present (December 2015). This information was 
false since he worked for Contractor A from September 2011 until his termination in 
November 2015.3 
 
 Question 13C of his SCA asked Applicant to address his employment record by 
stating whether in the last seven years he was fired from a job, quit after being told he 
would be fired, left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct, left a 
job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance, received 
discipline for misconduct in the workplace. Applicant answered “no” to all these 
questions. He later acknowledged that he was laid off from his job, but he maintained 
that he was not informed that he was terminated for cause.4 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
3 Item 3, 6-7. 
 
4 Items 2-3, 6-7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
An internal investigation by Applicant’s former employer determined that he 
engaged in misconduct by charging for hours not properly attributed to a government 
contract. Applicant provided no acceptable explanation for his action and he was 
terminated for cause. AG ¶ 16(d) applies.  
Applicant’s listing of “unemployment,” rather listing the employment from which 
he was terminated on his SCA is a material falsification. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 
1.c. Since the record is silent as to when Applicant was notified concerning his 
termination, the evidence is insufficient to determine that his answer to SCA 13C was 
deliberately false. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances of the investigation into 
Applicant’s improper charging of time toward a government contract and his deliberate 
falsification concerning his failure to list his last employment on his SCA. His actions did 
not constitute minor offenses. His actions create doubt about his overall trustworthiness, 
reliability, and good judgment, and ultimately on his worthiness to hold a security 
clearance. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service. However, I also considered that he engaged in serious misconduct on the job 
and falsified his SCA concerning his most recent employment. Both of these areas of 
concern involved integrity issues. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the personal 
conduct guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
