 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 17-04260 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). His statement of reasons (SOR) lists three delinquent debts. He paid or 
settled two debts, and the remaining debt is being paid, despite the unconventional 
method of repayment. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On November 15, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On December 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
On February 8, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On May 10, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On May 31, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for June 
15, 2018. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
 
2 
                                         
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits, Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1-5, and Applicant offered five exhibits, Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-E. There were no 
objections, and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. On June 26, 2018, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted that he owed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b, but denied owing the debt alleged in ¶ 1.c. He also provided mitigating 
information showing that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were resolved. 
Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old mechanical engineer, and a government contractor has 
employed him since November 2016. He does not possess a DOD security clearance. In 
2012, he earned a bachelor’s degree in 2012. Applicant was unemployed from November 
2012 to January 2013, from May 2013 to July 2013, from September 2013 to December 
2013, and from March 2015 to March 2016. (Tr. 8-9, 26-27; GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling $21,203, and the record 
establishes the status of Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off account for $20,450. This debt resulted from a 
Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) four-year scholarship Applicant received upon 
high school graduation. The scholarship was essentially a contract with the U.S. Air Force 
(USAF), on which Applicant agreed to the terms and signed. He used the scholarship to 
pay for his college tuition, room, board, books and he also received a stipend. Applicant 
used the money from the scholarship to pay for his first year of college, and for the first 
semester of his second year. After his third semester, Applicant decided that he no longer 
wished to proceed with his USAF enlistment. It was his intention to become a pilot, but 
Applicant had an eye exam which showed he would most likely be ineligible for a pilot 
position. (Tr. 29-31) 
 
Applicant received a notice from the U.S. government in June 2010 indicating that 
he was responsible for repaying the scholarship money. At the time, Applicant was 
currently attending college and did not have the financial means to repay the government. 
In May 2012, Applicant made a small payment to a collection agency. About two months 
after he made the payment, Applicant discovered that the government account had been 
charged-off. Applicant was given bad advice from a friend who informed him that he 
should wait seven years to allow the charged-off account to fall off of his credit report, 
and then Applicant would no longer be responsible for paying back the debt. Applicant 
had other student loans in good standing that he was repaying, and he admitted it was 
his intention at the time to not pay back the loan he owed to the government. (Tr. 32-38, 
AE A; SOR Response) 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant attached documentation with his SOR Response that showed he was 
not eligible for a payment plan for this government debt, but if at any time he wanted to 
make payments, he could do so directly through Pay.Gov. Applicant stated he was unable 
to make payments as he was using all of his income to pay other expenses and his 
student loans, one of which is almost paid in full. He testified that once the loan is paid 
this year, he will then apply his monthly payment to his government debt. Applicant also 
stated that if he receives an increase in pay, he would also apply that extra income 
towards his government debt. Applicant and his fiancée recently purchased a house and 
made a down payment of $7,500. His monthly net income is approximately $2,800 and 
his fiancée’s monthly net income is about $1,000. Based on the advice of a financial 
counselor, they are currently using any leftover funds to build up their savings account in 
the event of an emergency. (Tr. 38- 49; AE A, C; SOR Response)  
 
Applicant provided documentation to show that his tax refunds for tax years 2012 
and 2016 were intercepted by the Federal Government to pay off his government debt. 
After his 2017 tax refund was intercepted in the amount of $3,515, the debt balance is 
now approximately $19,000. Applicant testified that he intentionally maintained his tax 
withholding the last four years and anticipates that a tax refund of approximately $5,000 
will be intercepted for tax year 2018, which would significantly reduce his debt to the 
government. He stated that although his payments do not look like voluntary, good-faith 
payments, Applicant believes this method pays more toward the debt overall than making 
minimal monthly payments. Applicant stated the debt is being paid, and this method is a 
practical solution for his financial dilemma. (Tr. 54-58; AE A, B; SOR Response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a collection account owed to an apartment rental office for $708. 
Applicant has resolved this debt through settlement. (Tr. 28; AE F, G; SOR Response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a collection account owed to a creditor for $48. Applicant has 
paid this account in full. (Tr. 29; AE A, B; SOR Response) 
 
In 2017, Applicant contacted a credit wellness advisor for financial advice. He 
continued paying for her financial counseling services until about May 2018. Applicant 
said he stopped at that time because he is current on all of his accounts except for the 
debt he owes to the government. (Tr. 59-60; SOR Response) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
4 
                                         
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal citation omitted). 
 
  The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
 
6 
                                         
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,1 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling $21,203. Applicant’s debts 
resulted from several periods of unemployment, and his and his fiancée’s lack of income. 
This is a circumstance largely beyond his control.  
 
Applicant paid or settled the two SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.c. The only remaining 
SOR debt alleged in ¶ 1.a is currently being paid by Applicant by having his tax refunds 
intercepted by the Federal Government. Although this method may not be conventional, 
it is clear that Applicant maintains his current tax withholdings so that a large amount of 
money is applied to this government debt. He also anticipates using other money to repay 
this debt once he finishes paying off a student loan this year. Applicant stated that he is 
dedicated and he fully intends to repay this account owed to the government. 
 
Applicant made significant progress resolving his delinquent debts. He has 
numerous paid or current accounts listed in his October 2017 credit report. (GE 3) He 
received financial counseling, and he has demonstrated his commitment in resolving his 
delinquent debts. There are clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved, 
and his finances are under control. Future financial problems are unlikely to occur. AG ¶¶ 
20(b) and 20(c) are established, and financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated. 
    
                                            
1 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling $21,203. Applicant paid or 
settled two of the three alleged SOR debts. His biggest debt of approximately $19,000 is 
being systematically paid by intercepted tax refunds, which is the most practical option 
for repayment available for Applicant. This year he paid over $3,300, and next year he 
anticipates approximately $5,000 will be applied to this government debt. The Appeal 
Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases 
stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
 
8 
                                         
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted).  
 
Applicant’s actions show financial responsibility and he has established his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. I have 
carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude that 
financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
     Pamela C. Benson 
   Administrative Judge 
 
 
