 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02489 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Anthony J. Kuhn, Esq., Tully & Rinckey, PLLC 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), 
and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). A sufficient period of time has elapsed since 
his 2014 offense and successful completion of alcohol counseling. Future alcohol-
related conduct is unlikely to recur. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 3, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). On 
October 16, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
2 
 
 
  
 On December 14, 2017, Applicant and his counsel responded to the SOR, and 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Applicant admitted all of 
the SOR allegations under Guidelines J and G, with explanations. He submitted 14 
attachments with his response, which were also provided at the hearing. On April 16, 
2018, the case was assigned to me. On June 1, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for June 15, 2018.  
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
and 2 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s counsel offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through S, which I entered into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 36 years old and 
employed as a software engineer for a DOD contractor since March 2016. He enlisted 
in the U.S. Army after graduating from high school, served on active duty from February 
2001 to June 2005, was deployed to Iraq for over a year, and received an honorable 
discharge. Thereafter, Applicant joined the Army National Guard for three years while 
he was enrolled in college. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009. He married in 2015, 
and he and his wife had a baby girl in 2017. Applicant held a DOD security clearance 
when he served in the military without incident, and a DOD security clearance is 
required for him to perform specific duties for his employer.  (Tr. 7, 14-16, 42; GE 1)  
 
The SOR alleges under Guidelines J and G that Applicant was first arrested in 
May 2011 for Driving Under the Influence (DUI). Applicant testified that he drank two 
beers, but the beers were India Pale Ales (IPA), which contained a higher alcohol 
content. In addition, the craft beer was served in a “larger than normal” 12-ounce glass. 
His blood alcohol content (BAC) registered over the legal limit. Applicant was ordered 
by the court to attend DUI Level 1 alcohol counseling. He attended 26 group counseling 
sessions, 10 individual counseling sessions, which Applicant successfully completed. 
(Tr. 16-18, 20, 27; GE 2)  
 
Applicant’s second DUI arrest occurred in November 2014. He was over at a 
friend’s house to watch a football game and consumed two mixed drinks within two 
hours. He was pulled over by the police on his way home. Applicant informed the police 
officer that he had a weapon in his car, and that he also had a valid concealed carry 
permit. The officer asked him to step out of his car, and discovered an open bottle of 
vodka in the vehicle, for which he was charged with Open Container. Applicant refused 
to take the breathalyzer test. Applicant was ordered by the court to attend DUI Level 2 
alcohol counseling. He attended alcohol treatment from February 2015 to June 2015. 
Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Applicant successfully completed this 
treatment program, but despite the diagnosis, the SOR alleges he continued to 
consume alcohol. The discharge treatment record reflected that “Client has since 
 
3 
 
 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption in accordance 
with treatment recommendations.” (Tr. 18 -21, 44; GE 2; AE P) 
 
Applicant testified that his counselor informed him that he could drink alcohol in 
moderation upon completion of his Level 2 alcohol counseling program. He never was 
informed that he had been diagnosed alcohol dependent. After receipt of his SOR, 
Applicant reported to the same alcohol treatment program he attended following his 
2014 DUI arrest. He wanted the program to have access to his records. According to 
the current treatment records, Applicant’s presenting problem indicated that Applicant 
“…needs a security clearance and wants an opinion of diagnosis.” Applicant “came to 
the office for assessment only.” He was evaluated on December 6, 2017, and it was 
recommend he complete 12 group counseling sessions. He was successfully 
discharged in February 2018, and his diagnosis was alcohol use disorder, mild, in 
sustained remission. Applicant testified that his counselor told him that he can continue 
to drink alcohol responsibly, and that he was not required to attend any other outpatient 
therapy. The treatment record reflected that “Client has since demonstrated a clear 
and established pattern of modified consumption in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.” Applicant testified that his last use of alcohol occurred the 
previous Saturday when he drank one beer. (Tr. 21-22, 24, 37, 39-40; AE Q, R) 
 
Applicant stated that his priorities have changed. It has been nearly four years 
since his last DUI arrest. Since that time, he married his wife and they had a baby last 
year. His focus is spending more time with his family, furthering his career and his faith. 
He does not drink to become intoxicated, he drinks alcohol on occasion for personal 
enjoyment or for celebrations. He estimated his alcohol use would be slightly more than 
six times per year. Applicant was deeply remorseful for his alcohol-related arrests, and 
avowed that he would never allow himself to be in that humiliating position again. (Tr. 
23, 25, 32-33, 35, 46-47) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law testified that he has known Applicant for about seven 
years, and he finds Applicant to be very trustworthy, honorable, with a committed work 
ethic. (Tr. 49-52) A co-worker also testified at the hearing for Applicant. He has known 
Applicant for just over a year, and Applicant was his initial manager at work. He and 
Applicant operate on the same team and he sees Applicant at work on a daily basis. He 
stated that Applicant is a great leader on the job, and he has never demonstrated any 
problems at work. Both witnesses were aware of the adverse issues alleged in the 
SOR, and despite knowing that adverse information, both witnesses still recommended 
Applicant for a DOD security clearance. In addition, four character reference letters in 
evidence also repeated the positive comments about Applicant, as noted above. (Tr. 55-
57; AE L-O) 
 
Applicant received numerous decorations, medals and citations for his enlistment 
in the U.S. Army, and then in the U.S. Army National Guard. He spent over a year of 
service in Iraq. Applicant received the Army Commendation Medal, Army Achievement 
Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service 
Medal, and Army Service Ribbon. (AE A, F) 
 
4 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for criminal conduct are set out in 
AG ¶ 30, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2011 for DUI, and he was arrested in 2014 for DUI and 
Open Container. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 The evidence shows that a period of nearly four years have passed without 
Applicant committing any additional criminal violations, which demonstrates that further 
criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. It is important to note that character reference 
letters in evidence, as well as both witnesses’ testimony, affirm that Applicant is a hard-
 
6 
 
 
working, reliable and trustworthy individual. The passage of time in this case without 
any repeat alcohol-related offenses is a positive sign of Applicant’s successful 
rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) both apply.  
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following to be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2011 for DUI, and he was arrested in 2014 for DUI and 
Open Container. During his court-ordered alcohol treatment, Applicant was diagnosed 
as alcohol dependent. On December 6, 2017, he was diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder, mild, in sustained remission. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from alcohol consumption. I have considered the following mitigating condition 
under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant was arrested for DUI in 2011 after drinking two IPAs. In 2014, he was 
charged with DUI and Open Container after drinking two mixed drinks while at a friend’s 
house. He did not believe he was intoxicated and refused a breathalyzer after he was 
stopped by police. Applicant indicated that since his most recent DUI arrest, his 
priorities in life have changed. He is now married with a young daughter to care for, he 
is committed to upward progression at his place of employment, and in his personal 
faith. Applicant has moderated his use of alcohol in accordance with treatment 
 
7 
 
 
recommendations. I have considered all the evidence and find that a sufficient period of 
time has elapsed since his 2014 offense, and that future alcohol-related conduct is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 23(a) applies. 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline J and Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
military service to our country, favorable character evidence, and letters of 
recommendation. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the criminal conduct and alcohol consumption security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
