1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00613 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties due to circumstances largely beyond his 
control, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on January 26, 2016. 
On March 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations). The 
DOD acted under Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR April 12, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
May 3, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on May 26, 2017. On November 13, 2017, 
2 
 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for November 30, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant, represented by counsel, testified and Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E 
were admitted without objection. I left the record open until December 13, 2017, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX F through 
I, which I have admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
December 11, 2017. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this case was pending. This 
decision is based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old systems analyst currently employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2015. He served honorably in the U.S. Marine Corps, 
including combat tours in Iraq and Afghanistan, from December 1996 until January 2006, 
when he was medically retired as a result of a combat injury in 2005. He received 
numerous medals and commendations for his service, including the Purple Heart. (AX E.) 
He married in October 2009 and divorced in October 2016. His ex-wife has custody of 
their two children. Applicant has held a security clearance since 1999. (GX 1; Answer.)  
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges nine past-due accounts totaling $23,622, and 
a 2013 foreclosure. Applicant denies each of the accounts, states that he has paid several 
of the debts, and states that his wife is liable for several of the other debts. The delinquent 
debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) from February 2017 and 
February 2016. (GX 5; GX 4.)  
 
 Throughout their relationship, Applicant’s wife was responsible for handling the 
family finances, in large measure because Applicant frequently traveled for work. In 2009, 
Applicant moved back to his home state with his wife and their two children due to a family 
emergency. Applicant was able to maintain his employment through remote teleworking. 
He purchased a house with the mortgage loan in his name and the deed in his wife’s 
name. In 2012, the contractor Applicant was employed by closed and Applicant was 
briefly unemployed. He found employment in another state across the country and he and 
his family were necessarily required to relocate. When Applicant suggested they put the 
house on the market, his wife informed him that the house was in foreclosure. Due to the 
logistics and cost of getting the house out of foreclosure, Applicant let the house go. 
Unbeknownst to Applicant, his wife had been using the money that she was not applying 
to the mortgage-loan payments for other expenses, including furnishing the new house 
and assisting her parents and sister financially. (Tr. 50-52.) 
 
Applicant’s wife continued to manage their finances, despite the foreclosure.  
Between 2012 in 2015, Applicant was laid off three times. Each layoff caused financial 
hardship, and one of which required Applicant to move to another state for employment. 
3 
 
While Applicant was generally aware that he and his wife were experiencing financial 
difficulties, his wife did not disclose to Applicant the full extent of their delinquent accounts. 
In 2012, Applicant first learned that the payments on a joint account for a truck were 
delinquent when the truck was repossessed. (Tr. 23; Answer.) On the several occasions 
that Applicant offered to help manage the finances, his wife was offended and not 
receptive to his overtures. (Tr. 52.) 
 
In 2015, Applicant and his wife separated. In February 2016, Applicant and his wife 
entered a separation agreement, notarized in the state of their residence. The separation 
agreement specified that Applicant and his wife would have joint custody of the children, 
would equally divide the costs of transporting the children for visitation, and would remain 
jointly liable for their vehicle loans, except for one loan, for which Applicant would be 
solely liable. (AX G.)  
 
However, when Applicant’s wife filed for divorce in another state, the separation 
agreement was not incorporated in the divorce decree. The relationship became 
acrimonious, and Applicant’s ex-wife did not honor the terms of their previous agreement. 
In order for Applicant to share custody of the children, he paid child support and for all 
the transportation costs between states. Ultimately, Applicant’s ex-wife filed for 
emergency sole custody of the children. Applicant hired an attorney to fight for joint 
custody. However, Applicant became emotionally and financially exhausted by the 
process, and consented to his ex-wife’s having sole custody of the children. (Tr. 31-34.) 
 
 While Applicant trusted his wife to manage the finances and was not fully aware of 
his financial delinquencies prior to his 2016 background investigation, he accepts 
responsibility for the debts. (Tr. 35.) Applicant has paid SOR ¶¶ 1.a, a $187 cellular 
account, 1.d, a $241 cellular account, and 1.h, a $402 credit-card account. The foreclosed 
mortgage-loan (SOR ¶ 1.f) was guaranteed through a Veterans Affairs (VA) loan and 
Applicant does not owe a delinquency balance. He has entered repayment plans for SOR 
¶¶ 1.c ($8,058), 1.e ($3,429) and 1.g (5,758), owed for three repossessed vehicles. (AX 
I.)  
 
 The $5,243 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is for the balance due on repossessed 
vehicle. Applicant denies this debt as his ex-wife’s. However, Applicant will pay this debt 
if it is his responsibility to do so. (Tr. 48-49.) Applicant disputes the $304 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h, stating that this debt was incurred by the car dealership that repossessed one 
of Applicant’s vehicles due to its failure to turn in the license plates as required. This debt 
does not appear on Applicant’s recent CBRs. (GX 5; AX E.) 
 
Applicant now earns approximately $120,000 annually in salary, and receives 
retirement pay and disability compensation. (Tr. 39-40.) He lives within his means and 
has not incurred any significant recent delinquent debt. Applicant recently completed an 
online credit-counseling course. (AX H.) He paid his substantial legal costs incurred from 
the divorce and custody dispute. (Tr. 32; Tr. 62.) Applicant was candid, sincere, and 
credible while testifying. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
5 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds…. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 The following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose due to conditions largely beyond his control. 
Specifically, Applicant had periods of unemployment, and was required to relocate for 
new employment, which caused financial strain. Because of Applicant’s work duties, 
Applicant’s wife was responsible for managing the household finances. Applicant’s wife 
did not disclose to Applicant that she was not maintaining their financial obligations. Their 
house was foreclosed and they had several vehicles repossessed. Applicant incurred 
significant expenses as a result of his separation, divorce, and custody dispute. Applicant 
acted responsibly by paying his legal expenses and several SOR debts, and entering 
repayment plans for most of the remaining debts. He has addressed all but one of the 
SOR debts and will pay the remaining debt if he is liable for it. He completed credit 
counseling, has not incurred any significant recent debts, and lives within his means.  
  
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties did not arise under circumstances that cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. By addressing his debts in a 
responsible manner and by participating in counseling, Applicant has taken proactive 
steps to ensure ongoing financial stability. Although his financial record is not perfect, he 
has implemented a reasonable plan to resolve his financial issues within his means, and 
to avoid future financial difficulties. AG ¶¶ 20(b) through 20(e) apply. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but I have also 
considered the following: 
  
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Marine Corps for 10 years, including two 
combat tours. He has held a security clearance since 1999. He was sincere and credible 
during his testimony.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
