 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 17-03743 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to his contacts 
with citizens and residents of foreign countries. He refuted the personal conduct security 
concerns related to the allegation that he failed to disclose his contacts with foreign 
nationals in his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security 
clearance application (SCA). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 6, 2016, Applicant completed and signed an SCA. (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On February 28, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2)  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
 
2                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and E (personal conduct). 
 
On April 5, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) Department Counsel 
requested a hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 12) On May 17, 2018, Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed. On August 30, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On September 
18, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing, setting the hearing for September 27, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant waived his right 
to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. (Tr. 13) Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; there were no 
objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Transcript (Tr.) 16; 
GE 1-2). On October 5, 2018, DOHA received a transcript of the hearing. Applicant did 
not provide any documents after his hearing. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel offered information for administrative notice (AN) 
concerning foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to the 
Republic of Korea or South Korea. (Tr. 16-17; HE 4) Applicant did not object, and I 
granted Department Counsel’s motion. The request listed supporting documents to 
show detail and context for those facts. Portions of the South Korea section are drawn 
from the U.S. State Department website and from Department Counsel’s AN request. 
(Tr. 17) AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning South Korea.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 
F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at security clearance 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). Portions of the Department Counsel’s requests and 
information from the State Department website are quoted without quotation marks and 
footnotes. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and he partially admitted SOR ¶ 2.a. (HE 
3) He also provided mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are incorporated 
                                            
1 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to ensure protection of privacy interests. The cited sources contain 
more specific information. 
 
3                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old network operations technician, who has been employed 
by a government contractor for three years. (Tr. 6-7) He was born and educated in the 
United States. (Tr. 8; GE 1) In 2008, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 7) In 2012, he 
received an associate of science degree. (Tr. 7) He has never married, and he does not 
have any children. (Tr. 7) He did not serve in the military. (Tr. 28) His parents and 
brother were born in the United States, and they reside in the United States. (GE 1) He 
has no immediate family members living in any foreign countries. All of his employment 
and residences have been in the United States. (GE 1) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
During Applicant’s May 3, 2017 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI), he disclosed contacts with citizens and/or residents of the United 
Kingdom, South Korea, Egypt, Libya, India, China, Vietnam, Thailand, Bosnia, Colombia, 
Malaysia, Philippines, and Indonesia. (GE 2) Most of these foreign contacts were over 
the Internet. The only countries he visited were brief trips to South Korea, Thailand, and 
Japan in 2016. Department Counsel focused on his contacts with residents of South 
Korea; Thailand; People’s Republic of China; Singapore; Vietnam; Indonesia, and the 
Philippines, and she questioned him about the recency, quality, and frequency of those 
contacts. His longest and most frequent contact was with a citizen and resident of South 
Korea. 
 
The SOR raises the following foreign influence security concerns:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges, and Applicant admits that he met a citizen and resident of 
South Korea (SK) over the Internet. Applicant first communicated with SK in 2013. (GE 
2) For several years, he frequently communicated with SK during online video games 
involving zombie survival. (Tr. 21; SOR response; GE 2) In 2017, Applicant and SK  
played video games about once a week for two to three hours. (GE 2) SK lived for 11 
years in Colorado with his family, and SK is fluent in English. (Tr. 21) From 2015 to 2016, 
SK served as a reservist in the South Korean Navy. (Tr. 21) In 2016, Applicant went to 
South Korea and met with SK on three different days for meals, and he went to SK’s 
residence and looked at SK’s computer. (GE 2) In February 2018, he learned his 
contacts with SK caused a security concern, and he stopped communicating and playing 
video games with SK. (Tr. 22, 28-29)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant maintained continuing contacts with several foreign 
nationals in addition to SK. Applicant had contacts with multiple foreign nationals over 
the Internet and in chats because he was considering vacationing in foreign countries, 
and he wanted to find out about good places to visit. (Tr. 38) 
 
Applicant has weekly contact with a woman who resides in Thailand (TN1) using a 
chat application. (Tr. 29-30) He met TN1 personally in 2016 in Thailand. (Tr. 30) TN1 
works for a truck dealership. (Tr. 30) He does not have a romantic interest in her. (Tr. 30) 
She has not visited Applicant in the United States. (Tr. 30)  
 
4                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
TN1 referred Applicant to another Thailand resident (TN2), and he met TN2 for 
dinner in Japan in 2016. (Tr. 36) He ended his communications with TN2 shortly after 
they had dinner in Japan. (Tr. 36) 
 
Applicant has contact about every two months with a resident of the People’s 
Republic of China (CN) through a messaging application or chatting. (Tr. 31) He met CN 
at a club in the United States. (Tr. 31) At the time he met CN, she was a student at a 
U.S. university. (Tr. 31) He was not romantically involved with her. (Tr. 31) She returned 
to China after graduating from a U.S. university. (Tr. 32) CN works in a medical 
laboratory. (Tr. 40-41) Applicant has never been to China. (Tr. 32) 
 
In 2016, Applicant had contact with a resident of Singapore (SN) he met at a 
dance club in South Korea. (Tr. 32) The day after they met, he went shopping with her.  
SN was on vacation in South Korea when she met Applicant. (Tr. 32) Applicant 
maintained contacts with SN through texting; however, he never met with SN in person 
after their meeting in 2016 in South Korea. (Tr. 32) She is a Facebook contact. (Tr. 32) 
 
Applicant communicates on an almost daily basis with a woman who is a resident 
of Vietnam (VN) over the Internet. (Tr. 33) He has never met with VN in person. (Tr. 33)  
 
Applicant met a woman who is a resident of the Philippines (PN1) over the 
Internet. (Tr. 34) He has never met PN1 in person. (Tr. 34) At one time, he 
communicated with PN1 on a weekly basis. Now his communications with her are 
infrequent. (Tr. 34) 
 
At the time of Applicant’s May 3, 2017, OPM PSI, he had contact about every two 
months with a resident of the Philippines (PN2) that he met over the Internet. (Tr. 37) He 
never met PN2 in person. (Tr. 38) He ended his communications with PN2 at least six 
months ago. (Tr. 38)    
 
Applicant met a resident of Indonesia (IN1) over the Internet. (Tr. 35) He never 
met IN1 in person. (Tr. 35) At one time, he communicated with IN1 about twice a month; 
however, he does not contact her anymore after he received the SOR. (Tr. 35) 
 
At the time of Applicant’s May 3, 2017 OPM PSI, Applicant had contact with a 
resident of Indonesia (IN2). He ended his contacts with IN2 when he received the SOR. 
(Tr. 39)  
 
Applicant’s only foreign trip was in 2016. (Tr. 41) He spent six days in Japan, five 
days in South Korea, and six days in Thailand. (GE 2) He does not have any plans for 
future international travel. (Tr. 41) When he responded to the SOR, Applicant said he 
had contacts with 26 foreign nationals. (Tr. 44) He currently has ongoing contacts with 
15 foreign nationals. (Tr. 44) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Section 19, of Applicant’s April 6, 2016 SCA asks, “Do you have, or have you had, 
close and/or continuing contact with a foreign national within the last seven (7) years 
 
5                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
with whom you . . . are bound by affection, influence, common interests, and/or 
obligation?” (first emphasis in original; second emphasis added; GE 1) Applicant 
answered no, and he did not disclose any contacts with foreign nationals.  
 
When Applicant completed his April 6, 2016 SCA, he believed the SCA sought 
information about foreign nationals with whom he had affection, such as a girlfriend, 
family member, etc., or to whom he was “close.” (Tr. 18, 42) At the time he completed his 
April 6, 2016 SCA, he had not traveled to South Korea or Thailand, and he had not met 
any of the foreign nationals discussed in the previous section in person. (Tr. 22) He 
traveled for the first and only time outside the United States in October 2016. (GE 2) He 
had continuing contact with several foreign nationals, but he was not close to any of 
them before he completed his SCA. (Tr. 43-43)   
 
During his May 3, 2017 OPM PSI, the investigator asked Applicant about his 
foreign contacts. (Tr. 15) After the OPM investigator explained the scope of the foreign 
contacts question, he provided a description of all of his foreign contacts. (Tr. 15, 23)  
 
Applicant promised to disclose any foreign contacts that he had on any SCAs he 
completes in the future. (Tr. 41) None of his contacts have sought information from 
Applicant about his employment. (Tr. 41) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor since 2015 said Applicant is honest, forthright, diligent, and 
reliable. (Tr. 25) He seeks self-improvement, for example, he obtained certification in 
Security Plus in 2016. (Tr. 26) He has excellent judgment. (Tr. 26) He made important 
contributions to mission accomplishment. (Tr. 26) His supervisor supports approval of 
Applicant’s security clearance. (Tr. 27) Two coworkers lauded Applicant’s diligence and 
trustworthiness. (SOR response)  
 
South Korea2 
 
South Korea is a stable, democratic republic. The United States and South Korea 
have been close allies since 1950, and have fought communism on the Korean 
peninsula and in Vietnam. The United States, since 1950 and currently, has thousands 
of U.S. military personnel stationed in South Korea, and frequently conducts joint 
military operations with South Korea. About 2.3 million Koreans live in the United 
States. The United States has promised over the next four years to provide $11 billion in 
force enhancements in Korea. South Korea is the United States’ seventh largest trading 
partner. The recently signed free trade agreement between the United States and South 
Korea will generate billions of dollars in additional economic growth and job creation in 
both countries.     
 
The South Korean Government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens. In 2017, the most significant human rights issues in South Korea included: 
                                            
2 The facts in the section concerning South Korea are primarily from Department Counsel’s 
factual summary and attachments, except for some comments about the relationship between the United 
States and South Korea, which are drawn from the U.S. Department of State website, Republic of Korea. 
 
6                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
government interpretation and application of National Security Law, libel laws, and other 
laws that limited freedom of expression and restricted Internet access; corruption; and 
domestic violence.    
 
In recent years, the United States and South Korea have differed in their 
diplomatic approaches towards North Korea. The United States’ position is more 
assertive in its attempts to curtail North Korea’s development of advanced military 
technology, such as ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons. South Korea has 
emphasized steps towards unification of North and South Korea. South Korea has been 
the victim of attacks from North Korea. 
 
Industrial espionage remains a high-profile concern relating to South Korea and 
South Korean companies. South Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. 
information. On multiple occasions, South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of 
sensitive technology, in violation of U.S. export control laws. Department Counsel has 
listed numerous cases involving South Korea and theft or improper importation of 
sensitive information or technologies. There is no evidence that South Korea or entities 
in South Korea have a history of coercing U.S. citizens through contacts or friends that 
reside in South Korea to commit crimes against the United States. Department Counsel 
does not have the burden to produce such evidence.    
 
In sum, the United States and South Korea are close military, diplomatic, and 
political allies. The United States has maintained a large military force in South Korea 
for more than sixty years, and that close relationship is vital to both countries’ national 
security. It is unlikely that the South Korea government would jeopardize its close 
bilateral relationship with the United States by coercing an applicant to obtain classified 
or sensitive information from the Department of Defense.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
7                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
 
8                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant engaged in frequent contacts over the Internet with citizens and 
residents of the following countries: South Korea; Thailand; People’s Republic of China; 
Singapore; Vietnam; Indonesia, and the Philippines. He had in-person contacts in 2016 
with citizens and residents of South Korea, Thailand, China, and Singapore for parts of 
one to three days. He had the longest and most frequent contact with SK; however, 
when he was advised that his contacts with SK raised a security concern, he ended his 
contacts with SK. The SOR did not allege that any of his other foreign contacts with 
specific individuals raised a security concern.  
 
When an allegation under a disqualifying condition is established, “the Directive 
presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or 
circumstances . . . and an applicant’s security [or trustworthiness] eligibility. Direct or 
objective evidence of nexus is not required.”  ISCR Case No. 17-00507 at 2 (App. Bd. 
June 13, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2018)). 
 
The mere possession of close ties with a foreign national residing in a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4-5 
(App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (discussing problematic visits of applicant’s father to Iran).  
 
Guideline B security concerns are not limited to countries hostile to the United 
States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. 
May 19, 2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
 
9                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 1570 at *11-*12 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 02-26976 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2004)) (discussing Taiwan). 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists 
from any foreign countries seek or have sought classified or economic information from 
or through Applicant, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services. Applicant’s contacts in foreign 
countries “could be a means through which Applicant comes to the attention of those 
who seek U.S. information or technology and who would attempt to exert coercion upon 
him.” ADP Case No. 14-01655 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-
02950 at 3 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015)).  
The DOHA Appeal Board has indicated for Guideline B cases, “the nature of the 
foreign government involved and the intelligence-gathering history of that government 
are among the important considerations that provide context for the other record 
evidence and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case. 
The country’s human rights record is another important consideration.” ISCR Case No. 
16-02435 at 3 (May 15, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 
2017)). Another important consideration is the nature of a nation’s government’s 
relationship with the United States. These factors are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members living in that country are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement.  
 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law 
including widely accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, the government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, 
terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationships of foreign countries with the United States, and the situation in those 
countries places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
relationships with persons living in or visiting those countries do not pose a 
trustworthiness or security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
someone living in a foreign country. 
  
Applicant’s relationships with person who are living in a foreign country or visiting 
those countries create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists, criminals, or 
government authorities could place pressure on residents of those countries in an effort 
to cause an applicant to compromise classified information. These relationships create 
“a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG 
¶ 7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships 
with residents of foreign countries and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
 
10                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
11                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. None of the other mitigating conditions apply. A key factor in 
the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the U.S.” Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the United States. A DOD 
contractor has employed him for the past three years. All of his immediate family 
members live in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with citizens and residents of 
foreign countries. Applicant engaged in contacts over the Internet with residents of 
foreign countries over several years. He had in-person contacts in 2016 for parts of one 
to three days with citizens and residents of South Korea, Thailand, China, and 
Singapore. His most extensive contacts were with SK, and after he learned those 
contacts raised a security concern, he terminated his contact with SK. The SOR did not 
indicate his contacts with any other specific person raised a security concern. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections with foreign nationals are much less significant 
than his connections to the United States. His family living in the United States, his U.S. 
citizenship, his residence in the United States, and his U.S. employment are important 
factors weighing towards mitigation of foreign influence security concerns. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct 
investigations,  .  .  . [or to] determine security clearance eligibility . . . [.]”   
 
Section 19, of Applicant’s April 6, 2016 SCA asks, “Do you have, or have you had, 
close and/or continuing contact with a foreign national within the last seven (7) years 
with whom you . . . are bound by affection, influence, common interests, and/or 
obligation?” (first emphasis in original; second emphasis added; GE 1) The term “bound” 
is not defined in the SCA. Merriam Webster on-line Dictionary defines “bound” as being 
“placed under legal or moral restraint or obligation.” https://www.merriam-webster.com/ 
dictionary/bound. The SCA question is not designed to collect information about every 
contact with a foreign national because most residents of the United States are likely to 
have numerous routine continuing contacts with persons who are foreign nationals. Any 
U.S. citizen who stays in a foreign country for more than a few days would also have 
 
12                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
numerous continuing foreign contacts. The question seeks information about an 
applicant’s significant or close foreign contacts or connections.  
 
Applicant answered no because he did not have a close or significant relationship 
with any foreign nationals. At the time he completed his SCA, he had not met foreign 
nationals in person with whom he maintained contacts. His interpretation of the SCA 
question about contacts with foreign nationals was reasonable.  
 
Applicant volunteered to the OPM investigator information about his numerous 
foreign contacts. His forthright description of his foreign contacts to the OPM 
investigator is an indication he did not intend to conceal information about his foreign 
connections in his SCA. I do not believe he intentionally failed to disclose or intended to 
conceal his contacts with foreign nationals in his SCA. Applicant refuted personal 
conduct security concerns.    
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines B and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant more comment. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old network operations technician, who has been employed 
by a government contractor for three years. He was born and educated in the United 
States. In 2012, he received an associate of science degree. His parents and brother 
were born in the United States, and they reside in the United States. All of his 
employment and residences have been in the United States. The general sense of the 
statements of three coworkers supporting approval of his security clearance is that 
Applicant is diligent, trustworthy, and reliable.    
  
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. For the reasons 
 
13                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
stated, Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns and refuted the 
personal conduct security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
