KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not made a claim of factual or legal error with sufficient specificity to
permit review on appeal.  Applicant’s pro se status does not relieve him of the obligation to raise
specific claims of error.  Even though a pro se applicant’s brief cannot be expected to meet the
standards expected of a lawyer’s brief, he or she must set forth specific claims of error. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03372.a1
DATE: 10/19/2018
DATE: October 19, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03372
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 13, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On July 27, 2018, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Paul J.
Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling about $39,000.  They
became delinquent between 2012 and 2014.  He admitted the two largest debts that were the result
of a failed business venture.  In his background interview, he indicated that he did not intend to do
anything regarding one of those debts because it was charged off.  In early 2018, however, his debt
repair firm advised that the creditor agreed to settle the account for 12 monthly payments.  No
settlement letter was submitted, but he provided confirmation of making one monthly payment.  He
did not intend to address the other admitted business debt because it was charged off and no longer
was listed on his credit report.  
Applicant denied the remaining alleged debts for various reasons.  He claimed $2,000 in
fraudulent charges were made on one credit card account and the creditor told him it would pay the
charges.  In 2015, a collection agency filed a legal action against him for the balance, but that action
was later dismissed.  He claimed his credit repair firm would have the account removed from his
credit report.  In early 2018, the credit repair firm indicated the creditor accepted a settlement check
of about $1,500, but no documentation of payment was provided.  He claimed another debt resulted
from a stolen credit card; however, the record contains letters from a collection agency describing
Applicant’s settlement agreement and resolution of the debt.  He claimed that a judgment against
him was in the name of his former business, but provided no proof it has been removed from his
credit report.  He claimed his was disputing a bank debt but provided no supporting documentation.
The Judge noted that Applicant had over $500,000 in assets.  In his analysis, the Judge
stated, “The primary reason that Applicant’s security clearance application cannot be granted at this
time is based on the contradictory positions he has taken about the delinquent debts during the
security clearance process.”  Decision at 7.  The Judge also concluded that “Applicant’s documented
evidence of full satisfaction of only one of six SOR accounts and uncorroborated claims of paying
on the other accounts, is insufficient to overcome the ongoing security concerns engendered by the
financial considerations guideline.”  Decision at 7-8.
Discussion
2
Applicant’s appeal basically consists of one sentence, i.e., “Specific Claims of factual error:
Incorrect information was used for the judge’s determination.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  In making that
claim, Applicant also references documents attached to his brief.  Some of those documents are not
in the record and post-date the Judge’s decision.  The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence
on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant’s brief  fails to identify any specific error and also fails
to explain how the attached documents that are in the record relate to his claim of error.
As the Appeal Board has previously stated:
There is no presumption of error below, and the appealing party has the burden of
raising and demonstrating factual or legal error by the Administrative Judge.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-00339 (March 22, 2001) at p. 3.  Furthermore, the appealing
party must set forth its claims of error with specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-
0519 (February 23, 2001) at p. 9.  The requirement that the appealing party raise
issues with specificity serves some important purposes.  First, the appealing party
must provide  specificity in its claims of error so that the nonappealing party can
have a reasonable opportunity to respond to those claims of error, and the Board can
discern what the appealing party is claiming to be factual or legal error by the Judge. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0295 (October 20, 2000) at pp. 3-4.  Second, the Board
does not review cases de novo.  Rather, the Board is limited to reviewing a Judge's
decision under the terms of the Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item
E3.1.32.  ("The Appeal Board shall address the material issues raised by the parties
to determine whether harmful error occurred.")(italics added)  See also ISCR Case
No. 99-0519 (February 23, 2001) at p. 9.  If an appealing party fails to make any
specific claim of factual or legal error, the Board cannot assume the role of surrogate
advocate and search the record below and the Judge's decision to ferret out possible
error.  Third, the Board cannot engage in reasoned decision-making when carrying
out its appellate responsibilities unless the appealing party provides some specificity
to its claims of factual or legal error.  The Board cannot be expected to guess what
an appealing party believes is factual or legal error by the Judge.  Fourth, unless the
appealing party raises claims of error with some specificity, the Board could waste
its time (and prejudice the nonappealing party) by addressing matters that the
appealing party may not believe involve error by the Judge.1
In this case, Applicant has not made a claim of factual or legal error with sufficient
specificity to permit review on appeal.  Applicant’s pro se status does not relieve him of the
obligation to raise specific claims of error.  Even though a pro se applicant’s brief cannot be
expected to meet the standards expected of a lawyer’s brief, he or she must set forth specific claims
of error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0050 at 3.  Here, Applicant has failed to allege adequately that
the Judge committed an error in his decision.  
1 ISCR Case No. 00-0050 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2001).
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
