 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02591 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
                      For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On August 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 In responses signed on November 24, 2017, and December 28, 2017, 
respectively, he admitted all allegations without comment. He also requested a 
determination based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 31, 2018, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with six attachments (“Items”). 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 
2018. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate both 
criminal conduct and financial considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old male who has worked for the same defense contractor 
since about August 2016. He attended some college-level courses. He experienced 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
periods of unemployment from January 2016 to March 2016 and also from August 2011 
and October 2012, after serving as an active reservist in the United States military from 
March 2006 until his August 2011 honorable discharge.2 Applicant divorced in early 2014. 
He is the father of two pre-teen children.  
 
In late July 2014, Applicant received a phone call at work from his estranged wife’s 
boyfriend’s mother, who was concerned because she had not heard from her son. 
(FORM, Item 10, at 6) Applicant left work to check on his wife because she had previously 
had problems with that boyfriend. Upon arrival at his estranged wife’s residence, 
Applicant was greeted at the door by the boyfriend, who had a “smirk” on his face. (FORM, 
Item 10, at 6) The boyfriend’s attitude provoked Applicant and an argument ensued, with 
Applicant initiating a physical altercation by assaulting the man.  
 
The situation between the men escalated. Applicant pulled out a firearm from his 
pants and held it to the boyfriend’s cheek.3 Applicant’s estranged wife appeared and told 
Applicant to let her boyfriend go. Applicant put his firearm back into his pants. The wife 
told Applicant to go, then proceeded to call the local police department. Applicant left and 
later discovered a police report had been filed against him. Ultimately, charges were 
brought against Applicant for brandishing a firearm and for assault and battery. 
 
In April 2015, Applicant pled guilty to, and was convicted of, the noted 
misdemeanor charges. (FORM, Item 3, at 36 of 56; FORM, Item 10, at 7) Applicant 
avoided jail time and was sentenced to five years of unsupervised probation. He also paid 
the sum of $800, as ordered. That month he received counseling, where it was 
determined he was depressed. (FORM, Item 10, at 7) There is no evidence that Applicant 
has completed probation early. 
 
Also at issue in the SOR are 16 delinquent debts, ranging in sums from $48 to 
$8,247, and amounting to approximately $34,000. Applicant admitted responsibility for 
these debts, which included multiple delinquent accounts for student loans and about 
$1,200 for delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2015. Several of these delinquent 
accounts were disclosed in Applicant’s October 2016 SCA and discussed during a subject 
interview conducted between February 2017 and March 2017. No documentary evidence 
reflecting any effort toward addressing any of the delinquent debts at issue was offered. 
There is no information regarding Applicant’s present financial situation, and no 
documentary evidence reflecting that he has received financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
2 In his October 2016 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant wrote that he was an inactive 
reservist. (FORM, Item 3, at 21 of 56); but see Personal Subject Interview. (FORM, Item 10, at 5) 
 
3 Applicant had a state license to carry a concealed weapon. (FORM, Item 10, at 6) 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. These guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. This process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have only drawn 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence provided.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions shall be in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination 
as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant admits he pled guilty in April 2015 to, and was convicted of, brandishing 
a firearm, and assault and battery. He is currently under probation for those misdemeanor 
crimes. Such facts and admissions are sufficient to raise disqualifying condition:  
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
AG ¶ 31(c): individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:   
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.   
 
 The incident at issue and Applicant’s subsequent conviction both occurred within 
the past five years, and his probationary period is still in effect. Specifics regarding 
Applicant’s current personal life and his relationship with his ex-wife are unavailable. It is 
unknown whether Applicant continues to carry a concealed weapon. The results of 
Applicant’s 2015 counseling are unknown. In short, there is insufficient documentary 
evidence upon which a determination can be made as to whether such criminal 
misconduct might recur, or whether Applicant is prepared to comport his behavior moving 
forward. Similarly, there is insufficient evidence regarding any rehabilitative efforts 
Applicant has endeavored since the incident at issue. Consequently, neither AG ¶ 32(a) 
nor AG ¶ 32(d) apply. 
 
Guideline F – Financial Conditions 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admitted all allegations related to delinquent debts, which amount 
to approximately $34,000. Included in this delinquent sum is an unpaid federal tax 
balance of about $1,200 for tax year 2015. These facts are sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so;  
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The multiple debts at issue remain unaddressed, including an unpaid tax liability 
balance for tax year 2015. Applicant offered scant evidence as to the creation of these 
delinquent accounts. While there is evidence of a brief period of unemployment in early 
2016, a more notable period of unemployment following his honorable discharge from the 
military that lasted from August 2011 to October 2012, and a 2014 divorce that followed 
an apparently protracted estrangement, Applicant provided little insight into whether he 
behaved reasonably at the time in terms of his finances.  
 
Moreover, there is no documentary evidence reflecting an effort to work with 
Applicant’s creditors, including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), or pursue financial 
counseling. The minimal available information is of negligible help in assessing 
Applicant’s financial situation or mitigating related security concerns. Therefore, AG ¶ 
20(a)-(g) do not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I hereby 
incorporate my comments under the relevant guidelines herein.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old Tool Room HAZMAT Manager who has worked for the 
same defense contractor for just over two years. He has attended some college. Applicant 
had a brief period of unemployment from January 2016 to March 2016 and, more 
significantly, another such period from August 2011 and October 2012, after his 
honorable discharge from the military in August 2011. After a protracted estrangement, 
Applicant and his ex-wife divorced in 2014. They have two minor children.  
 
 In this case, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations without comment and did not              
respond to the FORM. Consequently, the written record upon which he prefers judgment 
to be based is scant. Applicant pled guilty to brandishing a firearm, as well as assault and 
battery, in 2015. Applicant’s conduct, as described in the record, appears to have been 
well out of proportion to the slight he perceived. Today, Applicant remains on probation 
for the misdemeanors at issue.  
 
Applicant’s financial situation still raises security concerns. Nearly $34,000 in 
delinquent debts, including student loans and tax liability from tax year 2015, remain 
unaddressed and unpaid. Applicant admits responsibility for these debts, but offered no 
documentary evidence reflecting any efforts to address any of the delinquent accounts at 
issue. Moreover, there is no information describing his present financial situation or 
capabilities. Finally, he offered neither evidence of financial counseling, nor a description 
of a plan to address this substantial delinquent debt in the future. Taken together, 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient information to mitigate either criminal conduct or 
financial considerations security concerns, Clearance denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1p:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
