 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 17-04223 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
  For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esquire 
                                        For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement).1 Applicant answered the SOR allegations on March 5, 2018, and also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on May 10, 2018. On August 8, 2018, 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing setting the hearing for September 12, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-3. Applicant gave testimony, introduced two character witnesses, and offered 
one packet of materials, which was accepted as Ex. A. The transcript (Tr.) was received 
on September 20, 2018, and the record was closed. Based on my review of the 
documentary evidence, testimony, and the Applicant’s demeanor, I find that Applicant 
failed to mitigate Guideline H security concerns.  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old software engineer who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since he received his undergraduate degree in May 2000. He 
currently maintains a security clearance, first granted in approximately 2010-2011. 
Applicant is considered an excellent employee and has received near-yearly bonuses 
for performance. He has been married for about 15 years. 
 
In July 2016, Applicant and his wife were on vacation, most of which took place 
on a cruise liner. On the day in question, the ship was docked in a foreign country in 
which there was debate concerning the possible decriminalization of recreational 
marijuana. The couple debated purchasing a couple of edible marijuana cookies they 
saw for sale on the street. After checking the Internet, they confirmed marijuana was still 
illegal in that country. (Tr. 35) They were familiar with the actual decriminalization of 
marijuana in the United States at the state level in at least two states. In a vacation 
“state of mind,” curiosity got the best of them.2 They noted that although 
decriminalization had not yet occurred where they were, police were not stopping the 
sale of marijuana edibles on a public square. They were curious about the products, 
even though Applicant was then maintaining a security clearance and drug use was 
antithetical to company policy. Seeing no arrests, the couple felt it was safe to purchase 
the drug-laced treats. (Tr. 36) 
 
Although part of Applicant’s mind told him it would be a mistake, the couple 
contemplated trying the cookies.3 (Tr. 18) Confident that his security officer was 
understanding, and that she4 was more interested in recurring patterns of poor behavior 
or activity that could be used as leverage for blackmail, he assumed that all would be 
fine as long as he reported any experimentation while on his “own time” when he 
returned to work.5 (Tr. 18-19) In the end, they bought about three of the cookies for 
about $20 and returned to their hotel. They agreed to consume about half a cookie 
each, then go for a walk, carrying the other cookie halves with them for later.  
 
After eating the marijuana treat and beginning their walk, both Applicant and his 
wife “had a terrible time.” (Tr. 20) Feeling paranoid and lethargic, they returned to the 
hotel and laid down for about eight hours before going to sleep. On his first day back to 
work after vacation, Applicant reported the incident to his security officer, who was 
                                                          
2 Applicant had previously tried marijuana in school, before applying for a security clearance. (Tr. 39) 
 
3 Elsewhere, Applicant termed this mistake a “wrong decision” and a “bad decision.” (Tr. 30-31) 
 
4 Applicant’s use of the feminine gender referenced his company’s former security office, not the male 
security office to whom he ultimately reported his marijuana use. (see Tr. 18-25, 29-30, 37) 
 
5 At the hearing, Applicant testified that, in retrospect, his former security officer was not totally accurate. 
He noted that it had not been stressed that “if the Government entrusts you with security clearance that 
you are – you should repay that trust with not breaking any of the Government’s laws.” (Tr. 25) He 
continued by stating, “[Y]ou know, it’s one of those things that shouldn’t have to be said, but is. You know, 
so I totally understand that you don’t get a pass or any kind of lenience if you have a clearance.” (Tr. 25) 
 
 
 
 
3 
disappointed in Applicant’s behavior. (Tr. 21) Applicant has not used any illegal drugs 
since that time, and he has no intention to do so in the future. He has signed a 
statement of intent not to use drugs in the future under which, should he again use 
drugs, he will accept the revocation of any security clearance granted. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
 
 
 
 
4 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. This is because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological 
impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Such use also raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant maintained a security clearance when he purchased and 
consciously ingested a marijuana pastry, knowing it contained marijuana, knowing 
marijuana was illegal both in the United States and in his host country, and knowing that 
such illegal drug use was antithetical to the possession of a security clearance. His 
decision was deliberate and calculated, it was not spontaneous. It was made after 
observing local police react to the sale and use of such edibles and after conducting 
Internet research on the legal status of the drug. This is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any substance abuse . . , 
  
(b) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including [purchase]; and  
 
(f)  any illegal drug use while granted  access to  classified  information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence raises security concerns under Guideline 
H. Therefore, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate related security concerns. Under Guideline H, conditions that 
could mitigate security concerns arising from drug involvement and substance misuse 
are enumerated. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply to 
Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;   
and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse 
is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
Applicant purchased and ingested the marijuana baked good just over two years 
ago, so its use cannot be realistically considered to be “long ago.” While it appears to 
have been an isolated instance of both purchase and of consumption, the 
 
 
 
 
5 
circumstances raise multiple atypical concerns. Applicant knowingly and intentionally 
broke drug laws while a guest on foreign soil. He did so after considerable thought, 
planning, research, and discussion. He knew marijuana was illegal back at his home in 
the United States and was barred from his workplace. He knew drug use was 
antithetical to the maintenance of a security clearance. In short, this was not a 
momentary lapse of judgment occasioned by a spontaneous act. This sort of 
consideration and rationalization has the potential for recurrence and clearly casts 
serious doubt on the Applicant’s trustworthiness and judgment. Therefore, AG ¶ 26(a) 
does not apply. 
 
On the upside, Applicant seems genuinely contrite for his judgment lapse. He 
has expressed his commitment to not use illegal drugs again in the future. He and his 
spouse are no longer in the foreign country at issue or in a domestic state in which 
marijuana may be legal to some degree at the state level. He has signed a statement of 
intent not to use drugs in the future under which, should he again use drugs, he will 
accept the revocation of any security clearance granted. While such factors tend to 
raise the mitigating conditions set forth at AG ¶ 26(b)(2)-(3), insufficient time has passed 
since the incident at issue to establish a meaningful pattern of abstinence and, indeed, 
to demonstrate a more inflexible understanding of the responsibilities incumbent on one 
granted a security clearance. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past drug involvement and 
substance misuse, as well as issues of personal conduct, I considered his past and 
present personal life, developing career, references, education, candor and bearing at 
the hearing, and the entire record as a whole. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old college graduate working as a software engineer. He is 
successful at work and a valued employee. Applicant has been married for over a 
decade. He was granted a security clearance during the 2010-2011 time frame. Then, 
just a little over two years ago, he illegally purchased and consumed a recreational 
marijuana product while abroad.   
 
In this case, Applicant actively researched the local drug scene while a guest on 
foreign soil; intentionally broke that country’s laws regarding marijuana; and knowingly 
breached the trust extended to him by the Government in terms of illegal drug use while 
entrusted with a security clearance. He apparently did so, at least in part, while under 
 
 
 
 
6 
the impression that any consequences could be ameliorated with his security officer 
after the conclusion of his holiday. His actions reflect more than a “bad decision” or a 
“wrong decision.” At best, this scenario reflects either exceptionally poor judgment or a 
troubling degree of naiveté. Regardless, more time is needed for Applicant to 
demonstrate his ability to comport his behavior properly, adhere to laws and regulations, 
and reflect a clear understanding of the responsibilities expected of one seeking a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
