 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 17-04327 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant had six arrests or apprehensions for alcohol-related driving offenses 
from 1986 to April 2015. He made some positive steps towards rehabilitation; however, 
security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption) are not mitigated. Guideline 
E (personal conduct) security concerns duplicate Guideline G security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On December 11, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1) On March 5, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. The SOR set forth 
security concerns arising under Guidelines G and E. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
 
On March 19, 2018, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a hearing. (HE 3) On April 30, 2018, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
 
2 
                                         
 
August 3, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On August 21, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
September 10, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, 
time, and place of his hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 14-15) Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered eight exhibits; Applicant offered 
one exhibit; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 17-21; GE 1-6; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A) Applicant expressed his concern 
that the Government was alleging he made a false statement about his alcohol 
consumption, and Department Counsel assured him that there was no such allegation. 
(Tr. 18-20) The Guideline E concern relates to his alleged failure to follow rules and 
judgment issues directly related to his alcohol consumption, and the SOR does not allege 
a lack of integrity or false statements. (Tr. 18-20) On September 19, 2018, DOHA received 
a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h. (HE 3) He 
denied SOR ¶ 2.a. He also provided mitigating information. (HE 3)   
 
Applicant is 53 years old, and a government contractor is sponsoring him for a 
security clearance to enable him to work in communications security. (Tr. 7, 10; GE 1) In 
1983, Applicant graduated from high school. (Tr. 7) In 2016, he was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree. (Tr. 8) 
 
Applicant served in the Air Force from 1983 to 2008, and he honorably retired as 
a master sergeant (E-7). (Tr. 8) His specialty was communications operator. (Tr. 9) In 
March 1988, he married, and his three children are ages 26, 29, and 35. (Tr. 9)   
 
Alcohol Consumption2  
 
Applicant began consuming alcohol when he was 15 years old and first drank to 
intoxication when he was 16 years old. (GE 5) In the mid-1980s, he consumed a fifth of 
scotch and a six pack of beer per week. (GE 5) The most he consumed in a 24-hour 
period was a fifth and a half of scotch. (GE 5) 
 
In July 1986, Applicant was apprehended at the gate of an Air Force base for drunk 
driving. (Tr. 29; GE 3) The police gave him a breathalyzer test, and his blood-alcohol 
content (BAC) was .26. (GE 5) Pursuant to Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), Applicant’s commander determined he committed the offense of drunk driving, 
and he imposed a reduction from airman first class to airman (suspended), forfeiture of 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this section is Applicant’s response to the 
statement of reasons. (HE 3)    
 
3 
                                         
 
$362 pay per month for two months, correctional custody for 30 days, and a reprimand. 
(GE 3) Custody in excess of 16 days was remitted. (GE 3) He successfully completed a 
six-week alcohol-rehabilitation program. (GE 3)   
 
In October 1988, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI). (GE 6) His BAC was .24. (GE 6) He pleaded guilty and was convicted of DUI. (Tr. 
29; GE 5) He received a fine of $268; his driver’s license was suspended for three months 
off base and for one year on base; and he received a reprimand. (GE 6) In January and 
February 1989, Applicant received 30 days of inpatient alcohol treatment at an Air Force 
base, and he attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings five times a week. (GE 5) 
He successfully completed the alcohol-treatment program and was diagnosed with 
Alcohol Abuse in remission. (GE 5) Abstinence from alcohol consumption and continued 
AA attendance were specified as his goals. (GE 5)   
 
In September 1997, Applicant was apprehended for drunk driving on an Air Force 
base. His BAC was .24 or .25.3 Pursuant to Article 15, UCMJ, his commander determined 
he committed the drunk driving offense, and he received nonjudicial punishment of 
forfeiture of $500; and he lost his on-base driving privileges for one year. He attended an 
Air Force alcohol-counseling program once a month for one year and AA meetings two 
or three times a week. He was required to refrain from alcohol consumption for one year, 
and he successfully completed the Air Force alcohol-counseling program.  
 
In December 2000, Applicant was arrested for DUI. (Tr. 30) He was charged with 
DUI in January 2001. (GE 2) He never went to court for the December 2000 DUI. (Tr. 29-
30; GE 6)  
 
In Applicant’s 2003 sworn statement, he did not mention the DUI in December 
2000. See n. 3 supra. He said, “I am incredibly fortunate to be in the USAF with three DUI 
arrests. There is no doubt in my mind that I would be immediately discharged from the Air 
Force if I had another alcohol related arrest. I do not want to jeopardize my military 
career.” (GE 7 at 5) He also said, “I have no plans to start drinking again, but I take it one 
day at a time. I am motivated to be a non-drinker because of my participation in the 
church.”      
 
In June 2013, the police stopped Applicant and gave him a breathalyzer. (GE 8) 
His BAC was .15 (GE 8) Applicant was convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI). (Tr. 
31)4 He completed the court-ordered substance abuse counseling. (Tr. 27) 
    
In April 2015, Applicant was charged with DUI and refusal. He was convicted of 
DUI but not refusal. (Tr. 31-32; GE 8) He was sentenced to three years of unsupervised 
                                            
3 Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from a sworn statement Applicant 
made to a Defense Security Service investigator on September 12, 2003. (GE 7)  
 
4 Applicant disclosed his DUI in 2013 and his DUI in 2015 on his December 11, 2015 Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 
1) I am not considering Applicant’s failure to provide accurate information to investigators or on his SCA 
against him in the disposition of his security clearance. 
 
4 
                                         
 
probation and court-ordered substance-abuse counseling. He completed the required 
substance-abuse counseling and successfully completed probation. (Tr. 26, 33) A copy 
of the document listing his conditions of probation was not included in the record. 
 
Applicant was diagnosed with substance abuse. He received outpatient alcohol 
counseling and treatment from December 2015 to June 2016, and he attended 51 AA 
meetings. (Tr. 26, 34-35; AE A) His June 20, 2016 alcohol-treatment final report states 
Applicant “has successfully completed this [treatment] process and committed to total 
abstinence.” (AE A) He stopped going to AA meetings, and he decided to seek support 
for his abstinence from alcohol consumption from his church. (Tr. 35)   
 
Applicant did not consume alcohol from 1993 to 1997. (Tr. 25) He stopped drinking 
alcohol from April 2015 to August 2016. (Tr. 33-34) He resumed his alcohol consumption 
shortly after completing substance abuse counseling in June 2016. (Tr. 34; GE 8) He 
acknowledged that he is an alcoholic. (Tr. 24) Applicant said he ended his alcohol 
consumption on September 1, 2017. (Tr. 23) His spouse keeps wine in his home, and 
she mostly consumes wine when she chooses to drink alcohol. (Tr. 27-28)   
    
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
5 
                                         
 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
applicant’s personal or professional history that may disqualify the applicant for eligibility 
for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶ 22 lists seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence.  
 
  AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant’s six alcohol-related driving incidents 
involving the police and/or the courts occurred from 1986 to April 2015. His BAC for the 
first three alcohol-related driving offenses ranged from .24 to .26. His BACs at .24 and 
above establish that he engaged in binge alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired 
judgment.5  
   
  AG ¶ 23 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
                                            
5 “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United States.” See 
the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 
0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and when 
women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. There are other definitions of “binge alcohol consumption” that involve different alcohol-
consumption amounts and patterns. 
 
7 
                                         
 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
   
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a fairly 
lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 
3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). See also ISCR Case No. 08-
04232 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2009) (affirming denial of security clearance for Applicant with 
alcohol-related criminal offenses for six years prior to hearing). For example, in ISCR 
Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board reversed the 
administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol-related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 2000, 
six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his alcohol 
consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol 
consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and 
capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (involving 
case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and reversing 
administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption. Applicant presented some 
evidence supporting mitigation of alcohol consumption concerns. In 1989, Applicant 
received 30 days of inpatient alcohol treatment at an Air Force base; he successfully 
completed the alcohol treatment program; and he was diagnosed with Alcohol Abuse in 
remission. He had periods of abstinence as long as four years from the age of 15 to age 
51. He said he ended his alcohol consumption 12 months before his hearing. He has not 
had any alcohol-related incidents involving the police or courts since April 2015.    
 
Several factors weigh against mitigation of alcohol consumption security concerns: 
(1) Applicant’s six alcohol-related driving offenses; (2) his reluctance to permanently 
forswear his alcohol consumption; (3) his binge alcohol consumption to the extent of .24 
to .26 BACs for his first three alcohol-related driving offenses; (4) his diagnosis  of alcohol 
abuse; and (5) his resumption of alcohol consumption after previous periods of 
abstinence for up to four years. I have lingering doubts and concerns about Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment pertaining to his history of alcohol 
consumption. Alcohol consumption security concerns are not mitigated.  
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
All of Applicant’s conduct causing a security concern in SOR ¶ 2.a is explicitly 
covered under Guideline G, and that conduct is sufficient to warrant revocation of his 
security clearance under Guideline G. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. Applicant’s 
involvement with excessive alcohol consumption and driving offenses affects his 
professional and community standing. However, this conduct does not create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because security and law 
enforcement officials are aware of it. AG ¶ 16(e) is not established. Guidelines G and E 
address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Guideline E 
concerns constitute a duplication of the concerns under Guideline G, and accordingly, 
personal conduct security concerns in SOR ¶ 2.a are found for Applicant. 
 
9 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. “In evaluating an applicant’s case, a 
Judge must carefully consider the record as a whole. This includes not only considering the 
extent to which an applicant’s circumstances raise concerns about his or her reliability but 
also giving fair consideration of the applicant’s mitigating evidence.” ISCR Case No. 12-
09900 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00424 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 
20, 2016)). My comments under Guidelines G and E are incorporated in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some 
warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old, and a government contractor is sponsoring him for a 
security clearance to enable him to work in communications security. In 2016, he was 
awarded a bachelor of science degree. He served in the Air Force from 1983 to 2008, 
and he honorably retired as a master sergeant. His specialty was communications 
operator. I have credited Applicant with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.h, which alleges attendance 
at an alcohol outpatient treatment program from December 2015 to June 2016 because 
this is mitigating information. SOR ¶ 2.a is a duplication of the alcohol consumption 
security concerns alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g.    
 
The evidence weighs against grant of access to classified information: (1) 
Applicant’s six alcohol-related driving offenses involving the police, command discipline 
under Article 15, UCMJ, and/or courts in 1986, 1988, 1997, 2000, 2013, and 2015; (2) his 
reluctance to permanently forswear continued alcohol consumption; (3) his binge alcohol 
consumption to the extent of .24 to .26 BACs for his first three alcohol-relating driving 
offenses, and a .15 BAC for his DUI in 2013; (4) his diagnosis of alcohol abuse; (5) his 
resumption of alcohol consumption after completion of a therapy program in June 2016; 
(6) his failure to follow treatment recommendations of abstinence from alcohol 
consumption; and (7) his most recent relatively brief period of abstinence of one year. It 
is difficult to rule out alcohol-related judgment errors in the future, and his lengthy history 
 
10 
                                         
 
of alcohol consumption raises ongoing questions about his reliability and trustworthiness. 
See AG ¶ 21.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. I have carefully applied the law, as 
set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude that G security concerns are 
not mitigated, and Guideline E security concerns are mitigated as a duplication of the 
concerns under Guideline G. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
