 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03458 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 25, 
2018, scheduling the hearing for August 30, 2018. The hearing was rescheduled for good 
cause, and held on September 27, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted into the record without objection. I held the record open until October 
 
2 
 
11, 2018. Applicant submitted an additional document, which was marked as AE D, and 
entered into the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on October 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 37, is single and has no children. Applicant graduated from high 
school in 1995, and has taken many college courses, but has not yet obtained a degree.   
He completed a security clearance application on April 29, 2016. He has never held a 
security clearance. (GE 1)  He has worked for his current employer for 15 years. (Tr. 15) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2010 through 2016; failed to file state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 
2016; had a collection account in the amount of $838; a delinquent medical account in 
the amount of $671; and a state tax lien in the amount of $559. Applicant admitted 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.d. As to SOR 1.e, the allegation was withdrawn at the beginning of the hearing. 
(Tr. 7) He provided explanations and documentation that the SOR debt in 1.c ($838) is 
settled. (AE D) The medical account in 1.d is also paid. (AE C) Therefore the case centers 
on SOR 1.a and 1.b, failure to timely file Federal and state income tax returns from about 
2010 to 2016. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial difficulties in the past. He stated that it was 
during the time when the housing bubble burst and his medical issues that he became 
burdened with debt. He owned about four properties that were foreclosed due in part to 
the death of a property manager who had been remiss in handling the property. (Tr. 16) 
He tried short sales but that was not successful. He hired another company, which also 
went under. He sought aid to prepare his taxes. The person who was handling the taxes 
had a flood in his basement, and all documents were lost. (Tr. 17).  This occurred in about 
2008 or 2009. He takes responsibility and has worked hard to find a competent person to 
file his federal and state income tax returns.  However, he does not recall asking the IRS 
for extensions. Applicant was credible when he testified that he called the IRS and 
attempted to gather the necessary paperwork that was lost in the flood. He learned that 
he owed no money. He obtained the help of two other accountants before he found the 
current one who is handling the tax issues. (AE B)  He admits that he hired his current 
accountant in 2017. 
 
As to SOR 1.a, and SOR 1.b, Applicant admitted he did not file the Federal or state 
income tax returns due to a variety of reasons. He first lost documents in the above-
mentioned flood, and then he became ill in 2012 and was hospitalized. He does not recall 
asking for extensions to file. (Tr. 24) Applicant stated that he decided after the 
hospitalizations to pay medical bills and that he just did not file the income tax returns. 
(Tr. 25) He believes that he has paid about $5,000 in medical bills. At one point, he stated 
he did not realize that he could ask for extensions to file income tax returns. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant timely filed his Federal and state income tax returns each year before 
the tax years at issue. He believed that he did not have to file each year. He was trying 
to organize documents and his poor health had a detrimental effect on his ability to file 
 
3 
 
his tax returns. (Tr. 46) After the foreclosure of the properties in 2010 or 2011, he stated 
that he went online with the IRS to see if he owed anything. He was going to meet with 
financial advisors, but stated that he could not afford them. The record was a bit confusing 
as to Applicant’s knowledge of asking for an extension for one year versus each tax year. 
(Tr. 50) 
 
Applicant’s current annual salary is about $60,000 to $63,000. In 2010, he believes 
it was about $58,000. He now uses a budget.  He has a retirement account. His current 
accountant is working on preparing and filing his Federal and state income tax returns for 
tax years 2010 through 2017. At the time of the hearing, Applicant indicated, according 
to his accountant’s information, his past-due Federal and state tax returns would be filed 
by September 2018. (AX B) At the close of the record, none of the income tax returns 
alleged in the SOR had been filed. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, and failure to timely file 
his Federal and state income tax returns, establish three disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”); and 19(f) (”failure to file . . . annual Federal,  state, or local ..income 
tax returns as required.” 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
5 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20 (g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s debts are the result of health issues and the foreclosure of four 
properties. He lost paperwork in 2008 or 2009 when his accountant’s business was 
flooded. However, it is not clear what took so long to find someone competent to help him 
file his tax returns. He has done so, but he did not provide copies of any tax returns that 
were filed. He has paid medical debts and the other debts on the SOR. AG ¶ 20(a) is fully 
established as to the delinquent debts in the SOR, but not the failure to file the Federal 
and state income tax returns His accountant planned to file the tax returns in September 
2018, but he did not prove that they were actually filed.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s health was beyond his control, he 
has not acted responsibly to address the filing of tax returns. He has resolved the other 
delinquent debts and paid about $5,000 in medical debts. He is in the process of working 
with an accountant to have the income tax returns filed. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. AG 20(d) and 20(g) are not fully established. 
Applicant did not receive financial counseling due to a lack of money. He provided 
documentation that he has paid his delinquent debts, but he started last year to file the 
required income tax returns and had not asked for an extension for each year. He 
provided insufficient documentation to meet his burden to mitigate the financial concerns 
set out in the SOR as 1.a and 1.b.  
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
 
6 
 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including his many years of work with his employer and his health 
issues, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
failure to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for many years. The Federal 
and state income tax returns alleged in the SOR remain unfiled. Accordingly, Applicant 
has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-e:  For Applicant 
 
 
      Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
7 
 
 
