 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01193 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Allison R. Weber, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on June 21, 
2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 20, 2018, and 
reassigned to me on June 18, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 2018, scheduling the hearing for June 
19, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 11, which were admitted without objection. The 
 
2 
 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted 
documents that I have marked AE 12 through 25 and admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He worked for 
another defense contractor from 2000 to 2008, and for his current employer since 2008. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1987 until he was honorably 
discharged in 1991. He served an additional year in the National Guard and was 
honorably discharged. He attended a technical trade school. He married in 1987 and 
divorced in 2014. He has three adult children.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which include a bankruptcy case, 
delinquent debts, and unpaid taxes. While they were married, his ex-wife had significant 
personal problems, including substance abuse. Applicant paid for counseling and 
medical treatment for his ex-wife, and he had hired a lawyer to address child protective 
services issues generated by her actions. He was unable to pay all his bills, and he filed 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 2007. His debts were discharged in 2008.2 
 
 Applicant’s tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012 were audited by the IRS in 
about 2013. The IRS determined that he owed about $7,000 for those tax years. He 
testified that he had a $158-per-month payment plan with the IRS that was interrupted 
when his credit union closed his account in about January 2018. He stated that he was 
unable to arrange another payment plan because he was on hold with the IRS for 
extremely long periods. He documented that he has been paying the IRS $158 every 
two weeks since July 24, 2018. That constitutes seven payments totaling $1,106. He did 
not provide anything from the IRS establishing how much, if anything, he previously 
paid, and how much he still owes. He filed his 2017 state and federal income tax returns 
with extensions after the record closed. His federal income tax return indicates that he 
owed the IRS $881. He did not document that he paid the IRS for tax year 2017.3 
 
 Applicant stated that, except for his unexpected tax issues, his finances 
stabilized after his bankruptcy, and he was doing fine until 2016. His ex-wife relapsed 
and was evicted from her home. She moved in with Applicant’s daughter who had her 
own family problems. His two other children had employment and medical problems and 
special-needs children. Applicant provided financial assistance to his children and their 
families at the expense of paying his own debts.4 
 
  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 37, 81; GE 1; AE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 16, 50-51, 56-59; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 2, 12-14, 21, 25. 
 
4 Tr. at 37-41; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case; the unpaid federal taxes from 
2010, 2011, and 2012; and 41 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted owing all the debts, 
but he correctly asserted that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.nn is a duplicate account of 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.z, 1.aa, 1.dd, 
1.gg, and 1.ii are either duplicate accounts or unsubstantiated. The balances of the non-
duplicate substantiated delinquent debts total about $50,000. 
 
 Applicant’s finances began to stabilize in 2017, and he started repaying his 
delinquent debts. He received financial counseling and adopted a plan advocated by a 
noted financial advisor. He used the “snowball” plan in which the smallest debts are 
paid first.5 
 
Applicant established through documentation that the $400 credit union debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was paid in full as of July 2018. From June 2017 through April 
2018, he paid $60 every two weeks toward the $1,406 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. He 
paid the debt in full with a final $50 payment in May 2018. The $452 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.v was paid in full with a final payment of $217 in April 2018.6 
 
Applicant stated that he was current on the $3,050 credit union debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.x. The debt is reported as delinquent on the April 2017 credit report, which is 
the most recent credit report in evidence. He did not submit any supporting 
documentation. He established through documentation that the $161 debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.y was paid before May 2018. He submitted documentation that he paid other 
debts, but it is unclear from the documentation whether those debts were alleged in the 
SOR.7  
 
Applicant contracted with a company in May 2018 to negotiate and settle his 
debts. He enrolled debts totaling $48,174 in a debt-resolution plan. He agreed to pay 
$722 per month into the plan for an estimated 48 months. He has been making his 
monthly payments, and the company has been disbursing funds to his creditors.8 
 
 Applicant stated that his finances are better. He has a second and a third job. His 
ex-wife is healthy and working. His children no longer require as much assistance. He 
has a budget, and he is setting aside funds for emergencies. Costly car repairs, 
attorney’s fees, and medical bills stalled his plans for a period, but he stated that he has 
a handle on his finances, and he plans to pay all his debts.9 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 80-81; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 34, 43-44, 50-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE 10, 11, 20. 
 
7 Tr. at 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE 16, 18, 19, 22-24. 
 
8 Tr. at 11-14, 69; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE 1, 6, 7, 12-15, 17. 
9 Tr. at 41-42, 60-64; AE 1, 4, 5, 8, 9. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
December 2015. He reported his bankruptcy case even though it was outside the 
seven-year window of the question. He also reported his tax problems. He wrote that he 
owed the IRS about $7,000, and he was on a payment plan. He did not report additional 
financial issues, primarily because most of his debts did not become delinquent until 
after the SF 86 was submitted. He did not intend to falsify the SF 86 or mislead about 
the state of his finances.10 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 59-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including a bankruptcy case, 
delinquent debts, and unpaid federal income taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.z, 1.aa, 1.dd, 1.gg, 1.ii, and 1.nn are 
either duplicate accounts or unsubstantiated. Those allegations are concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
 
6 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s family issues, unexpected car repairs, and medical expenses 
constitute conditions that were largely beyond his control. His failure to pay his taxes 
was not beyond his control. Failure to comply with tax laws suggests that an applicant 
has a problem with abiding by well-established government rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01726 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2018). A 
person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as paying taxes 
when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-
01382 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2018).  
 
Applicant is credited with paying the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.p, 1.v, and 
1.y. Those allegations are mitigated. He submitted documentation that he paid other 
debts, but it is unclear whether those debts were alleged in the SOR. He is credited in 
mitigation for the effort even if they were not SOR debts. He stated that he was current 
on the $3,050 credit union debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x, but he did not submit supporting 
 
7 
 
documentation. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect 
applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR 
Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 
3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)). Finally, he receives credit in mitigation for his participation in 
the debt-resolution plan. It shows he intends to address his delinquent debts. However, 
intentions to pay debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt 
repayment or other responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 23, 2013). 
 
  Applicant’s taxes remain problematic. For whatever reason, Applicant has left me 
in the dark about his taxes. He asserted he learned about his tax problems after the IRS 
audited him in about 2013, and he reported on his 2015 SF 86 that he was in a payment 
plan. He did not provide proof of any payments made to the IRS before July 24, 2018. 
He documented seven payments totaling $1,106. He did not provide anything from the 
IRS establishing exactly how much, if anything, he previously paid, and how much he 
still owes. He filed his 2017 state and federal income tax returns with extensions after 
the record closed, but he did not document that he paid the $881 he owed in federal 
taxes for tax year 2017.  
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
believe Applicant is sincere, and he may reach a point where his finances are 
sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance, but he is not there at this time. I find 
that financial considerations security concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
8 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally provide false information about his finances on his 
2015 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q-1.t:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.u-1.v:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.w-1.x:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.y-1.aa:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.bb-1.cc:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.dd:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.ee-1.ff:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.gg:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.hh:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.ii:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.jj-1.mm:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.nn:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.oo-1.qq:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
