 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03617 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on November 27, 2017, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 11, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for February 1, 2018. The hearing was continued at Applicant’s 
request. The hearing convened as rescheduled on July 10, 2018. Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called 
three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted AE K through N, which were admitted without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant also submitted AE I and J. Those documents are hearing briefs and have 
been remarked as Hearings Exhibits (HE) I and II. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor contractor since 1999. He served on active duty 
in the U.S. military from 1977 until he retired in 1997. He has a bachelor’s degree, which 
was awarded in 2005. He is married with two adult stepchildren.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which include four bankruptcy 
cases. Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in 1991 after his wife 
lost her job. Their debts were discharged the same year.2 
 
 Applicant and his wife recovered financially, but she lost her job again and 
became disabled. It took an extended period before she received disability payments. 
She has had eight surgeries on her foot. Applicant also indicated that his wife “liked to 
go shopping.” They filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in 2002. The case was 
dismissed in June 2004, but another Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was filed in July 2004. 
Under Schedule D, Creditors Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed $224,152 in 
secured claims, which included a mortgage loan. Under Schedule E, Creditors Holding 
Unsecured Priority Claims, the petition listed $722 owed to the IRS for 2001 taxes. The 
petition listed debts totaling $75,811 under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Nonpriority Claims.3  
 
 Applicant made all the payments under the approved Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
plan, and his dischargeable debts were discharged in January 2008. The trustee’s 
report shows that Applicant paid $35,239 into the plan. The trustee was paid $3,093; 
Applicant’s attorney was paid $2,289; the IRS was paid $776; $24,307 was paid to 
secured claims; $4,239 was paid to unsecured claims; and $500 was refunded to 
Applicant or the trustee.4 
 
 Applicant’s wife handles the family’s finances. By 2015, they had developed 
additional financial problems, which he attributed to overspending, unexpected medical 
bills, and poor money management. He spent about $200 to $300 per month on 
recreational gambling. He and his wife went on a five-day cruise in September 2014. In 
early 2015, he and his wife bought and financed three new cars, including a new car for 
his stepdaughter who was supposed to make the monthly payments. A February 2016 
credit report indicates the cars were financed for about $36,000; $35,000; and $29,000.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 48-50, 77; GE 1; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 26-27, 50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-28, 51-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4-6; AE K. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE K. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-34, 41-43, 46-47; GE 3, 7. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in August 2015. He 
paid $18,550 to the trustee as of December 2016. The plan was approved in February 
2017. His unsecured liabilities totaled about $54,000, and included $2,976 in student 
loans and about $2,700 in unpaid federal taxes. The approved plan called for monthly 
payments of $1,550 for 44 months for a total amount of payments during the bankruptcy 
of $88,750. The plan calls for the trustee to receive $8,875 through the plan, and 
Applicant’s attorney to receive $4,300. The IRS will receive $2,847 for taxes from 2015. 
Applicant’s mortgage loan of $1,231 per month will be paid through the plan, but the 
three car loans were to be paid outside the plan. The plan did not anticipate paying any 
of the general unsecured non-priority claims. Applicant submitted documentation 
establishing that he is generally up-to-date in his payments to the trustee.6  
 
 Applicant stated that his stepdaughter’s car was voluntarily repossessed because 
of mechanical problems, and that any deficiency is included in the bankruptcy. He and 
his wife testified that they do not plan on going through bankruptcy again. They cut up 
all their credit cards. He does not gamble anymore, and she curtailed her spending 
habits. They received financial counseling through their bankruptcy, and they also met 
with a financial counselor and maintain a budget. His wife recently went on a three-
week cross-country road trip with her daughter and granddaughter. She estimated that 
the trip cost about $2,500. He has about $196,000 in his 401(k) retirement account.7 
 
 Applicant has been diligent about reporting his financial issues to his security 
officer. Witnesses testified and Applicant submitted documents attesting to his excellent 
job performance. He is praised for his trustworthiness, reliability, responsibility, work 
ethic, dependability, conscientiousness, diligence, and integrity. Work colleagues and 
his supervisor state that he is meticulous in his handling of classified information. They 
recommend that he retain his security clearance.8 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 52-53, 56-57, 71-73; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4; AE L, M. 
 
7 Tr. at 28-31, 35, 40-46, 53-60, 63; AE B-D. 
 
8 Tr. at 16-20; AE E-H. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
5 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required;  
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including multiple bankruptcy 
cases. His 2015 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case included about $2,700 in unpaid federal 
taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) as disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Before his current bankruptcy case, Applicant was spending about $200 to $300 
per month on recreational gambling. There is no evidence that he had a gambling 
problem. Gambling was part of his entertainment budget, like dining out. It is insufficient 
to generate concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(h) and 19(i). However, it will be considered under 
the mitigating conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems in 1991 to his wife losing her job. 
Before his 2004 bankruptcy case, his wife lost her job again and became disabled. She 
has had eight surgeries on her foot. Applicant also indicated that his wife “liked to go 
shopping.” He attributed his most recent financial problems to overspending, 
unexpected medical bills, and poor money management. He spent about $200 to $300 
per month on recreational gambling. He and his wife went on a five-day cruise in 
September 2014. In early 2015, he and his wife bought and financed three new cars 
totaling about $100,000, although his stepdaughter was supposed to make the monthly 
payments on her car. He did not pay his federal taxes for 2015 when they were due. 
 
 Applicant is up-to-date in his payments to the trustee for his current Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case. If he completes the plan, the trustee, his attorney, and his federal 
taxes will be paid. His student loan will likely be paid, and payments on his mortgage 
loan will be made. Like the Chapter 13 bankruptcy that was discharged in 2008, little if 
any of his general unsecured non-priority claims will be paid.  
 
 It is financially beneficial for Applicant to complete the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
plan, and it is likely that he will do so. However, I am not confident that he will not find 
himself in financial problems again. His daughter’s car was voluntarily repossessed 
while the plan was in place, and his wife recently went on a three-week cross-country 
road trip with her daughter and granddaughter that cost about $2,500. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security concerns raised 
by his finances are not mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service and excellent character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
