 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-04256 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 6, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guidelines F, (Financial Considerations.) The action was taken under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.1 
  
                                                          
1 ADP Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“The Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the 
Directive, including both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2018, and she admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 
1.c. She denied the final two SOR allegations, ¶¶ 1.d, and 1.e. Applicant attached 
additional documentation.2 Applicant requested that her case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 16, 2018, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine Items, was mailed to Applicant. The 
FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. On May 
9, 2018, she responded to the FORM and submitted additional evidence. Applicant did 
not object to the Government’s Items. Hence, Items 1 through 9 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant’s FORM response is also admitted as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. The documentation she submitted with her FORM response, are also 
admitted into evidence without objection as AE B and AE C. DOHA assigned the case to 
me on July 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and has been employed by a DOD contractor as a case 
manager since October 2016. She attended some college courses, but did not obtain a 
college degree. Applicant was married in January 1999 and widowed in August 1999. Her 
husband was an active duty Marine. Applicant has been cohabitating with an individual 
since April 2014. She is the mother of two teenage daughters. She is requesting a position 
of trust with the government. (Item 5) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has five delinquent accounts, to include an 
overpayment of Social Security benefits. The combined total of her delinquent accounts 
is approximately $15,557. In her March 2016 SCA, Applicant failed to disclose any 
adverse credit information under the financial section, as required. These debts appear 
in her two credit bureau reports and a social security statement. (Items 1, 6, 7, 8) 
 
 During Applicant’s April 2017 background interview, she disclosed that she was 
unemployed from December 2006 to December 2007. She was supported by her 
Veterans Administration (VA) benefit and child support. She was also unemployed from 
January 2010 to August 2012. During this time, she attended college part-time, and 
stayed home with her young children. She was supported by VA benefits and child 
support. (Item 9) 
 
 In approximately 2011, Applicant began to experience financial difficulties when 
her child support was lowered, and later, the child-support payments stopped altogether. 
Her daughters’ father quit his job in late 2011, and did not send child support, or pay his 
share of childcare expenses, for an extended period of time. During this time, Applicant 
was living in California earning $33,000 annually as a contractor for the Wounded Warrior 
Regiment (WWR). Applicant made a decision to move to another state to improve her 
financial position. She was able to accept a better paying contractor position with the 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s additional documentation is included with her Answer to the SOR, see Item 2. 
 
3 
WWR. Applicant also took multiple financial management classes to prevent herself from 
sinking into another challenging financial position in the future. (Item 9; AE A) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a deficiency balance due on a repossessed car in the amount 
of $7,017. Applicant admitted this debt and was unaware that she owed a balance after 
the creditor “charged-off” the debt. After learning that she is still responsible for a charged-
off debt, Applicant contacted the creditor. She is willing to pay $50 to the creditor each 
month, if the creditor allowed, until the balance is satisfied or settled. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the Social Security Administration (SSA) approximately 
$6,873, due to an overpayment of benefits. (SOR ¶ 1.b) The current balance of the 
account is now $1,714. She has reduced this account by more than $5,000. Applicant 
has scheduled a meeting with SSA to see if she is eligible for a waiver for the remainder 
of the debt. (Item 4; AE A, B) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges an unpaid medical account in the amount of $472. In January 
2018, Applicant paid this account in full. (Item 4) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege past due accounts for credit cards in the total amount 
of $1,195. Applicant initially denied both of the accounts because they do not appear on 
her current credit report. However, Applicant has contacted both creditors requesting a 
current statement of her account. One of the creditors informed her that they do not have 
an account under her social security number other than her current card account, which 
is in good standing. She attached a current credit report which disclosed the creditor (¶ 
1.d) and a zero balance. The creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.e, was not listed on the credit 
report. Applicant indicated that if she received current statements from the creditors, she 
is willing to repay the debts. (Item 4; AE A, C) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
in the AG. (Directive, Enclosure 2) These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the 
guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, 
in arriving at a fair and impartial decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator or, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 The record evidence shows that Applicant owes over $15,500 for delinquent 
accounts. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided mitigating information, such as periods of unemployment, 
reduction in her child support, and her daughters’ father failing to pay child support for an 
extended period of time. In addition, she earned $33,000 annually in state with a high 
cost-of-living. Applicant acted responsibly by moving to a state where the cost of living is 
lower, and due to her relocation, she was able to accept a better paying position as a 
contractor. Applicant has been able to pay down her SSA debt by approximately $5,160 
and fully satisfied her medical debt of $472. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b) and (d) apply. 
  
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant took financial management classes, but 
did not submit any verifiable records. Nonetheless, she has demonstrated that she can 
systematically pay her debts while not incurring additional debt.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(e) partially applies. Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation of 
any legitimate dispute she has initiated with her creditors. However, she is currently in the 
process of attempting to get the SSA to waive the remaining balance of her debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.         
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant’s underemployment, unemployment, and the reduction/loss of child 
support, all contributed to her financial difficulties. She has maintained employment since 
August 2012, and moved across the country to live in a location with lower cost-of-living 
expenses. She accepted a better paying contractor position with her employer, and she 
has taken financial management classes to improve her financial decisions. Applicant’s 
debt owed to the SSA has been reduced by more than $5,000, and she also satisfied an 
outstanding medical debt. She is working with her creditors to arrange payment plans to 
resolve her other delinquent accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust with 
the government. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations) concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
