 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04245 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: George B. Donnini, Esq. 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign business 
interest. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national security eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 31, 2015. 
On January 26, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant 
answered the SOR on February 12, 2018, and requested a decision based on the 
administrative record. On April 25, 2018, Department Counsel converted this case to a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
I was assigned to the case on May 2, 2018. On May 16, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
June 14, 2018, and I issued an order to both parties to produce their documentary 
evidence by June 1, 2018. On May 22, 2018, Applicant’s Counsel entered his 
appearance. Department Counsel and Applicant’s Counsel submitted their 
documentation as requested. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 20 were admitted 
 
 
 
 
2
without objection. Applicant also testified. The record was held open until June 22, 2018, 
and Applicant’s Counsel timely submitted AE 21 through 23, which were admitted without 
objection. I received the completed transcript (Tr.) on June 25, 2018, and the record 
closed. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC). Those facts are set forth in the following: Government’s Request for Administrative 
Notice for PRC, marked as GE 3. These documents are included in the record. The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not 
subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 64 years old, and she is U.S. citizen by birth. She has been married to 
her second husband since 1993. He is also a U.S. citizen by birth. They own several 
businesses and properties in the United States. (Tr. 22, 28) In 1976, she graduated from 
University A with a bachelor of science degree in engineering. In 1989, she received a 
master of science degree in engineering from University B. (Tr. 23-24) After receiving 
both of her degrees, she worked as an engineer for companies supporting automobile 
manufacturers.  
 
In 1995, Applicant created her own business (Business A) in State A, which 
performs contract packaging, warehousing, kitting, and light assembly. One of the major 
automobile companies (Automobile A) is a primary client of Business A. (Tr. 29-30) 
Applicant also owns 100% of a real estate holding company (REHC) which is located in 
State A. REHC owns the properties that Business A utilizes, including an office building, 
land, and at least one warehouse. (Tr. 42) In 2000, Applicant purchased a second 
business (Business B), located in State B. Business B re-manufacturers automobile 
components for Automobile A. Applicant spends approximately 75% of the month in State 
B, running the operations of Business B, and maintains a residence there. (Tr. 33-34; AE 
16)  
 
In the early 1990s, while Applicant was working at a company supporting 
Automobile A, she met another individual (Individual A), who is also a U.S. citizen, and 
also worked at a company supporting Automobile A. (Tr. 36, 41; GE 2 at 2-3; AE 16) At 
some point Individual A became the general manager of the North American subsidiary 
of a PRC automotive company (PCNA) and he contacted Applicant to conduct business 
with Business A.  
 
Since 2009, Business A has had contracts with the PRC automotive company 
(PRC Company). PRC Company ships wheels on metal pallets from the PRC to Business 
A in the United States. Business A is contracted by PRC Company to take the wheels off 
of the metal pallets, inspect the wheels, and transfer the wheels to plastic returnable 
containers. Automobile A sends its trucks to Business A to load the plastic containers and 
 
 
 
 
3
transport the containers to its assembly plants. Automobile A then returns the plastic 
containers to Business A. PRC Company ships approximately 3 million wheels to the 
United States each year. Business A has approximately 20% of PRC Company’s volume. 
(Tr. 30-32; GE 2 at 2; AE 3; AE 4; AE 16) 
  
Business A also scraps all of the metal pallets that originated in the PRC. (Tr. 31) 
PCNA has leased one-third of REHC’s office building and pays $2,500 per month for its 
lease. Business A is also a lease tenant in the same building and pays $30,000 per month 
for its lease. Business A and PCNA share a conference room, but their remaining spaces 
are separate.1 They have separate phone lines, servers, and alarm codes. (Tr. 41-45; AE 
2) In 2018, Business A and PRC Company agreed to a second contract. This three-year 
contract starts in November 2018. (Tr. 32-33, 78; AE 5; AE 6; AE 11; AE 16) 
 
In 2013, Applicant and Individual A were invited by PRC Company to visit the PRC 
and PRC Company’s headquarters. Individual A was unable to take the trip. Applicant 
traveled by herself, and she paid for all of the expenses related to her travel. 
Approximately four other U.S. citizens, who are connected to other automobile 
manufacturers and do business with PRC Company, were part of the trip.  
When they toured PRC Company’s facilities, no proprietary information was shared or 
disclosed by Applicant or anyone else. (Tr. 48-55; GE 1 at 25-26; GE 2 at 3; AE 9; AE 10; 
AE 11; AE 20) 
 
In January 2015, Applicant was appointed by the governor of State A to an eight-
year term to serve on the Board of Trustees (BOT) for University A. She was initially 
assigned to the BOT’s Security Committee, and due to research conducted by University 
A, she was required to hold a security clearance to serve on this committee. (Tr. 35-39, 
58-63, 83-84; GE 1 at 13; GE 2 at 2; AE 12; AE 13; AE 14; AE 15; AE 19) Applicant 
served on University A’s Board of Control from 1979 to 1989. She was appointed by a 
past governor of State A. She currently serves as the vice chair of the BOT, but is slated 
to become the Chair of the BOT, which also requires her to hold a security clearance. (Tr. 
27; GE 1 at 13; AE 15; AE 19) 
 
In September 2015, Applicant received an interim secret clearance, which was 
upgraded a month later to an interim top secret clearance. (Tr. 9) This clearance was 
withdrawn in January 2018. (Tr. 14) Applicant did not have access to classified 
information between September 2015 and January 2018. The facility security officer 
(FSO) for University A submitted a letter recommending her for a security clearance due 
to her “high moral character.”2 (Tr. 35-39, 58-63, 83-84; GE 1 at 13; GE 2 at 2; AE 12; AE 
13; AE 14; AE 15; AE 19) 
                                            
1 PCNA has seven employees that regularly use the rented spaces at Business A. Five of these individuals 
are U.S. citizens, one is a Canadian citizen, and one individual is a Chinese citizen with an H1-B visa and 
a pending green card application. (AE 16) 
 
2 The FSO also noted that she is aware of Business A’s commercial contracts with PRC Company and 
REHC’s lease with PCNA. The FSO has briefed Applicant on her duties regarding reporting suspicious 
information and contacts. (AE 15 at 4) 
 
 
 
 
4
 Applicant testified that her business interests do not subject her to pressure, 
manipulation, or inducement. (Tr. 68; GE 2 at 3) PRC Company and PCNA currently 
account for approximately 12% of Business A and REHC’s annual revenue. (Tr. 69-72; 
AE 7; AE 8) Applicant and her husband’s net personal and professional assets total over 
$9.5 million. (AE 21; AE 22; AE 23)  
 
 Applicant’s companies do not have any defense contracts, nor does her business 
overlap with her role on the BOT for University A. She feels very honored to serve on 
University A’s BOT, and is grateful to be able give back to her alma mater, because she 
believes University A is responsible for her career. “I have a fiduciary responsibility to the 
university…to serve and to serve well. And…help them…be successful going 
forward…and grow the university.” (Tr. 83-84, 91, 95-96)  
 
 Applicant’s loyalties are to the United States and her contact with foreign 
individuals is infrequent and minimal. (Tr. 84-85; AE 16) She takes being a U.S. citizen 
seriously and feels a responsibility to keep her employees employed. Applicant and her 
husband have a good life, and she would do nothing to jeopardize their life and their 
businesses. (Tr. 85-86) Applicant has received honors related to her work as an engineer 
and business owner. (Tr. 39-40) The general manager of Business A, who has known 
and worked with Applicant for twenty years, wrote a letter of recommendation for her. He 
“finds her to be of the highest moral character.” (AE 16)     
 
PRC 
 
The PRC is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Communist Party is the 
paramount authority. Human rights concerns included the repression and coercion of 
organizations and individuals involved in civil and political rights advocacy; torture and 
coerced confessions of prisoners; detention and harassment of journalists, lawyers, 
writers, bloggers, dissidents, petitioners, and others; lack of due process; extrajudicial 
disappearances; and monitoring of communications. Citizens lacked the right to change 
their government and had limited forms of redress against the government. 
  
The United States faces a large and growing threat to its national security from 
PRC intelligence collection operations. Among the most serious threats are the PRC’s 
efforts at cyber and human infiltration of U.S. national security organizations. Computer 
systems, including those in the U.S. Government, are targeted by PRC-based intrusions. 
The PRC uses its cyber capabilities to support intelligence collection against U.S. 
diplomatic, economic, and defense industry sectors. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
5
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
    
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant has ongoing business connections with a PRC company. This 
relationship creates a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because of the 
intelligence-gathering activities of China. The record evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
 
 
 
 
7
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant and her husband are both U.S. citizens. Her ties to the United 
States are life-long and deep. She is actively involved professionally and 
personally in her local community, as evidenced by her professional awards and 
her appointment by two governors to University A’s BOT. Applicant’s foreign 
contacts are related to her businesses, and there is little likelihood that they could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
The nature of Applicant’s relationships with foreign persons is such that it is 
unlikely that she will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of the PRC or PRC Company and the interests of the United States. 
Business A’s contract with PRC Company represents a small portion of Applicant’s 
personal and professional assets. 
 
Applicant’s loyalty is to the United States. She can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 
8(b), and 8(c) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns at issue. 
Accordingly, Applicant has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security of the United States to grant her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
                                        
         
    ___________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
