 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03909 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts have been ongoing for many years. There are not 
clear indications that his financial issues are under control. He failed to demonstrate a 
workable plan to resolve his financial issues or progress toward implementing one. He 
falsified an answer on his security clearance application (SCA), and he did not provide 
an honest response during his background interview. Resulting security concerns were 
not mitigated. Based upon a review of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national 
security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2016, Applicant completed and signed his SCA. On January 12, 
2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 26, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He admitted all of the Guideline F SOR 
allegations, and he denied both of the Guideline E SOR allegations. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on May 10, 2018. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on May 29, 2018, setting the hearing for June 14, 2018. On 
that date, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into 
evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, and offered 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-E, which were admitted into evidence without objection. I 
granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until July 14, 2018, to permit 
submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 
25, 2018. Applicant submitted e-mails on June 25, 2018, July 16, 2018, August 10, 
2018, and August 24, 2018. Three documentary exhibits, joint tax records for tax years 
2015, 2016, and 2017, were submitted. I labeled his e-mails and documents as AE F-L, 
which were admitted into the record without objection.  
 
                                          Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions to all of the Guideline F SOR allegations, (¶¶ 1.a through 1.h), I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He earned a bachelor of science degree in biology. He 
was active duty in the U.S. Air Force between 1993 and 1997. He received an 
honorable discharge and has additional periods of both inactive and active reserve 
between 2007 and 2012. He married in 2001 and has one daughter, age 16. He is 
currently employed by a DOD contractor since October 1998. His job title is security 
police. He has consistently held a DOD security clearance since 1994. (Tr. 5, 8, 15; GE 
1) 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s beauty salon business 
losing income starting in about 2005, after approximately 14 of her booth rental 
employees walked out, leaving behind only one paying employee. In addition, a nearby 
federally funded program ended in about 2007, which in turn, caused many program 
employees to lose employment. This also adversely affected his wife’s business since 
these employees made up the majority of her clientele. Applicant’s wife had difficulty 
paying quarterly taxes from 2004-2007, and paying the mortgage on her salon building. 
Applicant started a side concrete business from 2004–2014 to help cover his wife’s loss 
of income. He assisted her in paying her business mortgage, but he was unable to also 
maintain their residence’s mortgage payments. They accumulated other delinquent 
accounts. The house went into foreclosure in about May 2013. (Tr. 15-16, 24-25, 30, 
32-33, 46-47; GE 5, GE 7) 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $59,469, and the record 
establishes the status of Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
October 2013. The bankruptcy schedules included approximately $51,000 of unsecured 
creditor claims, about $209,000 of secured creditor claims (without deducting the value 
of collateral), and about $7,000 owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for his 
wife’s unpaid business 941 taxes for years 2004-2007. Applicant recalled providing all 
of his debt information to his attorney for the bankruptcy petition. The bankruptcy case 
was dismissed in January 2014 due to the debtors’ failure to make monthly plan 
payments. Applicant admitted this allegation. He testified that he met with his attorney 
who advised him that filing bankruptcy would halt the foreclosure proceedings on his 
residence. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) The attorney would negotiate with the mortgage creditors and 
he believed they would ultimately be able to keep their house. The first mortgage holder 
did not agree to reinstate the mortgage, but agreed not to pursue any legal action 
against Applicant if Applicant relinquished the house to them. Applicant admitted that he 
did not make any Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments. Applicant was going to provide an 
agreement from the first mortgage holder and a copy of an IRS Form 1099-C, if any, 
had been issued post-hearing. Applicant was unable to provide an agreement, as his 
attorney advised him the agreement with the creditor was an oral agreement only, and 
he also stated that an IRS Form 1099-C had never been issued. (Tr. 24-26, 30, 32-33; 
GE 5, 7; AE I) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant owes the second mortgage creditor 
approximately $52,000 after the foreclosure of his home. Applicant admitted this 
allegation, but testified that his attorney advised him that based on a state’s statute of 
limitations, the financial obligation is currently unenforceable. Applicant was asked if he 
ever tried to resolve the second mortgage debt, or settle his outstanding obligation. 
Applicant never tried to resolve this debt based on the advice of his attorney. Applicant 
sent a post-hearing e-mail stating that he has been in contact with his second mortgage 
creditor and is currently working to set-up a payment plan. (Tr. 35-36; GE 2, 3; AE E, I)   
 
Applicant admitted he owed two outstanding medical accounts that were referred 
to the same collection agency in the total amount of $710. (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, and 1.e.) 
Applicant testified that he paid these accounts in full, two days before his hearing by 
personal check. He did not have any documents to submit to verify his payments, but 
Applicant stated he would provide this evidence later. This evidence was never received 
post-hearing. (Tr. 37-39) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, and 1.g allege two unpaid medical accounts in the total amount of 
$331. Applicant admitted these debts, and testified that he believed these accounts 
were paid by his wife. He was not certain, but stated he would be able to provide 
documentation later. This evidence was never received post-hearing. (Tr. 38-39) 
 
The final debt in the SOR alleges a judgment was entered against Applicant in 
2010 in the approximate amount of $6,439. (SOR ¶ 1.h.) Applicant admitted this debt in 
his response to the SOR. At the hearing, Applicant stated he had no idea he had a 
judgment entered against him or that he knew any details about the alleged debt. 
Applicant verified that his address on GE 6 for legal service of the court’s final summary 
 
 
 
 
4 
judgment was correct, but he could not recall if he had received that information. He 
also confirmed that the debt was included in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, but he 
still denied knowing anything about the judgment. Applicant stated that the only time he 
ever saw this debt was in his bankruptcy filing and at the hearing while looking at GE 6. 
During his May 2017 background interview, Applicant had been asked about this debt, 
and he stated at that time he had no idea about the judgment or the debt. Applicant 
submitted an e-mail post-hearing stating that he is still investigating to find the creditor 
of this unsatisfied judgment. (Tr. 26-28; GE 3, 5, 6; AE I)   
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2016. In 
response to inquiries under section 26, which asked if in the past seven years Applicant 
had filed a petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy code, he responded “no.” (SOR 
¶ 2.a.) In May 2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as part of 
his background interview. When asked by the investigator if he had filed bankruptcy, he 
admitted he had contemplated filing for bankruptcy, but then he decided against it. The 
investigator confronted Applicant with the bankruptcy filing and dismissal information. 
Applicant told the investigator he did not disclose the bankruptcy on the SCA because 
he did not believe it was actually filed. (SOR ¶ 2.b.) (GE 1, 3) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant explained he did not realize that the bankruptcy was a 
true bankruptcy case because it had not been finalized. There was also 
miscommunication between him and his attorney. Applicant acknowledged that he 
provided information about his creditors to his attorney, and he and his wife had 
completed the financial courses required by bankruptcy filers. Applicant admitted he 
knew he had filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, not made any payments to the bankruptcy 
trustee, and that his bankruptcy case was dismissed. He claimed that he never tried to 
hide the true circumstances of his bankruptcy during the course of his investigation. I 
asked Applicant why he did not disclose on his SCA that he had been 120 days or more 
delinquent on any debt within the last seven years, as he had answered that question 
with a negative response. Applicant admitted he should have answered that question 
“yes.” Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant did not provide any details on the 
2016 SCA about his home foreclosure, or the judgment that had been entered against 
him in 2010 that was also included in his bankruptcy petition.1 (Tr. 24, 28-30, 45-46, 55, 
58-59) 
 
Applicant provided three character reference letters reporting that Applicant is a 
valuable employee. He is considered trustworthy and reliable. His attorney provided a 
letter that stated Applicant did file for bankruptcy in 2013, but there was not a discharge 
of his bankruptcy since the case was dismissed. His attorney stated he understands 
how this information may have been confusing to Applicant when he completed his 
SCA. Applicant’s final exhibit presented at the hearing was a May 2017 letter from his 
                                            
1 See ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at 3-4. (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010)(“[A] Judge may nevertheless consider 
unalleged conduct for certain limited purposes. These include assessing an applicant’s credibility, 
evaluating his evidence in mitigation, and considering the extent to which an applicant has demonstrated 
rehabilitation.”). 
 
 
 
 
5 
attorney that disclosed Applicant’s second mortgage is currently unenforceable under 
the state’s statute of limitations. (AE A-E) 
 
Applicant provided copies post-hearing of his 2015, 2016, and 2017 Federal 
income tax returns. (AE G, H, and K) Applicant and his spouse received a refund of 
$10,650 for 2015, a refund of $9,924 for 2016, and a refund of $13,115 for tax year 
2017. In his August 10, 2018 e-mail, Applicant stated it was his intention to use the 
2017 tax refund to pay off debts. No other supporting documentation, such as receipts 
or cancelled checks, were provided by Applicant. (AE J) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
 
 
 
 
6 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds…. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2013, which was dismissed 
in January 2014 for failure to make payments. The SOR alleges his residence went into 
 
 
 
 
7 
foreclosure and his unresolved delinquent debts total approximately $59,469. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was subsequently dismissed. He 
did not provide additional evidence after the hearing to show his debts were satisfied, in 
the process of being resolved, or legitimately disputed. His financial problems are recent 
and ongoing. There is insufficient evidence to conclude they are unlikely to recur. His 
failure to adequately address his financial issues over time cast doubt on his reliability 
and good judgment. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s loss of income from her 
business, which is a condition beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must show that he acted responsibly. Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
to prevent foreclosure of his home. When he was unable to have his mortgage 
reinstated, the bankruptcy case was dismissed without Applicant making any payments 
to the trustee. He has been on notice that his financial issues were a security concern to 
the government, and he claimed to have paid two medical debts two days before his 
hearing, but no documentation was provided by him. He failed to demonstrate a 
workable plan to resolve his financial issues or progress toward implementing one. 
Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant participated in financial counseling, which is required when a debtor 
files bankruptcy. He never made any payments into his Chapter 13 payment plan, which 
 
 
 
 
8 
shows he was not seriously working to resolve his debts. Applicant’s debt has been 
ongoing for many years, and he has not demonstrated a plan, or personal exertion to 
resolve his financial issues. There are not clear indications that his financial issues are 
under control. I find AG ¶ 20(c) has minimal application. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant made attempts to resolve his two largest 
debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant has shown very little effort on his part to contact the 
creditor from his 2010 judgment in the amount of over $6,400. In addition, Applicant has 
chosen to follow his attorney’s advice and has not paid, or resolved his second 
mortgage in the amount of about $52,000. Although he admits to benefiting from the 
second mortgage at the hearing, Applicant chose not to pay it since it was barred under 
the state’s statute of limitations. Overall, Applicant’s actions do not constitute a good-
faith effort to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.   
 
 The DOHA Appeal Board explained why state statutes of limitations do not 
mitigate financial considerations concerns as follows: 
 
In this case, the Judge noted that Applicant explained that he did not owe 
any of the alleged debts because they had either been deleted from his 
credit report or soon would be deleted, and he also relied on a state 
statute of limitations to absolve himself of debts. The Appeal Board has 
long recognized that debts remain relevant for security clearance 
purposes even if they are no longer enforceable due to the running of the 
statute of limitations or cannot be legally listed on a credit report due to the 
passage of time. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 
20, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 6 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). We 
also have held that reliance on a state’s statute of limitations does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve financial difficulties and is of limited 
mitigative value. ADP Case No. 06-18900 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 03-04779 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 20, 2005) and ISCR 
Case No. 01-09691 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003)). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 I find that Applicant was aware he had filed a bankruptcy petition when he 
completed his SCA. He deliberately failed to disclose this information on his SCA. 
Applicant was not honest with the investigator during his background investigation when 
he denied filing for bankruptcy. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant made a good-faith effort to correct the 
omission before he was confronted with the facts. I find AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Applicant did not disclose on his SCA that he had filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He 
told the government investigator during his background interview that he had 
considered filing for bankruptcy, but later decided against it. At his hearing, Applicant 
provided conflicting testimony by admitting he filed for bankruptcy, but in his mind, the 
bankruptcy did not need to be disclosed because it had never been finalized. Applicant 
is an intelligent individual with a bachelor of science degree. The question is simple – in 
the last seven years, did he file a petition for bankruptcy. Applicant knew he had filed for 
bankruptcy, and he intentionally omitted his bankruptcy information when he filled out 
his SCA, and he provided provided false information during his background interview 
with the government investigator.  
 
 I find Applicant’s omissions are serious and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. There is insufficient evidence to apply AG ¶ 17(c). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experienced 
financial problems over twelve years ago due to his wife’s loss of business income. His 
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2014, his house went into foreclosure, and he 
accumulated significant debt. At the hearing, Applicant was unable or unwilling to show 
much effort made by him to resolve these debts. However, the greater concern is that 
he deliberately failed to disclose his bankruptcy on his SCA and misrepresented the 
facts about the bankruptcy to the background investigator, and although not cited in the 
SOR, he also failed to disclose his history of financial problems when he completed his 
SCA. The financial questions are clear and concise. I do not find that Appellant credibly 
believed that he did not have to disclose the bankruptcy. In addition, the other financial 
questions in the SCA asked specifically about foreclosure, judgments, and debts that 
have been 120 days or more delinquent in the last seven years. Applicant’s finances 
and personal conduct raise security concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I have questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for access to classified material or assignment to sensitive duties. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under the financial 
considerations and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
