 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 17-03020 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 3, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had three alcohol-related arrests between 2010 and 2015. He is currently 
on probation for the last arrest, and continues to drink. Based on a review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 27, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.) On October 5, 2017, the Department 
of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense after June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) with attachments on November 
11, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on December 26, 2017. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on January 4, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on January 12, 2018. The case was reassigned to 
me on January 31, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 6, 2018. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on February 13, 2018.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45, divorced from his second wife, and has one child. He is seeking to 
retain a security clearance in connection with his work with the DoD.  
 
Applicant served on active duty with the Air Force from 1993 through 1996, when 
he received an Honorable Discharge. He has worked for his present employer since 2005. 
(Government Exhibit 1 at Sections 13A and 15.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The Government alleged in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he uses intoxicants to excess. Applicant admitted having three alcohol-related 
arrests.   
 
 1.a. Applicant was first arrested for Driving Under the Influence (DUI) on April 16, 
2010. He was convicted of DUI with blood alcohol .08% or higher on November 15, 2010. 
The sentence included court-ordered attendance at a nine month DUI class and three 
years on probation. Applicant submitted evidence showing he had completed the DUI 
course. (Government Exhibit 3; Applicant Attachments 1a-2, 1a-3, and 1a-4.) 
 
 Applicant has given two different versions of this event. In a written statement to 
his employer dated April 21, 2010, Applicant stated: 
 
 On the evening of April 15, 2010 at approximately 9 PM I went to a 
local bar to sing karaoke with some friends. On the way home my vehicle 
went off the road and got stuck in several piles of gravel. I was stranded in 
an unpopulated and out of the way location. I saw tail-lights of a semi trailer 
across the street and down the road approximately 60 to 100 yards. I went 
to request assistance and was denied. I returned to my vehicle trying to 
determine my next course of action. Shortly after, the police arrived as I was 
 
 
3 
 
 
standing outside my vehicle. The officer requested a breathalyzer and field 
sobriety test and I declined. The officer handcuffed me and took me to the 
police station. I was booked for a misdemeanor DUI. (Applicant Attachment 
1a-1.) 
 
 Applicant had an interview with an investigator with the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on March 14, 2014. During that interview Applicant stated that an 
unknown third person had driven Applicant’s car into the ditch because Applicant was too 
intoxicated to drive. Applicant repeated this explanation in his testimony at the hearing. 
(Government Exhibit 6 at 3-4; Tr. 19, 26-29.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant had a second alcohol-related arrest on September 20, 2012. At this 
point he was still on probation for his 2010 DUI conviction. On that date Applicant and his 
second wife had a domestic argument after both had been drinking at a party. They 
engaged in a mutual shoving match and his wife fell on the bed. She stated she was going 
to call the police and he pulled the phone out of the wall. She yelled out the window for 
someone to call the police, and he pulled her in and shut the window. At that point 
Applicant left the house to cool off. The police arrived, spoke to Applicant and his wife, 
and arrested him. Applicant was subsequently charged with Domestic Violence (Battery 
of Spouse) and Prevent/Delay a Witness. Applicant was found guilty of count 1 on 
November 7, 2012, and was sentenced to attend a 52-week domestic violence course, 
one day in jail, and placed on probation for three years. He successfully completed the 
domestic violence course in January 2014. (Government Exhibits 4, and 6 at 4-5; 
Attachments 1b-1 through 1b-6; Tr. 19-20, 29-34.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant was arrested for DUI, his third alcohol-related incident, on or around 
August 7, 2015. At this time Applicant was still on probation for his second arrest. He 
admitted that on this date he was upset about his recent divorce from his second wife and 
drank too much before driving. He was convicted of DUI with blood alcohol .08% or higher 
on March 1, 2016. The adjudged sentence included probation for five years, a fine, and 
Applicant had to attend an 18-month alcohol education course. As of the date of the 
hearing Applicant was still on probation and had not yet completed the alcohol education 
course. (Government Exhibit 5, and 7 at 2-3; Attachments 1c-1 through 1c-4; Tr. 20-22, 
35-36, 39-40.) 
 
 Applicant continues to drink on an occasional basis, having last drunk alcohol two 
days before his hearing. Applicant has drunk between six to eight beers over a 12-hour 
period at least once since his last arrest. He admitted that his drinking was stress-based, 
and the classes he is taking are helping him cope with that. He attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous meetings as required for his treatment, and continues to attend them as 
needed. Applicant admits having an issue with alcohol in the past, but does not believe 
he is currently an alcoholic or a problem drinker. (Tr. 43-50.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J: Criminal Conduct)  
 
 The Government alleged in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for national 
security eligibility because he has engaged in conduct of a criminal nature. Applicant 
admitted both subparagraphs with explanations. 
 
 2.a The SOR alleged the three arrests discussed above under Paragraph 1 are 
also cognizable under this paragraph as criminal conduct.   
 
 2.b. Applicant admitted that a bench warrant was issued in February 2017 for his 
alleged failure to appear in court for a hearing, and also to provide proof of enrollment in 
the 18-month DUI program discussed under 1.c, above. Applicant first discovered a 
bench warrant had been issued for him when he received the SOR. He explained that he 
had a communication issue with the court concerning when he had enrolled in the course. 
Applicant provided documentation showing that he had enrolled in the course in May 
2016, and he had a court hearing in November 2017, during which the warrant was 
recalled and Applicant’s time to complete the course was continued until November 2018. 
Applicant has mitigated this allegation. (Government Exhibit 5; Attachments 1c-1 through 
1c-4, 2b-1; Tr. 22-24, 36-38.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions possibly apply to the facts 
in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has a history of drinking to excess, as shown by the three alcohol-related 
incidents set forth in the SOR and discussed above. The last incident was in August 2015, 
about a year and a half before the record closed in this case. He is on probation until 
2021, and had not completed his court-ordered 18-month DUI course at the time of the 
hearing. He continues to drink alcohol, the last time being two days before the hearing. 
Both of the cited conditions apply.   
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate alcohol 
consumption security concerns.  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions were completely established in this case. 
Applicant had three alcohol-related arrests, the last in August 2015. As stated, Applicant 
will be on probation until 2021, was still drinking, and had not finished the 18-month 
alcohol program as of the time of the hearing. He appears to have issues understanding 
or accepting his continuing problems with alcohol. Considering all the available evidence, 
I find that not enough time has passed without an incident to be sure that he will not 
resume drinking and acting irresponsibly while under the influence. The Alcohol 
Consumption guideline is found against Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J: Criminal Conduct) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions apply: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant had three alcohol-connected criminal incidents between 2010 and 2015. 
He is currently on probation until 2021for his last conviction for DUI. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense;  
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 As stated, allegation 2.b is found for Applicant. Otherwise, Applicant had gone 
almost two years without an alcohol-related criminal incident as of the date of his hearing. 
However, as stated above, he does not seem to have understood the adverse impact his 
alcohol use and related criminal conduct have had on his personal life and career. Based 
on the available record, it is not possible to say with any certainty that alcohol-related 
criminal incidents will not happen in the future. Of particular concern is the fact that he is 
still on probation, and had not completed the 18-month DUI course.  Not enough time 
has passed to make a positive decision in Applicant’s favor. Guideline J is found against 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not mitigated the 
security significance of his alcohol use and related criminal conduct. Overall, the record 
evidence does create substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability 
for national security eligibility and a security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
