 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02395 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied.   
 
                                    Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On August 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct.) The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 12, 2018, and she admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
- 1.h. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m. Under Guideline E, she admitted SOR ¶¶ 
2.a – 2.e, and she denied SOR ¶¶ 2.f and 2.g. Applicant attached criminal court records 
with her response. Applicant requested that her case be decided by an administrative 
judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 21, 2018, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was mailed to Applicant on February 
22, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt 
of the FORM. Applicant provided a handwritten response to the FORM on March 19, 
2018, which I labeled as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. She did not attach any supporting 
documentation with her response. Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 8, and the 
Government did not object to AE A, all of which I admitted into evidence. The DOHA 
Hearing Office assigned the case to me on June 7, 2018.     
 
    Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:   
 
Applicant is 35 years old. She has been employed by a DOD contractor as a 
security officer since April 2016. She was on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 2001 to 
2009, and received an honorable discharge. She held a DOD security clearance while 
she was enlisted in the Navy. Applicant was in the Navy Reserves from February 2010 
to March 2011. She received an administrative separation for unsatisfactory 
participation in drills. She remained unemployed until April 2013, and she listed on the 
SCA that she was attending school during this time. Applicant was married in July 2003, 
and divorced in October 2004. She married again in March 2005 and was divorced in 
November 2014. She and her wife married in November 2016. She has three children, 
ages 13, 12, and 9. (Items 3, 4)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has 13 delinquent accounts, to include a past-
due student loan. The SOR debts total about $37,273. The debts alleged under 
Guideline F are supported by the credit bureau reports in evidence. On her March 2016 
SCA, Applicant failed to disclose any adverse credit information under the financial 
section, as required. (Items 1, 3, 5, 6)   
 
During Applicant’s March 2017 background interview, she disclosed that she was 
unemployed from December 2015 to April 2016, but she was supported by her wife at 
the time. Applicant was asked by the investigator whether she had ever abandoned her 
employment. Applicant disclosed that she stopped reporting to U.S. Navy Reserve drills 
due to her inability to find a babysitter for her children. This led to her administrative 
separation for unsatisfactory participation in drills in March 2011. Applicant claimed that 
she did not disclose this information on her 2016 SCA because she forgot about it. 
(Items 2, 3, 4) 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant volunteered during her March 2017 background interview that she had 
delinquent debts. She did not list any of her delinquent accounts on her SCA because 
she misunderstood the financial questions and thought they pertained to her bank 
account only. Applicant admitted owing a tuition bill to a beauty academy she attended 
from 2014 to 2015. She thought the tuition would be paid by her GI bill. She also owed a 
substantial utility bill. Applicant had an electricity account put in her name while living 
with friends. Her friends did not pay their share of the electricity bill. Applicant no longer 
associates with her former roommates, and she had no plans to pay this utility debt. 
Applicant claimed that she also had no plans to pay on a car loan account after her ex-
husband fraudulently added her name as a co-signer on the car loan. He later filed for 
bankruptcy, and the creditor is now requesting that she pay this delinquent account. 
Applicant stated that her financial delinquencies developed, in part, during the 2010 to 
2014 time period when she has having a personal crisis. She was separated from her 
spouse, raising three children with no support from her family, and she could not find 
stable employment. Applicant asserted that her financial problems would not recur 
because she is currently in a stable relationship with her wife and she has full-time 
employment. (Item 4) 
 
In Applicant’s March 2018 response to the FORM, she claimed that she had paid 
off some of her delinquent accounts, to include two medical bills totaling $578, and an 
insurance collection account for $64. Applicant failed to provide any supporting 
documentation with her response, and I was unable to match the two medical accounts 
with any delinquent medical debt alleged in the SOR. (Item 1, AE A) Even if the debts 
were shown as fully paid SOR accounts, Applicant’s remaining debt balance under 
Guideline F is outstanding in the amount of about $36,631. Applicant did not provide 
any evidence showing that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.m are being resolved, 
paid, or legitimately disputed.  
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant was arrested on four 
occasions for assault (domestic violence) between 2007 and 2012. She was required to 
undergo domestic violence counseling in 2007 through the U.S. Navy. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 
2.c, and 2.e.) The SOR also cites her administrative separation in March 2011 from the 
U.S. Navy Reserves for a pattern of rule violations (missing drills). (SOR ¶ 2.d.) 
Applicant admitted all of these allegations. Applicant also is alleged to have intentionally 
falsified her 2016 SCA by failing to list her 2012 arrest for assault, and by failing to 
disclose her delinquent financial information, as required. (SOR ¶¶ 2.f and 2.g) 
Applicant denied both falsification allegations. She explained [in her Answer or FORM 
response] that she omitted the 2012 assault arrest because she misunderstood the 
question. Similarly, Applicant said she omitted her delinquent financial accounts 
because she believed the questions pertained to her bank account only. (Items 2, 3, 4, 
7) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                    Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . . 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. In 
assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following potentially disqualifying condition: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated over $37,000 of delinquent debt with 13 creditors, as 
alleged in the SOR. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information.  
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
  
 Applicant accumulated significant debt due to what she termed a “personal 
crisis,” i.e., divorce, unemployment, and raising three children by herself, from 2010 to 
2014 without the benefit of family support. These conditions were largely beyond her 
control. However, in order to receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must also 
show that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been 
employed full-time since April 2016. She was put on notice of her delinquent 
accounts during her background interview in March 2017. The only debts Applicant 
claimed to have satisfied a full year later include three accounts for a minimal amount, 
and these claims are not sufficiently documented. Applicant’s current delinquent debt 
totals over $36,000. Applicant’s failure to take responsible action with her creditors over 
an extended period of time casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not apply. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. It is also apparent 
that her financial difficulties are not under control. Applicant claimed to have paid some 
medical accounts, but I was unable to link her payments to any of the SOR accounts. 
There is no evidence to show that Applicant initiated and is adhering to a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her outstanding debts. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and (d) do not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant stated that her ex-husband fraudulently 
added her name as co-signer for a car loan. (SOR ¶ 1.b) She provided no 
documentation to substantiate her legitimate claim that she is not liable for this debt due 
to fraudulent activity. Applicant also has a substantial delinquent utility account in her 
name that she refuses to pay after her former roommates failed to pay their share of the 
bill. (SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant has failed to provide any documentation, such as a complaint 
filed in the legal system, a demand letter to the creditor, or to her former roommates, in 
her effort to dispute her responsibility for the money owed.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
 
7 
 
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, 
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities;  
 
 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . 
   
  (2) any… violent, or other inappropriate behavior;  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Applicant has four arrests for violent behavior, and an administrative separation 
from the U.S. Navy Reserves in 2011 due to a pattern of rule violations. Applicant is 
also familiar with the security clearance application since she held a DOD security 
clearance while in the U.S. Navy. Her claims of misunderstanding clear, concise 
questions on the current security application are not credible. The two allegations of 
falsification of her 2016 SCA are substantiated. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth potentially applicable mitigating conditions under Guideline E: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
  
 As to the falsification alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.f, and 2.g, AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s explanation for her omissions on the 2016 SCA was that she misunderstood 
the questions. Although not cited in the SOR, Applicant also failed to disclose on the 
SCA that she was administratively separated from the U.S. Navy Reserves in 2011 due 
to her failure to report to drills. Her explanation for this omission is that she forgot about 
it.1 I find Applicant’s explanations are not credible, and that her omissions of adverse 
information were intentional.    
 
 Applicant has several criminal arrests for violent conduct. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c. 
and 2.e). Her most recent arrest was in 2012 and occurred after she completed a 
required domestic violence treatment program in 2007. Although she has not been 
arrested for domestic violence in six years, her conduct continues a pattern of her 
inability to follow laws, rules, or regulations. I find that more time is needed to show that 
Applicant is fully rehabilitated. Her anger and violence did not occur under “unique” 
circumstances. It occurred after she was involved in a disagreement with her domestic 
partners. SOR ¶ 2.d, alleges her administrative separation from the U.S. Navy Reserves 
in 2011 for a pattern of rule violations. Until such time has passed to show full 
rehabilitation, there is a strong possibility that her inability to follow laws, rules, or 
regulations, may likely recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010)(“[A] Judge may nevertheless consider 
unalleged conduct for certain limited purposes. These include assessing an applicant’s credibility, 
evaluating his evidence in mitigation, and considering the extent to which an applicant has demonstrated 
rehabilitation.”). 
 
9 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) was addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 35 years old and employed by a DOD contractor as a security officer 
since April 2016. She accumulated debt over time, and currently has over $36,000 of 
debt owed to numerous creditors. She has made very little effort to resolve, pay, or 
legitimately dispute her delinquent accounts. Although applicants are not required to 
show they have paid all delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, they should, at the very 
least, provide a plan indicating how they intend to pay their delinquent debts coupled 
with documented evidence confirming that the plan is underway. Applicant also has a 
history of failing to follow rules, laws, and regulations. She has several similar domestic 
violence arrests, and was not truthful about disclosing adverse information on her SCA, 
as required. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude she failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
(Financial Considerations), and Guideline E, (Personal Conduct.)   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-m:  Against Applicant  
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a-g:  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                      
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
