 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 17-01557 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. National security eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 21, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines J, Criminal Conduct, and G, Alcohol Consumption. The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 10, 2017. He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
April 13, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
 
2 
 
 
Hearing on June 27, 2018 for a hearing on September 6, 2018. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. 
  
 The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented two witnesses, and 
submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through O, which were admitted into the record 
without objection. At the Government’s request, the record was kept open for one week 
for submission of a document reflecting a 2018 alcohol incident to conform to the evidence 
revealed at the hearing. The document was received and marked as GX 8.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 14, 2018.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He works as an electrical engineer for a defense 
contractor. He is married and has two children.  He served on active duty in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from 1985 until 1988, receiving a bad conduct discharge. (GX 1) He 
obtained his undergraduate degree in 1993. He has been with his current employer since 
2001. He initially held a security clearance in 1986. He has held his current clearance 
since 2003. (GX 1) He completed his most recent security clearance application in March 
2016.  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related problems since approximately 1983 to at 
least April 2016. (SOR 1.a) He was arrested in December 2014 and charged with DWI 
1st. In March 2015, he was found guilty of DWI and sentenced to 45 days confinement 
(suspended); one year restricted license with ignition interlock; fined $250 and required 
to attend a state alcohol safety action program. (SOR 1.b) Applicant was arrested on 
December 10, 2015 and charged with DWI 2nd offense; refusal to take a breathalyzer test; 
restricted license violation; and driving after the forfeiture of a license. He was sentenced 
to 180 days confinement (160 days suspended); three years unsupervised probation; 
$500 fine and attendance at the state alcohol safety action program. For driving after 
forfeiture of a license, he was sentenced to six months confinement (suspended six 
months); three years unsupervised probation; and one year suspension of a license. 
(SOR 1.c) On April 4, 2016, Applicant was charged with public swearing and intoxication. 
He was found guilty of public swearing and intoxication in July 2016. (SOR 1.d) (GX 4-6) 
 
 Applicant was a social drinker since the age of 16. He believes he had an alcohol-
related incident in the early 90’s. (Tr. 61) He acknowledged that he was diagnosed with 
depression and received medication in about 2014. (AX B) Applicant experienced stress 
and started to self-medicate with alcohol.  (Tr. 55) He received two DWI’s in two years. 
(GX 3-5) All alcohol was removed from the home. Applicant attended inpatient treatment 
for 28 days from April 19, 2016 and was discharged on May 17, 2016. He successfully 
completed the program, which consisted of individual and group counseling, and other 
educational activities. (AX E) 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In 2016, Applicant’s employer initiated an internal program to monitor Applicant’s 
behavior and use of alcohol. Certain restrictions were placed on Applicant to include: no 
use of alcohol at any time; scheduled meeting with a psychiatrist; random alcohol testing; 
attendance at AA meetings (at least 5 per week); family and addictions counseling; check 
in and out with work hours; parking in front of building; smoke breaks outside the break 
room area; lunch breaks no more than one hour. (AX C) In addition, Applicant lost his 
position as a supervisor. (Tr. 41) 
 
 The CEO of the company testified at the hearing that he has personally observed 
Applicant for the last 18 months. The formal memorandum was signed by the company 
officer and applicant in November 2016. If the terms of the agreement were not kept, 
Applicant could be terminated. (Tr. 34) 
 
 The President of the company, who is a retired Admiral, stated that he took the 
time and effort to give Applicant an opportunity to continue his employment, despite the 
history of alcohol abuse, because he has been a trusted employee for almost 20 years. 
He knows that Applicant has contributed greatly to the company and deserves the 
opportunity to continue to work for the company. (Tr. 35)  He testified at the hearing that 
Applicant has progressed and the restrictions have ended. (Tr. 42) He also wrote a strong 
letter of recommendation for Applicant. (AX O) 
 
 Applicant continued alcohol treatment with a licensed clinical social worker 
(LCSW). He attends bi-weekly sessions and is no longer on medication. He attended AA 
and has a sponsor. He admits that he is an alcoholic. (Tr.57) Applicant’s therapist wrote 
a letter of recommendation in August 2018. The LCSW noted that he has known Applicant 
for ten years and has treated him the past four years for alcohol abuse. He opined that 
Applicant has been open and honest about his behaviors and has taken responsibility for 
them. The therapist stated that Applicant had a “relapse” in May 2018 which resulted in a 
legal problem (the 2018 public intoxication conviction). Despite that incident, Applicant’s 
prognosis is positive and that he shows a commitment to his sobriety. (AX M) 
 
 Applicant explained that as to the incident of public swearing and intoxication in 
July 2016, (SOR 1.d), he did not recall much about the event. Upon questioning, he stated 
that he had a “relapse” in March 2018, and told his employer. He acknowledged that the 
“relapse” occurred in March 2018, when he was arrested and pled guilty in April 2018. 
(Tr. 68) Applicant explained that he was distressed about a situation with his daughter 
and her fiancé who was killed. (Tr. 68)  Applicant stated that he had thirteen months of 
sobriety before this event.  He claimed that he has not had a drink since that time. (Tr. 
71) 
 
 Applicant signed a statement of intent, dated September 5, 2018. (AX J) He also 
submitted a number of character references. Each letter attested to Applicant’s 
dependability and trustworthiness. (AX A, F, H,) The letters indicated that the writer knew 
of Applicant’s problem with alcohol. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 At the end of the hearing, the Government requested that the record be kept open 
for one week so that the SOR could be amended to conform to the evidence of record.  
SOR allegation 1.e, about the arrest on or about March 18, 2018, and charge of Public 
Swearing and Intoxication was added. On April 27, 2018, Applicant was found guilty of 
the charge and required to pay a fine and court costs. (GX 8) Applicant’s attorney 
responded and presented a submission within the allotted time. (AX P) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR (2.a) cross-alleged the information alleged in 1.a through 1.e. Applicant 
admitted to all SOR allegations in paragraph one. The history of alcohol abuse stems 
from 1983 to 2018. 
 
 Applicant admitted his 2014 and 2015 DWI convictions and the unsupervised three 
year probation. He is still on probation for one more year. He was arrested in 2016 and 
2018 for public swearing and intoxication, and was found guilty. 
 
        Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
  Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Five conditions may apply: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse since 1983 to 2018. He was found guilty 
of a DWI in 2014 and 2015. He received a three year unsupervised probation. He was 
found guilty of public swearing and intoxication in 2016 and 2018. These incidents that 
involved drinking are cross- alleged under Guideline J. Applicant admits his diagnosis for 
an alcohol disorder and received treatment. These facts establish prima facie support for 
the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Three conditions may apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant sought treatment in 2014. He completed an inpatient and outpatient 
program. He was compliant with both. He readily acknowledges that alcohol was ruining 
his life. He had been sober for about 13 months, until he had another public intoxication 
conviction in 2018.  He submitted information from his therapist who states he has a good 
prognosis despite the “relapse” in 2018. He attends AA meetings, and receives 
counseling. The therapist report stated that Applicant was forthright and had insight into 
his situation. He has a sponsor in AA. His employer is monitoring him and recommends 
him for work and a security clearance. However, the pattern of alcohol “relapse” continues 
despite his good efforts. He is also still on probation. His latest relapse was in March 
2018.  He has not mitigated the security concern under the alcohol guideline. 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
As discussed under Alcohol Consumption, Applicant has four alcohol-related 
convictions from 2014 to 2018. He has a history of alcohol abuse and intoxication from 
1983 to 2018. He is currently on unsupervised probation. The evidence establishes the 
above three disqualifying conditions. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
raised in this case: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct concerns. His pattern and 
relapse in 2018 prevent reliance on passage of time. He has been addressing his 
alcohol disorder but it is not unreasonable to expect a longer period of time to show 
that he has fully mitigated under this guideline. He receives partial credit for his 
treatment and his good efforts. He has a good recommendation from his employer, 
but his 2018 involvement in a legal alcohol incident negates full mitigation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is respected by those 
that know him. He performs well at work. He was in the military. He has worked at his 
current employment for 17 years. He has held a security clearance since 2003. He has 
excellent letters of recommendation. He admitted and obtained help for his alcohol 
problems. He acknowledged that he is not the same person as before. He successfully 
completed inpatient and outpatient programs.  He is doing everything to stay sober. He 
has a sponsor in AA. He is described as a good father by his wife. 
 
Applicant however has had alcohol convictions in 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2018.  He 
was monitored by his employer and one condition was to abstain from alcohol. In 2018, 
due to stress, he again resorted to alcohol. This is troubling. If another very stressful 
incident occurs it is not clear how Applicant would react to another stressful incident. He 
has made great strides, but the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the concerns under Guidelines G and J.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-e:  Against Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
