 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01866 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 27, 2016. 
On July 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on September 29, 2017. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM and submitted a response, marked as 
Applicant exhibit (AE) A. The Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 to 9, and AE A are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old mental-health professional, employed by a defense 
contractor working at a U.S. military facility since 2016. He was previously employed in a 
similar position at another military facility since 2012. He earned a doctorate degree in 
2002 and a bachelor’s degree in 1992. He has been married since 2013 and has no 
children. He previously held a DOD security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling about $20,667. Applicant’s debts 
include an unpaid judgment, a state tax lien, and credit card bank accounts. Applicant 
admitted a small credit card debt and stated he is paying on an overpayment of state 
benefits that resulted in a judgment. He denied the remaining debts, claiming the state 
tax lien is a mistake, and asserting that the remaining credit card debts have been 
charged off and no longer active. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a small credit card debt for $56. Once notified of the debt, Applicant 
paid it in August 2017. This account is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a tax lien placed by state A in 2016. Applicant acknowledged living 
and working in state A, but when he moved to state B in 2011, he continued to receive 
tax notices from state A. In September 2016, Applicant notified state A that he disputed 
the tax debt and provided some but not all documentation showing his residence and 
employment in state B for the years in question. It is unclear what the current status is 
with the state A tax obligation, as Applicant’s November 2017 credit report continues to 
show an unresolved $2,845 tax lien from state A. However, Applicant has taken adequate 
measures to address the state tax delinquency and has provided sufficient documentation 
to state A to refute the debt.2 This account is being resolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is an unpaid judgment from state A to recoup overpayment of state 
unemployment benefits. Applicant applied for and began receiving state unemployment 
benefits in 2009 and 2010. At some point, Applicant did not correctly disclose his dates 
                                                     
2 In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided a Federal IRS Release of Levy/Release of Property from 
Levy form, sent to state B tax authorities in June 2015, showing a release of levy. It is not clear on the form 
what levy is being released, although Applicant claims it releases the state A tax lien. The form makes no 
mention of state A, an amount, or date the levy was imposed. In addition, Applicant provided a 2017 state 
A personal income tax payment of $95 for tax year 2016, apparently to show that no additional taxes were 
owed.  
 
3 
 
of re-employment, resulting in an overpayment. In 2011, the state sent Applicant a notice 
of the judgment filing for $9,542, but Applicant did not respond to the court because he 
had moved out of state. The judgment remained delinquent thereafter. In his Answer to 
the SOR, he claimed he paid 10% of the balance in 2017, but did not provide evidence of 
such payment. He stated that since this judgment debt does not incur interest charges, 
he typically pays other obligations that incur interest before this debt. Applicant claimed 
in his response to the FORM, that his 2016 Federal income tax refund of $946 was to be 
redirected to apply to this judgment, but provided evidence from state A that only $74 of 
his 2016 state tax refund was applied to the debt. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.f are credit card debts totaling $8,224. Applicant noted in his Answer 
that during the recession, he was unable to pay these debts, but claimed they are no 
longer active because they have been charged off. These collection accounts are 
recorded in Applicant’s 2016 credit report (GE 7) and show one account becoming 
delinquent in 2009, while two others show delinquencies beginning in 2016. Three smaller 
collection accounts with the same lender as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, became 
delinquent in 2010, but are not alleged in the SOR. Applicant asserts that the delinquent 
accounts no longer appear on his 2017 credit report and are not active debts. No evidence 
of attempts to resolve the debts was provided. 
 
Applicant noted in his Answer, that state B had a high cost of living, and he used 
credit cards to pay for the move and to improve his credit score. His move back to state 
A cost $14,800, and he lost income while waiting for credentialing in his new position. In 
2004, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy to discharge credit cards he used to pay 
debts and living expenses. The bankruptcy debts were discharged in 2004. 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant disclosed that his spouse has chronic 
health issues, has been on medical leave since September 2017, and his physician could 
not say when he would return to work. Since his spouse’s paid leave has been exhausted, 
the household income has decreased. As a result, they stopped payments on their 
student loans, but expected to resume them in February 2018. Applicant did not provide 
documentation of notice to or concurrence by the student loan lenders of the cessation of 
payments or an agreement to restructure loan payments. Given no payments toward 
student loans and delinquent debts, Applicant provided a budget showing a monthly net 
remainder of $145. Applicant’s Federal joint tax return for 2016 shows an income of 
$163,122, and he noted in his Answer that his student loan principle balance is currently 
$135,000 despite paying $60,000 in interest so far. Applicant noted his highly productive 
work history and service to military personnel. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
4 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
6 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s unresolved debts have been a recurring problem despite a 2004 
bankruptcy discharge, a stable work history since at least 2012, and a significant joint 
income. He points to the recession, moving costs, and a high cost of living as reasons for 
his delinquent debts. However, he has not shown sufficient documentation of good-faith 
efforts to resolve his debts or regular progress toward paying on a state judgment. By his 
own statement, his household income has been recently reduced due to his spouse’s 
illness and loss of work, and he has stopped paying on his student loans to be able to 
pay other obligations. I have insufficient evidence of Applicant’s ability or willingness to 
satisfy the SOR debts for which he is responsible, and his financial status appears 
unstable. I am unable to determine that his finances are under control, that debts will be 
resolved, and that similar problems are unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant has not shown that he has sought financial assistance or financial 
counseling. His long-standing disregard for delinquent debts and failure to adequately 
address a judgment when he had the means to do so, and ignoring other debts because 
they have been charged off, directly impugn his judgment and raise significant doubts 
about his ability and willingness to pay financial obligations. He has made significant 
efforts to resolve the state tax lien and a small credit card debt. With regard to the 
remaining debts, no mitigating condition fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).3 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s 
delinquencies remain an ongoing concern. He has not shown evidence of whole-person 
                                                     
3 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age 
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence 
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
factors sufficient to overcome the financial concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security 
interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
