 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 17-04173 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to those 
interrogatories on February 7, 2018. On February 23, 2018, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to him, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 
4), (December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated March 19, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by 
DOHA on May 22, 2018, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days 
after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as 
well as the Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM 
on June 4, 2018. His response was due on July 4, 2018. Applicant timely submitted 
several documents in response to the FORM, and they were admitted as Applicant 
exhibits without objection. The case was assigned to me on September 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments nearly all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 
1.d. through 1.l., 1.n., and 1.o.). Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact:  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as an information assurance analyst (cybersecurity) with his current employer since May 
2017. A 1995 high school graduate, he received a bachelor’s degree in 2014, and 
professional certifications in 2017. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in May 1996, and 
he was honorably retired with the rank of sergeant first class (E-7) in May 2017. He was 
granted a secret clearance on an unspecified date. Applicant was married in 2001, and 
divorced in 2011. He remarried in 2011, and divorced in 2016. He has two daughters, 
born in 2005 and 2014. 
 
Military Record 
 
Although Applicant spent two decades in the U.S. Army, he furnished very little 
information regarding his military career. He submitted no information regarding awards 
and decorations that he received for his service. During his interview with an investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on February 7, 2017, he reported 
that he had been deployed to: Iraq from December 2006 until an unspecified date in 2007; 
to Iraq from March 2009 until September 2009; Iraq from May 2010 until May 2011; and 
Afghanistan from March 2012 until December 2012.  
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations1 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a variety of causes: his two divorces 
were expensive with regard to attorney fees; child support for two children located in 
separate states; the failure of his home mortgage lender to defer his payments while he 
was deployed; and the failure of the home mortgage lender to reduce his home mortgage 
finance rate of 6.5 per cent. As a result, he fell behind in his payments. In an effort to 
resolve his mortgage problems, Applicant claimed he engaged the services of a company 
(company A) to negotiate a lower monthly payment with the mortgage lender, and he 
purportedly paid them $1,000 to accomplish the task. Applicant claimed the company did 
not enter into any negotiations with the mortgage lender, and the relationship ended 
without success. Although Applicant discussed the relationship with the company, he 
failed to submit any documents, including correspondence, engagement agreement, 
checks, or receipts, to confirm his claim, or the dates of the relationship.  
 
In August 2016, Applicant turned to a law firm (law firm B) to address his mortgage 
problems by seeking a mortgage modification. Upon the completion of making four 
payments of $800 each, commencing on September 1, 2016, and ending on December 
2016, the law firm was to commence negotiations on the modification. Although Applicant 
submitted a copy of the signed engagement agreement, he failed to say that he followed 
through on the agreement, or made any of the agreed payments. Despite being requested 
to provide documentation by the OPM investigator, he failed to submit correspondence, 
checks, or receipts, to confirm that the agreement was consummated and any activity on 
his behalf was commenced. 
 
At some point before Applicant met with the OPM investigator in February 2017, 
he changed directions from working with law firm B and moved to a different organization 
(company C) in an effort to consolidate his debts. At the same time, he contended he was 
searching for still another organization (company D) to work on his finances. On March 
1, 2018, Applicant agreed to pay company D $850 for their services. Essentially what 
company D did was to dispute numerous delinquent accounts with the credit reporting 
agencies and seek their deletion without expressing any justifications for such actions. 
Aside from a company D Credit Consulting Agreement and an e-mail company D sent to 
Applicant on June 21, 2018, reflecting those actions, Applicant failed to submit any 
documents, including correspondence, engagement agreements, reports, checks, or 
receipts, to confirm his contentions, the dates of those relationships, or final credit 
reporting agency actions. When he spoke to the OPM investigator in April 2017, Applicant 
noted that in addition to the delinquent accounts that he previously summarily mentioned 
in his e-QIP, there were two federal income tax issues for the tax years 2013 and 2014. 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in July 2016, he reported a number of 
delinquent accounts, and reported that he was working with company’s C and D. He also 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: Item 3 (e-QIP, dated July 13, 2016); Item 4 (Answers to Interrogatories, dated 
February 7, 2018); Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 7, 2017); Item 4 (Personal Subject 
Interview, dated April 4, 2017); Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated 
July 27, 2016); and Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated November 1, 2017).  
 
4 
                                      
 
contended that his financial issues started in December 2011, despite clear evidence in 
his credit reports that several of his delinquent accounts were charged off in 2010, with 
one account charged off in 2006. When the investigator questioned Applicant regarding 
various delinquent accounts, Applicant openly discussed some of them and the reasons 
why he had fallen behind in making payments, and he claimed to have no knowledge of 
other accounts. He indicated that he would look into some of the accounts and seek 
repayment arrangements.2  
In addition to Applicant’s failure to timely pay his federal income taxes for the tax 
years 2013 and 2014, the SOR identified 13 purportedly delinquent accounts that had 
been placed for collection, charged-off, or past due, as reflected by Applicant’s 2016 or 
2017 credit reports. Those debts, totaling approximately $163,181, are described below: 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is an automobile loan with a past-due and unpaid balance of 
$8,103 that was charged off.3 Applicant claimed his ex-wife was ordered to pay the 
balance, but she failed to do so. Applicant disputed the account with the credit-reporting 
agency seeking to have the account deleted from his credit report. Nevertheless, in his 
response to the SOR, Applicant stated he would make monthly payments of $10 or more 
to resolve the account.  Despite his claim regarding legal responsibility for the account, 
and his promise to make payments, Applicant submitted no documents, such as the court 
order, cancelled checks, receipts, etc., to support his claims. The account has not been 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a personal bank loan with a balance of $7,925 that was 
charged off in April 2006.4 Applicant claimed that he had reached out to the collection 
agent to establish repayment options, but they were not acceptable to the collection 
agent. He was advised to contact the creditor. Applicant disputed the account with the 
credit-reporting agency seeking to have the account deleted from his credit report. 
Applicant submitted no documents to support any resolution efforts or to reflect any 
payments by him. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is an installment sales contract with a balance of $1,696 that 
was charged off in February 2016.5 Applicant claimed that the account was unknown to 
him. He disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have the 
account deleted from his credit report. The account has not been resolved. 
                                                          
2 It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts 
in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting 
in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
3 Item 5, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
4 Item 6, supra note 1, at 6; Item 5, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
5 Item 6, supra note 1, at 7; Item 5, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a bank-issued credit card with a balance of $954 that was 
charged off.6 Applicant contended that he paid the account in full, but he failed to submit 
any documents, such as canceled checks, bank registers, or receipts, to support his 
contention. He also disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have 
the account deleted from his credit report. In the absence of documentation reflecting 
otherwise, I must conclude that the account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): This is a bank-issued credit card with a balance of $73 that was 
charged off.7 Applicant contended that he paid the account in full, but he failed to submit 
any documents, such as canceled checks, bank registers, or receipts, to support his 
contention. He also disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have 
the account deleted from his credit report. In the absence of documentation reflecting 
otherwise, I must conclude that the account has not been resolved. 
 (SOR ¶ 1.f.): This is a credit union account reported by the credit reporting agency 
as an automobile loan, but claimed by Applicant to be a credit card, with a balance of 
$11,987 that was charged off in May 2010.8 Applicant claimed his ex-wife was ordered to 
pay one-half of the balance, but she failed to do so. He stated that he contacted the 
creditor to work out a resolution. He also disputed the account with the credit-reporting 
agency seeking to have the account deleted from his credit report. Despite his claim 
regarding legal responsibility for the account, and his professed efforts to resolve the 
account, Applicant submitted no documents, such as the court order, cancelled checks, 
receipts, etc., to support his claims. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): This is a credit union-issued credit card claimed by Applicant to be 
the same credit card as the account in SOR ¶ 1.f., with a balance of $10,922 that was 
charged off in August 2010.9 Applicant claimed the account was listed in his credit report 
by error. He disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have the 
account deleted from his credit report. Despite his claim regarding legal responsibility for 
the account, or that the account was a duplicate of the other credit union account, 
Applicant submitted no documents to support his claims. The account has not been 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): This is a credit union automobile loan with a balance of $4,990 that 
was charged off in December 2010.10 Applicant contended that he had an automobile 
accident in 2011, and that he had Guaranteed Auto Protection (GAP) insurance,11 but 
                                                          
6 Item 5, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
7 Item 5, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
8 Item 6, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
9 Item 6, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
10 Item 6, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
11 GAP insurance is the difference between the actual cash value of a vehicle and the balance still 
owed on the financing. 
 
6 
                                      
 
that the lender disputed the coverage. He disputed the account with the credit-reporting 
agency seeking to have the account deleted from his credit report. Nevertheless, in his 
response to the SOR, Applicant stated he was seeking to enter into negotiations with the 
creditor to arrive at a settlement. Applicant submitted no documents, such as his loan 
papers with references to GAP coverage, letters, a repayment agreement, cancelled 
checks, receipts, etc., to support his claims. In the absence of documentation reflecting 
otherwise, I must conclude that the account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): This is an unspecified type of credit union account with a past-due 
and unpaid balance of $2,619.12 Applicant claimed that the account was unknown to him. 
He disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have the account 
deleted from his credit report. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.j.): This is a charge account with a balance of $2,774 that was charged 
off in May 2010.13 Applicant claimed he used the card for an unexpected expense in 2011. 
He also contended that he entered into an installment agreement on an unspecified date, 
and that he was making payments of $133.79, without mentioning the frequency of such 
payments. Applicant submitted no documents, such as an installment agreement, letters, 
cancelled checks, receipts, etc., to support his claims. In the absence of documentation 
reflecting otherwise, I must conclude that the account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.): This is a home mortgage loan – obtained in 2005 – with a balance 
of $193,349, of which $107,573 was past due.14 Applicant claimed he has been in various 
discussions with the lender for several years in an effort to obtain either a loan 
modification or a repayment plan, and that the lender has refused to accept any payments 
until such time as either a loan modification or a repayment plan is accepted. The lender 
addressed Applicant’s concerns for relief under the Civil Relief Act (SCRA) in March 2012; 
September 2013; October 2015; November 2015; December 2015; and January 2016, 
but he was repeatedly informed that his mortgage loan was not eligible for service 
member interest rate and fee benefits under SCRA because his loan originated while he 
was on active duty.15 Unhappy with the results of his efforts, Applicant filed a complaint 
with the U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in early 2018. Applicant also 
indicated that he had listed the residence – in which he still resides – for rent. Other than 
the one 2018 letter from the lender, Applicant submitted no other documents, such as 
loan modification applications, SCRA applications, letters, or escrow deposits, etc., to 
support his loan modification efforts, his relationship with a realtor, or his plans to repay 
the past-due amount. The account has not been resolved. 
                                                          
 
12 Item 6, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
13 Item 6, supra note 1, at 8. 
 
14 Item 6, supra note 1, at 8. 
 
15 Item 2 (Letter, dated March 7, 2018, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR). 
 
7 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.l.): This is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $460.16 
Applicant claimed his ex-wife was ordered to pay the balance, but she failed to do so. 
Applicant disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have the 
account deleted from his credit report. Nevertheless, in his response to the SOR, 
Applicant stated he would be willing to negotiate payment options to resolve the account.  
Despite his claim regarding legal responsibility for the account, and his promise to make 
payments, Applicant submitted no documents, such as the court order, cancelled checks, 
receipts, etc., to support his claims. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.m.): This is a medical account with an unpaid balance of $155.17 
Applicant claimed that the account was unknown to him, and indicated that it may be 
related to one of the other listed accounts, but he did not explain why or to which account. 
He disputed the account with the credit-reporting agency seeking to have the account 
deleted from his credit report. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.n. and 1.o.): These are federal income taxes owed to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) in the amounts of $1,135 (for the tax year 2014) and $1,815 (for 
the tax year 2015). With respect to the 2014 income taxes, Applicant established an 
installment agreement in March 2016, but that agreement terminated in January 2017. It 
was reestablished in February 2017, only after a notice of intent to levy was issued. The 
agreement lapsed in December 2017. During 2015-17, Applicant was credited with some 
minor payments, as well as the attachment of a refund from his 2016 income taxes. A 
levy was issued on January 8, 2018. As of January 22, 2018, Applicant had an unpaid 
balance of $1,135.57.18 Applicant stated that the balance would be resolved when he 
receives his refund for the 2017 federal income tax return. On April 15, 2018, $1,168.39 
from that refund was transferred to his 2014 balance.19 The account has been resolved. 
With respect to the 2015 income taxes, Applicant established an installment 
agreement in May 2016, but that agreement terminated in January 2017. It was 
reestablished in February 2017, only after a notice of intent to levy was issued. The 
agreement lapsed in December 2017. During 2016-17, Applicant was credited with some 
minor payments. A levy was issued on January 8, 2018. As of January 15, 2018, Applicant 
had an unpaid balance of $1,815.93.20 Applicant stated that the balance would be 
resolved when he receives his refund for the 2017 federal income tax return. On April 15, 
                                                          
16 Item 6, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
17 Item 6, supra note 1, at 4. 
 
18 Item 4 (IRS Account Transcript (2014), dated January 22, 2018, attached to Applicant’s 
Responses to the Interrogatories). 
 
19 IRS Account Transcript (2017), dated June 22, 2018, submitted in response to the FORM. 
 
20 Item 4 (IRS Account Transcript (2015), dated January 22, 2018, attached to Applicant’s 
Responses to the Interrogatories). 
 
8 
                                      
 
2018, $1,879.50 from that refund was transferred to his 2015 balance.21 The account has 
been resolved. 
For his 2017 federal income tax return, Applicant claimed four exemptions with a 
filing status as married, but he was no longer married in 2017. He reported an adjusted 
gross income of $69,327, and a taxable income of $40,427.22 Although Applicant 
indicated that he is able to live within his means regarding current expenses, he is unable 
to address all of his delinquent debt. It is not known what Applicant’s current financial 
resources may be because he did not submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect 
his net monthly income; monthly expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be 
available for discretionary spending or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There 
is no evidence of any financial counseling other than to assist him in disputing most of his 
delinquent accounts to have them deleted from his credit report. Other than his own 
statement, Applicant offered no meaningful evidence to indicate that his financial situation 
is now under control.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
21 IRS Account Transcript (2017), supra note 19. 
 
22 IRS Account Transcript (2017), supra note 19. 
 
23 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
9 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”27  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
25 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
26 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income      
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
In addition to unpaid federal income taxes for the tax years 2014 and 2015, 
Applicant had 13 other delinquent debts, totaling approximately $163,181, placed for 
collection, charged-off, or past due. There is some evidence that Applicant was unwilling 
to satisfy his debt regardless of the ability to do so. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) 
have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;29 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;30  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is compliance with those arrangements.  
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties make it 
difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it is 
                                                          
29 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
30 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
“unlikely to recur.” Applicant generally attributed his financial difficulties to several 
separate factors: his two divorces were expensive with regard to attorney fees; child 
support for two children located in separate states; the failure of his home mortgage 
lender to defer his payments while he was deployed; and the failure of the home mortgage 
lender to reduce his home mortgage finance rate of 6.5 per cent. However, despite 
Applicant’s contention that his financial problems started in 2011 when the first divorce 
occurred, there is clear evidence in his credit reports that several of his delinquent 
accounts were charged off in 2010, with one account charged off as early as 2006.  
While Applicant claimed to have insufficient funds to maintain his accounts in a 
current status over the years, he failed to submit documentation related to a number of 
those factors. Briefly commenting on those factors is insufficient proof of same. Applicant 
seems to have made significant and costly efforts to dispute his accounts with the various 
credit reporting agencies in an effort to have those accounts – even one for $73 – deleted 
from his credit reports. There is little evidence to reflect good-faith efforts on his behalf to 
engage his creditors and collection agents; to negotiate repayment agreements; or to 
resolve his debts. Other than attempting to delete his accounts from his credit reports, 
with the exception of his federal income taxes, and his unsubstantiated claims of having 
made some payments to various creditors, evidence of positive good-faith efforts is 
missing. There is no evidence of meaningful financial counseling; no evidence of an 
overall repayment plan; and no evidence of a budget.  
With regard to the only two accounts for which there is evidence of resolution, the 
two federal income tax deficiencies, Applicant entered into several installment 
agreements, permitted them to lapse, seemingly without payments, and reestablished 
installment agreements only after notices of intent to levy were issued. Those two 
accounts were finally resolved when Applicant’s refunds from the tax year 2017 were 
applied to them.  
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. Applicant offered no meaningful evidence to indicate that his financial situation 
is now under control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.31 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
                                                          
31 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Seemingly ignoring debts with the anticipation 
that they will disappear from one’s credit report is not evidence of a good-faith effort to 
resolve those debts. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further confirmed 
action, are insufficient. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.32  
  
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 41-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving as an information assurance 
analyst (cybersecurity) with his current employer since May 2017. Applicant enlisted in 
the U.S. Army in May 1996, and he was honorably retired with the rank of sergeant first 
class (E-7) in May 2017. He was granted a secret clearance on an unspecified date. 
During his two decades in the U.S. Army, Applicant was deployed to Iraq on three 
occasions, and to Afghanistan on one occasion.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Although it is now mid-to-late 2018, Applicant failed to submit meaningful evidence 
(documentation) of a good-faith effort to resolve his debts – some of which were charged 
off in 2010 or before. During the entire period, Applicant was employed. He seemingly 
ignored most of his debts – even the one for $73 – choosing instead to dispute them, not 
resolve them. Because of his failure to submit documentation or information regarding his 
current finances, or his planned efforts to resolve his outstanding debts, his financial 
situation is unknown. Considering the lack of evidence regarding his current finances, I 
                                                          
32 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
am unable to reach a positive conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:33 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding nearly all of the debts in his name. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See SEAD 4, 
App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.o.:  Against Applicant 
   
 
  
                                                          
33 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
