 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02375 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tokay T. Hackett, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 1, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on June 8, 2018. 
    
 On September 29, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 1, 2017. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on April 13, 
2018. On June 7, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for 
September 10, 2018. The case was transferred to me on September 4, 2018. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits 
which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6.  Applicant testified, called 
one character witness, and offered 15 exhibits which were admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A - O. The record was held open until September 24, 2018, to allow the 
Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely submitted three documents which 
were admitted as AE P, Q, and R. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 19, 
 
2 
 
 
2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.     
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since July 2018. He has worked for 
various DOD contractors since 1995. He has held a security clearance since 1995. He 
has had one period of unemployment between October 2013 and January 2014. He has 
a college degree. He is engaged. He and his fiancée have a four-year-old daughter. He 
has a six-year-old daughter from a previous relationship.  His older daughter lives with 
her mother in another state. (Tr. 40 - 43; Gov 1)   
 
On February 4, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as 
part of a periodic reinvestigation. In Section 26 – Financial Record of the application, he 
disclosed delinquent child support and an automobile repossession. (Gov 1, section 26) 
 
A subsequent security clearance background investigation resulted in the  
following SOR allegations: a Chapter 13 bankruptcy that was filed in May 2015 and 
dismissed in June 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 3 at 3; Gov 5); a delinquent student loan with 
an approximate balance of $28,008 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 
2); delinquent child support with an approximate balance of $14,846 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 
at 2; Gov 4 at 3); a $6,347 account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 3 at 2); a 
$247 cable-television account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 6); 
a $200 delinquent medical account (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 3 at 2); a $196 delinquent utility 
account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 6); and a $2,065 
judgment entered against Applicant for a broken apartment lease (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 4 at 
2). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include:  a charged-off debt for $8,076 owed as a 
result of an automobile repossession (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 4 at 3); a $1,162 account placed 
for collection related to the purchase of a television (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 4 at 3); an account 
that was charged off, but no amount is listed (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 4 at 3); a $3,128 account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 4 at 6); and a $105 traffic express-lane account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 4 at 6).   
 
Applicant states that his financial problems started in October 2011, when he 
was displaced from the house he was renting.  The sheriff’s office notified Applicant that 
the house was no longer owned by the landlord and that he and his roommates had 24 
hours to vacate the property. He was not financially prepared to move. In addition, he 
has incurred a substantial amount of legal fees regarding custody and child support of 
his oldest daughter. (AE A) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
A summary of the SOR allegations is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: Applicant’s May 2015 Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. Applicant had 
approximately $10,495 in total assets and approximately $78,689 in total liabilities. 
Applicant was to pay $405 monthly under the Chapter 13 payment plan.  During the first 
year of the payment plan, his employer changed his pay cycle from bi-monthly to 30 
days after invoice. Applicant claims he notified his bankruptcy attorney of the change.  
He decided to mail checks directly to the bankruptcy court. In June 2016, the Chapter 
13 bankruptcy was dismissed and the checks were returned to Applicant. He claims he 
was not provided a full explanation as to why the bankruptcy was dismissed. The cause 
was a material default by Applicant to make timely payments in accordance with the 
plan.  (Tr. 43-46, 67; AE A; Gov 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $28,008 delinquent student loan. Applicant claims he has a payment 
plan in effect and the account is in good standing. He did not provide additional 
documentation regarding his student loans after the hearing. (Tr. 47; AE A)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $14,846 in delinquent child support. Applicant admits that he owes 
child support. He claims he is in a repayment agreement and is making consistent 
payments. He currently pays around $1,400 a month.  He claims the delinquency 
accrued because of nonpayment while he had custody of his daughter; a lapse of 
employment because of the federal government sequester in 2012 or 2013; and the 
current amount of child support is based on salary that is significantly more than what 
he is currently earning. As of September 7, 2018, the current balance of delinquent child 
support is approximately $32,292.79. (Tr. 48 – 50 -AE A)  
 
Under cross examination, Applicant admitted that he had not made consistent 
child-support payments from September 2017 to September 2018.  He claims he is in 
the process of attempting to modify his child-support payments because he cannot 
afford them. His oldest child moved with her mother out of state and he has not been 
able to locate them in over two years. In January 2015, Applicant’s driver’s license was 
suspended for failure to pay child support. He appeared in court to clear up the matter. 
(Tr. 50-52; AE A; Gov 6)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $6,347 charged-off automobile account:  Applicant purchased a car 
in 2009. He could not afford the car and the car was repossessed in 2011. The car was 
sold and Applicant owes the amount of the deficiency. Applicant is not sure who the 
current owner of the debt is and whether the amount owed is accurate.  (Tr. 55-56; AE 
A; Gov 4 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $247 cable-television account placed for collection. Applicant claims 
he was unable to pay this bill because of the furlough in 2012 – 2013. The bill is 
included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Tr. 52-53; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  $200 delinquent medical account. Applicant does not recognize this 
debt. The creditor is not listed.  (Tr. 53; AE A)  
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $196 utility account that was placed for collection. Applicant initially 
denied this debt because he claimed it was paid.  During the hearing, Applicant testified 
that this is one of the debts incurred when he vacated the apartment because he was 
unable to afford the rent due to the furlough. (Tr. 54; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: $2,065 judgment filed in 2013 related to a broken lease.  Applicant 
initially claimed that he was not sure whether he owes this debt. During the hearing, he 
testified this is a debt related to broken lease of the apartment he vacated because of 
the furlough. (Tr. 55; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i:  $8,076 charged-off debt related to a car loan.  Applicant claims this 
debt is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Comparing the credit report entries 
of the two accounts, it appears that this debt is likely a duplicate of the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i. As a result, this allegation is found for Applicant. (Tr. 56; AE A; Gov 3 at 2; 
Gov 4 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j:  $1,162 store account placed for collection. Applicant purchased a 
television for an ex-girlfriend. His ex-girlfriend still has the property and refuses to pay 
for it. The debt is now included in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Tr. 57-58; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: Charged-off account. Applicant neither admits nor denies this 
account. He is unable to identify the creditor. (Tr. 58; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l:  $3,128 collection account related to vacating an apartment lease 
early.  Applicant claims this is the same debt as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Based 
on the evidence in the record, I cannot conclude this allegation is a duplicate of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.  It is now included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  (Tr. 58-59; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m:  $105 debt related to fines for using highway express lanes without 
paying a toll.  Applicant admits this debt.  He claimed it was paid. His driver’s license 
was about to be suspended for failure to pay his fines. After the hearing, Applicant 
provided documentation indicating that he received several fines for traffic violations in 
January 2017 and December 2017. The total amount of fines and court costs is 
$1,508.85. The paperwork indicates Applicant entered into a payment plan on July 26, 
2018, but there is no indication or proof that payments are being made and whether it 
was paid off in full. (Tr. 59, 77-78; AE A; AE Q) The additional traffic fines Applicant 
presented after the hearing are not alleged in the SOR.  They will not be considered as 
a matter under disqualification, but will be considered when considering mitigation and 
the whole-person factors.  
 
On July 4, 2018, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  He anticipates his 
debts will be discharged in October 2018. (AE P)  His student loans as well his child 
support are not dischargeable under the U.S. bankruptcy code. Applicant did not 
provide a complete copy of his Chapter 7 bankruptcy paperwork. (Tr. 60, 70, 73; AE J; 
AE P)    
 
 
5 
 
 
After the bankruptcy, Applicant believes he and his girlfriend will be able to 
maintain expenses. His monthly income is $6,000. His fiancée just got a new job and 
her monthly income will be $4,400. Their total monthly income will be $10,400.  Their 
total monthly expenses are $9,325.  After the expenses are paid, Applicant will have 
$1,075 in discretionary funds each month. They are moving to an apartment where the 
rent will be reduced from the $2,000 monthly that they currently pay to $1,000 monthly. 
(AE R) 
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
Mr. W. testified telephonically during Applicant’s hearing. He has held a Top 
Secret/SCI since 1995. He first met Applicant in 2010 when they worked together for the 
the same contractor. He was Applicant’s direct lead. He was not a supervisor. He had 
daily contact with the Applicant. He describes Applicant’s duty performance as 
exemplary.  He would rate his work ethic as nine on a scale of one to ten. He and 
Applicant also worked together for another contractor. He states Applicant is always 
aware of recent developments in the cyber security industry. He is aware of Applicant’s 
financial issues, but finds that he is trustworthy. Mr. W. would work with Applicant again 
and believes Applicant would put the U.S. first in any situation. (Tr. 28 – 35)  
 
Several of Applicant’s friends and co-workers submitted written statements on his 
behalf indicating that Applicant is trustworthy and reliable. (AE C-I, P)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant encountered financial problems for several years. His financial 
problems were aggravated when he was laid off during the federal government furlough 
in 2012.  In addition to several broken leases and delinquent consumer debt, Applicant 
has had difficulty keeping up with his child-support payments and his student loans.  
The total approximate amount of the debts alleged in the SOR is $64,380. Of that 
amount, $14,846 was for delinquent child support and $28,008 was for delinquent 
student loans. AG ¶¶ 19(a), and 19(c) apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. 
While Applicant attempted a Chapter 13 bankruptcy and recently filed bankruptcy under 
Chapter 7, he still has delinquent child support and his delinquent student loans which 
are not dischargeable in bankruptcy. Although Applicant testified that he is attempting to 
modify his child support, his current history of paying child support has been 
inconsistent. He also provided no proof that he had entered into a payment agreement 
and is making timely and consistent payments towards his student loans. Applicant’s 
history of financial problems raises questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because Applicant’s financial situation was adversely 
affected by a four-month period of unemployment beginning in October 2013 and 
ending in January 2014 as a result of a federal government furlough. This was beyond 
Applicant’s control. However, this mitigating condition is given less weight because I 
cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances after the 
furlough, because he ignored all of the delinquent debts that were incurred during that 
period. He earned sufficient income to agree to some minimal payment plans with his 
creditors. He chose to ignore them. In addition, Applicant’s delinquent child support has 
more than doubled from $14,846 alleged in the SOR to approximately $32,292. I cannot 
conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances.    
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. While Applicant is required to take a financial 
couseling course in conjunction with his bankruptcy, he has not taken a thorough 
financial counseling course from a recognized institution.  I am not convinced that 
Applicant has a plan in place to manage his finances in the future once his debts are 
discharged in bankruptcy. After bankruptcy, significant child support and student loan 
debt will remain.  
 
 AG & 20(d) does not apply. While bankruptcy is a legal means of resolving one’s 
debts, it is not a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors and resolve one’s debts.   
Applicant testified to actions he is attempting to do in the future, such as requesting that 
his child support be modified and entering into a repayment plan for his student loans. 
However, he presented no evidence of any steps taken towards resolving his child 
support issue and student loan debt.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s successful 
career with federal contractors since 1995. I considered the favorable references of his 
friends and co-workers.   
 
 I considered Applicant’s period of unemployment for several months in late 2013 
to 2014 adversely affected the household finances. However, Applicant earns a good 
income. The amount of delinquent debt alleged in the SOR was manageable. If 
Applicant had followed through with financial counseling, he would have likely learned 
how to manage a budget.  He neglected to pay any of his delinquent debts over a long 
period of time. In 2015, he filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13, but it was ultimately 
dismissed for failure to make timely payments towards the plan. In July 2018, he filed 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7.  His debts will be discharged in October 2018. It is too 
soon to conclude that Applicant is now on a successful path towards financial 
rehabilitation. Most concerning is Applicant’s delinquent child support which has more 
than doubled since the SOR was issued.  While Applicant states he is attempting to 
modify his child support, it does not explain his missed child-support payments. 
Applicant also has unresolved delinquent student loans, which will not be discharged in 
his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Security concerns under financial considerations are not 
mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h, 1.j – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.i:      For Applicant 
     
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
