 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-00485 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for National Security Eligibility ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquencies on his second mortgage loan, two consumer 
debts, and Federal income taxes due to circumstances that were temporarily beyond his 
control. He took responsible action to improve those circumstances, is financially stable, 
and has resolved all formerly delinquent debts. Resulting security concerns were 
mitigated. Based upon evaluation of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national 
security eligibility is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 21, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 13, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 31, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on June 22, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on July 11, 2017, setting the hearing for July 28, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. 
Applicant testified, and offered Exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence. All exhibits 
were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open 
until August 28, 2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 8, 2017. Applicant submitted no additional evidence, 
and the record closed as scheduled.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006.1 Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has been employed as an aircraft mechanic by a Federal contractor 
and its successor contractor since February 2016. He is applying for national security 
eligibility to perform sensitive duties in connection with that work. The SOR contained 
five allegations concerning Applicant’s formerly delinquent debts. Applicant denied all of 
the allegations, with explanations of his efforts to resolve each of the issues. (GE 1; 
Answer.)   
 
 Applicant is 63 years old, has never married, and has no children. He enlisted in 
the Navy in 1974 after graduating from high school, and honorably retired in 1995 as an 
Aviation Machinist Mate First Class. He then attended a technical college, from which 
he graduated in July 1997. He successfully held a security clearance during his naval 
service, but this is his first post-retirement application for national security eligibility. (GE 
1; GE 5; Tr. 11-13, 43.)  
 
 Applicant incurred intermittent periods of underemployment and unemployment 
over the past ten years. He attributed his former, temporary, financial problems to his 
reduced income during some of those periods when he had to rely more heavily on his 
                                            
1 This was designated an ADP case by the DoD CAF because Applicant’s employer is sponsoring him to 
obtain national security eligibility to occupy a designated national security sensitive position, even though 
he does not work in data processing or with personal identifying, financial, or medical information. See 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) II.  
 
 
 
 
3 
Navy retirement pay of about $1,500 per month. His current job pays about $60,000 per 
year, and he has about $2,000 per month in surplus income after meeting all living 
expenses and debt obligations. He underwent financial counseling with the law firm that 
helped him resolve his second-mortgage delinquency, and is making regular 
contributions into his retirement savings plan. He has no delinquent debts, and his 
financial situation is stable. (GE 1; AE C; Tr. 42-49.) 
 
 Applicant fell behind on payments toward his second mortgage loan during early 
2013, due to a business downturn that reduced his hours and pay at the job in which he 
was then working. The credit bureau reports, upon which the SOR ¶ 1.a allegation was 
based, cited information reported to them on the status of this loan during March 2014 
by the creditor then holding the loan. These 2014 entries showed a past-due amount of 
$3,787 and a total outstanding balance of $20,758. Applicant consulted and hired a 
consumer debt advocacy law firm to assist him in resolving this delinquency in 2015. He 
and the firm successfully negotiated a loan modification with the current creditor in 
September 2015. Applicant made the initial $1,000 payment called for by the new terms 
on October 1, 2015, and began making the $228 monthly modified loan payments on 
November 1, 2015. He has timely made all subsequent monthly payments toward this 
mortgage loan. (Answer; GE 4; AE A; AE C; Tr. 45, 47-52.)  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c involved a $3,160 utility bill and a $400 
credit card account that became delinquent around the same time and for the same 
reasons as Applicant’s second mortgage loan discussed above. Applicant paid both of 
these debts in full during early 2017, after obtaining his current employment and 
stabilizing his financial situation. (Answer; GE 4; AE D; Tr. 52-55.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleged an old charged-off $12,452 debt to a major bank. The account 
reportedly had a past-due balance of $2,792 and a last-activity date of August 2009, 
when it was last updated by Equifax in February 2016. Applicant contacted the bank 
about this entry and asked for verification of the debt since he had no recollection or 
idea concerning it having been his account. After taking his information and informing 
him that the debt could not be quickly identified, the bank representatives never 
contacted him again and the debt was removed from the two more recent Equifax credit 
reports in the record. On this basis I find that there is not substantial evidence 
establishing that this debt, which Applicant denied, was his obligation. I further find that, 
to the extent there is evidence supporting such an allegation, Applicant successfully 
disputed the debt. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; AE D; Tr. 64-76.) 
 
 Applicant reported on his e-QIP that he owed about $6,000 in unpaid Federal 
income taxes since 2012, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He had experienced under-
withholding during the 2010 and 2011 tax years, partially as a result of the higher tax 
rates on the combined incomes from his job and his military retirement. This also 
occurred around the time he was suffering the other budget issues discussed above, so 
he could not immediately pay the additional taxes due. He filed all of his tax returns on 
time, and has paid his taxes for all prior and subsequent years on time as well. In 2015, 
he entered into a repayment agreement with the IRS, and has timely made every $200 
 
 
 
 
4 
monthly payment under it. At the time of his hearing, he had reduced the outstanding 
balance to $2,316. (Answer; AE B; Tr. 55-64.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant encountered financial difficulties during the years before obtaining his 
current employment, primarily caused by intermittent periods of underemployment or 
unemployment. Between 2010 and 2013, he fell behind on his second mortgage loan, 
two consumer debts, and his Federal income tax payments for 2010 and 2011. These 
facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift 
the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
6 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s relatively short period of financial troubles arose from employment 
circumstances that were temporarily beyond his control, but subsequently resolved by 
obtaining his current job. He obtained professional credit counseling, has reestablished 
financial solvency, and has fully repaid or complied with repayment agreements 
concerning all of his former mortgage, consumer, and tax delinquencies. He 
demonstrated both the means and the intention to successfully continue this pattern of 
financial responsibility. These actions establish mitigation of security concerns raised by 
his acknowledged formerly delinquent debts under AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c), (d), and (g). 
 
The evidence is insufficient to establish that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d 
belonged to Applicant. He denied that it was his, and contacted the bank that formerly 
reported it to request verification. The debt has since been removed from all of his credit 
reports, and repayment is not being sought, removing any potential for pressure, 
coercion or duress as a result. Any security concerns that may have arisen from this 
alleged debt were mitigated under AG ¶ 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
 
 
7 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who has demonstrated accountability for resolving the debts he was formerly unable to 
repay. He has now resolved his formerly delinquent debt through payment in full or 
compliance with ongoing, affordable repayment agreements. He demonstrated strong 
character and has devoted most of his adult life to successful support of national 
security objectives. Applicant provided persuasive evidence of rehabilitation and 
sufficient income stability to ensure solvency in the future. The potential for pressure, 
exploitation, or duress is minimal. Overall, the evidence has eliminated the formerly 
legitimate doubt as to Applicant’s national security eligibility. He successfully met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant national 
security eligibility. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
