 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02927 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s longstanding U.S. ties mitigate security concerns raised by his familial 
relations in Russia. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 7, 2015. On 
September 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. Applicant answered the SOR on 
October 16, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
I was assigned to the case on April 16, 2018. On May 31, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
June 14, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified, and I agreed to hold the record open until July 14, 2018, in the event 
either party wanted to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted two documents 
post-hearing (AE C and D), which I admitted without objection. I received the completed 
transcript (Tr.) on June 25, 2018. 
 
 
 
 
2 
    Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing, Applicant requested a continuance for his hearing. He explained 
that his wife is currently in the process of obtaining her United States citizenship, but as 
of this date, she had not yet received it. Applicant requested to continue his security 
clearance hearing until his wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen. Government 
Department Counsel objected to the continuance noting that Applicant’s case has been 
pending for an extended period of time. I agreed with Department Counsel that the 
hearing should proceed since Applicant did not demonstrate good cause to continue his 
hearing. (Tr. 8-10) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 I took administrative notice of facts concerning Russia. Those facts are set forth in 
the Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Russia, marked as GE 3. These 
documents are included in the record. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate 
type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice 
at security clearance proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). The facts administratively 
noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable 
dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. (Tr. 14-15; GE 3) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted both of the SOR allegations. Applicant, age 
30, was born and raised in the United States. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2012, and he received certifications in aerospace project management and systems 
engineering from his current DOD employer. Applicant is an aircraft structural engineer 
and has been employed by his DOD employer since March 2013. Applicant does not 
currently possess a DOD security clearance. (Tr. 20-21, 30, 32,   GE 1,  
 
Applicant met his wife during the summer of 2009 while they were both working as 
lifeguards. She had recently graduated from college in Russia with a bachelor’s degree 
in bank administration. At the end of summer 2009, Applicant’s girlfriend returned to 
Russia. They agreed to maintain a long-distance relationship and kept in touch through 
e-mail and Skype. Applicant visited his girlfriend in Russia from late December 2009 to 
early January 2010. Shortly thereafter, Applicant discovered she was pregnant. In July 
2010, he visited his girlfriend in Russia for a couple of weeks. Their son was born in 
Russia in October 2010. Applicant visited Russia again from December 2010 to January 
2011. Applicant sponsored his fiancé to come to the U.S. In May 2011, Applicant’s fiancé 
and son moved permanently to the United States. Applicant and his fiancé were married 
in August 2011 in the United States. (Tr. 22-23, 25-27, 29-30, 32; GE 1, 2) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant’s wife is 31 years old, she was born and raised in Russia, and she is 
currently living in the United States with Applicant and their son, age 8. Their son is a 
citizen of the U.S. At the time of the hearing, she had Russian citizenship and possessed 
a valid Russian passport that was scheduled to expire in April 2019. Post-hearing 
documentation, however, disclosed Applicant’s wife was scheduled to appear for a U.S. 
Naturalization Oath ceremony in August 2018. (AE D) Applicant and his wife have lived 
together in the United States since 2011. She is employed as a newborn photographer. 
Applicant and his spouse do not have any financial interests in Russia, and his wife does 
not expect any foreign inheritance interests in the future. (Tr. 26-27, 31, 42, 45; GE 1) 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Russia. Applicant stated 
he is not particularly close to his parents-in-law due to the language barrier. He speaks 
to them on rare occasions, but his wife maintains monthly contact with them. Applicant 
testified that once his wife obtains her U.S. citizenship, it is her intention to renounce her 
Russian citizenship and sponsor her parents for immigration to the U.S. Her parents have 
visited and stayed at their home in 2016 for about three weeks, and then during the 
summer months of 2017 and 2018, to babysit their grandson. Applicant’s parents-in-law 
want to move to the U.S. and become naturalized U.S. citizens. They want to live close 
to their only child and grandson. (Tr. 17, 27, 35-36, 39-41, 43) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, age 58, and father-in-law, age 55, own a clothing store 
in Russia. Business in their city has been very slow and they closed their store this 
summer due to low sales. They live in a condominium in Russia. Neither have any known 
connection to the Russian government, military, or its intelligence services. (Tr. 33-36, 
40-41, 46) 
 
Applicant has taken security training taught by Federal Bureau of Investigations 
(FBI) agents for security risks and corporate espionage. He was provided a direct phone 
number to call if he is ever approached by anyone asking him to disclose proprietary or 
classified information. Applicant would immediately report any such incident to the FBI. 
(Tr. 44) 
 
Administrative Notice – The Russian Federation (Russia)1 
 
 Russia has a highly centralized, authoritarian political system dominated by 
President Vladimir Putin. Although the United States has long sought a full and 
constructive relationship with Russia, current relations between the two cold war enemies 
appears to have again turned adversarial. Of note, in May 2017, the Director of National 
Intelligence (DNI) reported to Congress that: 
 
Russia is a full-scope cyber actor that will remain a major threat to U.S. 
Government, military, diplomatic, commercial, and critical infrastructure. 
Moscow has a highly advanced offensive cyber program, and in recent 
years, the Kremlin has assumed a more aggressive cyber posture. This 
                                            
1 The information herein on Russia is generally taken from GE 3. 
 
 
 
 
4 
aggressiveness was evidence in Russia’s efforts to influence the 2016 U.S. 
election, and we assess that only Russia's senior-most officials could have 
authorized the 2016 US election-focused data thefts and disclosures, based 
on the scope and sensitivity of the targets. Outside the United States, 
Russian actors have conducted damaging and disruptive cyber attacks, 
including on critical infrastructure networks. In some cases, Russian 
intelligence actors have masqueraded as third parties, hiding behind false 
online personas designed to cause the victim to misattribute the source of 
the attack. Russia has also leveraged cyberspace to seek to influence 
public opinion across Europe and Eurasia. We assess that Russian cyber 
operations will continue to target the United States and its allies to gather 
intelligence, support Russian decision making, conduct influence 
operations to support Russian military and political objectives, and prepare 
the cyber environment for future contingencies.2 
 
 The DNI went on to state that leading state intelligence threats to U.S. interests 
will continue to come from two main countries, one of which is Russia.3 And, that “Russia 
is likely to be more assertive in global affairs, more unpredictable in its approach to the 
United States, and more authoritarian in its approach to domestic politics.”4 A recent U.S. 
State Department human rights report on Russia reflects the commission of significant 
human rights abuses. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2, describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
                                            
2 GE 3, 2017 Worldwide Threat Assessment at 1. 
 
3 GE 3, Item 1 at 9, Counterintelligence. 
 
4 GE 3, Item 1 at 18, Russia. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
    
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
 
 
 
 
6 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a close relationship with an individual 
living under a foreign government. The mere possession of a close relationship with an 
individual in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. 
If an applicant has such a relationship, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential 
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information.5  
 
As noted, a heightened risk is associated with the Russian government given its 
persistent espionage and cyberattacks against the United States, and human-rights 
problems. Here, Applicant’s relationship to his wife’s family in Russia is far deeper and 
more than casual, as previously reported. His parents-in-law have lived in his home the 
past two summers babysitting his young son while Applicant and his wife work. 
Applicant’s wife and her parents maintain frequent and regular contact. After considering 
                                            
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
7 
and weighing the evidence, I find that Applicant did not rebut the legal presumption of 
close familial bonds or ties to his wife’s parents. The relationship with his wife and his 
parents-in-law leave him vulnerable to foreign influence, and creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation and coercion and the potential risk for a conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(b) are established. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
The guideline includes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns under AG 
¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
An applicant with relatives, financial interests or other substantial 
connections to a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle, in 
mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted 
access to classified information.”6 However, what factor or combination of factors 
may mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant with relatives in a foreign 
country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.7 Moreover, an applicant with 
familial or other connections to a hostile foreign country faces a heavy burden in 
mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties.8 
 
Applicant’s strong and longstanding ties to the United States, including his 
work as a federal contractor, raises favorable inferences regarding his suitability. 
                                            
6 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
 
 
 
8 
Additionally, there is no evidence that Russia or other foreign power has tried to 
use his wife’s family in Russia as a means to influence him. The government has 
no burden of showing that Russian officials have attempted to exploit Applicant; 
however, if such evidence existed, it would cause grave security concerns about 
foreign influence. His wife’s recent oath of allegiance to the United States and their 
son’s U.S. citizenship demonstrate his and his immediate family’s deep 
connections to the U.S. Applicant’s security training, honesty in self-reporting his 
foreign connections, and the candor he exhibited at hearing are sufficient to fully 
mitigate the security concerns raised by Applicant’s familial connections to Russia. 
Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest with respect to Russia 
in favor of the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person and the heightened risk associated with Russia, Applicant 
has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns at issue.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
                                        
         
     
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
