 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04330 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 12, 2016. 
On January 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on March 23, 2018. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM and submitted a response, marked as 
Applicant exhibit (AE) A. The Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 to 10, and AE A are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on September 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old engineering consultant, sponsored for a security 
clearance by a defense contractor. He was previously employed as a security officer, 
senior software engineer, and a test engineer. He was fired from a job with a defense 
contractor in 2015 for using a corporate credit card while not on travel, a violation of 
company policy. He is unmarried and has two children. Applicant served on active duty 
in the U.S. Air Force from 1995 to 2004 and was honorably discharged. He has attended 
college but has not attained a degree. He previously held DOD security clearances. 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling over $22,000, and that Applicant 
was terminated from a job for misuse of a corporate credit card. The debts include 
defaulted student loans, credit card and credit union debts, an apartment collection, 
various consumer and utility debts, and unpaid child support. Applicant admitted all of the 
SOR allegations except for a utility debt, and provided explanations and supporting 
documents with his Answer. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a vehicle car loan that was charged-off in 2015. Applicant claimed 
that he was unable to pay it due to his child-support requirements. In April 2017, Applicant 
contacted the lender and arranged for a payment plan. He has been making automatic 
payments since then, paying off over $5,000, and provided evidence of the agreement to 
continue payments of $100 per month to repay the debt. This account is being resolved. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f are delinquent credit card accounts that have been charged 
off for about $4,728. Applicant stated in his Answer that he thought the accounts were 
paid, and he intended to contact the creditor and establish a payment plan. In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant provided two settlement offer letters from the creditor 
to permit installment payments over several months, ending in January 2019. No records 
of payments under these plans were provided. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e, 1.g, and 1.i are five collection accounts by the Department of 
Education for defaulted student loans, now totaling about $13,527. Applicant admitted his 
education loans are in default. He believed that they were deferred until he graduated 
from college, however, because he stopped attending school from 2014 to 2017. He failed 
to provide a current address to the Department of Education, so notifications of his default 
status did not reach him. In his Answer, Applicant provided a December 2017 letter 
showing a loan-rehabilitation agreement. It requires nine consecutive payments of $183 
 
3 
 
per month for nine months. He provided a document showing two payments in January 
2018 of $183 each, and two previous payments of $398 in November 2017, and $1,300 
in February 2017. Applicant did not explain the erratic payment history, nor did he provide 
an updated payment status in his response to the FORM. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h is debt for child-support arrears owed to a state child support services 
office. Applicant claimed he fell behind several times on child support due to 
unemployment and increased obligations, but the latest arrearage resulted in a delay in 
starting a new job in 2018. He provided documentation showing the state issued an 
income withholding order for monthly support payments to be withheld from Applicant’s 
pay. The monthly support amount of $1,391, beginning in April 2018, is now being 
automatically deducted from his pay. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j is a collection account owed to a cable utility. Applicant was unaware of 
the debt until he attempted to reinstate the utility in a new home. In his Answer, he 
provided evidence of payment in January 2018. This debt is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k is a collection account for an apartment rental debt. In 2016, Applicant 
paid a settlement on the account and it was closed. This debt is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l is a $140 debt owed to an electric utility in state A, after Applicant moved 
without paying the final bill. Applicant provided evidence of settling a utility debt in state 
B, but did not show resolution of the debt from the utility in state A.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.m alleges Applicant was terminated for misuse of a corporate credit card 
reserved for official travel expenses, but was used to pay about $800 in his girlfriend’s car 
and insurance expenses. Applicant admitted the incident and stated that he repaid the 
balance when he received the bill. He acknowledged that misusing the card was “a poor 
decision” that he regrets, but claimed he was in a “bad place” at the time. 
 
Many of the debts were incurred as a result of poor financial decisions, 
unemployment from January to October 2013, and adjustments in child-support 
requirements. Of note, despite being fired in 2015 and suffering financial difficulty, 
including for child support obligations, Applicant traveled on three international vacations 
in 2016. In April 2018, Applicant enlisted the aid of a credit-repair company and received 
credit counseling in May 2018. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
4 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing deceptive 
loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s unresolved debts, especially his student loans and child-support 
arrearage have been a recurring problem that have not been sufficiently addressed to 
show that the problem is unlikely to recur. Although Applicant alluded to unemployment 
in 2013 and child-support obligations, he has not shown sufficient documentation of good-
faith efforts to resolve his debts, regular progress toward their payments when a payment 
plan is established, and a stable financial status. Given Applicant’s discretionary spending 
on international travel in 2016, I have insufficient evidence of Applicant’s ability or 
willingness to satisfy his current financial obligations and pay the delinquent debts to 
which he is responsible. Therefore, I am unable to determine that his financial status is 
under control and that similar problems are unlikely to recur. 
 
Although Applicant has sought help with repairing his credit and received financial 
counseling, it was too late to overcome a history of delinquencies that have been largely 
unaddressed until his security clearance investigation raised financial issues. Applicant 
has not shown sufficient progress toward regular, recurring payments on student loan 
debts, to indicate that the debts are likely to be resolved. I have insufficient evidence of 
his current financial status and his ability to meet future financial obligations. Finally, the 
intentional misuse of a corporate travel credit card to pay for his girlfriend’s expenses 
reflects poor judgment and a deliberate failure to abide by rules and regulations. 
Applicant’s long-standing disregard for his delinquent debts and failure to follow corporate 
credit card rules directly impugns his judgment and raises significant doubts about his 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations in the future. No mitigating condition fully 
applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).2 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
                                                     
2 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age 
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence 
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s 
delinquencies remain an ongoing concern. He has not shown evidence of whole-person 
factors sufficient to overcome the financial concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security 
interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.g; 1.i, 1.l-1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
