 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01013 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed in part to 
his financial problems and that he has been acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. He resolved most of the financial concerns before the issuance of the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). He also mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 7, 2016, 
seeking to continue the clearance required for his position with a federal contractor. He 
was interviewed by a government background investigator on June 3, 2016. After 
reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued him an SOR on June 16, 2017, alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 13, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 13, 2018, and issued a notice of hearing 
on June 11, 2018, setting a video teleconference (VTC) hearing for June 27, 2018. At 
 
2 
 
 
the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified 
and submitted three exhibits. (AE 1 through 3) AE 3 was received post-hearing. GE 5 (a 
request for me to take administrative notice of facts about Tunisia) was marked and 
made part of the record, but it is not evidence. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection, except as noted above. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 6, 
2018. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Tunisia. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the 
facts contained in their requests. The facts are summarized in the written requests and 
documents, and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is that 
Tunisia has problems dealing with the terrorist threats within its borders, has been 
victimized by terrorism, and has human rights problems. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 
2.c, which he denied in part. He admitted that his brother-in-law is a resident-citizen of 
Tunisia, but denied that his brother-in-law is a member of the Tunisian parliament. His 
admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, including his testimony and demeanor 
while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1979, and received a bachelor’s degree in August 2008. He married his 
first wife in 1982, and divorced in 2007. He has three children of this marriage ages 35, 
32, and 25. He married his current spouse in 2009, and they have a seven-year-old 
child.  
 
After high school, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1980, where he 
honorably served 20 years on active duty until he retired with the rank of E-7. Applicant 
started working for federal contractors in 2003, and has been consistently employed by 
federal contractors to present. In July 2017, Applicant’s current employer, a federal 
contractor, hired him to continue his work abroad in support of deployed U.S. military 
personnel. He has held a secret clearance continuously since about 2001. There is no 
evidence showing that his clearance was ever suspended, or of any security concerns, 
except for those in the current SOR.  
 
On his 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he married a Tunisian citizen in 2009, 
and they have a seven-year-old son. They met while she was working as a school 
teacher in the Middle East country where Applicant was working and residing at the 
time. Applicant’s wife’s parents, siblings, and other close family members are resident-
citizens of Tunisia. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In Section 20A (Foreign Activities) of his 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed that in 
2005, he purchased $2,500 worth of stock in a telecommunications company in Tunisia. 
He also stated his future plan to purchase real estate in Tunisia in the year 2035. 
Additionally, Applicant revealed that he failed to pay his 2013 federal taxes because of 
lack of funds and he was in the process of making payment arrangements with the IRS. 
 
The background investigation addressed Applicant’s financial problems and the 
foreign influence concerns. The SOR alleged Applicant failed to file federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2007 through 2012. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The evidence shows that 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 
2016. (Because his failure to file tax returns for tax years 2013 through 2016 was not 
alleged in the SOR, it cannot be used for disqualification purposes. It may be 
considered by me in assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.)  
 
Applicant’s IRS documents show that: (1) he timely filed his 2007 income tax 
return in April 2008; (2) for tax year 2008, the IRS filed a substitute income tax return in 
January 2011, and Applicant filed his income tax return in 2012; (3) for tax year 2009, 
the IRS filed a substitute income tax return in August 2011, and Applicant filed in June 
2012; (4) for tax year 2010, Applicant filed his income tax return in October 2013; (5) for 
tax year 2011, Applicant filed his income tax return in October 2013; (6) for tax year 
2012, he filed in February 2014; (7) for tax year 2013, the income tax return was filed in 
November 2014; (8) for tax year 2014, he filed in December 2015, and Applicant was 
assessed late filing penalties; (9) for tax year 2015, he filed in November 2016; (10 ) for 
tax year 2016, he timely filed in March 2017; and (11) for tax year 2017, he timely filed 
in July 2018. Shortly after filing his late income tax returns, Applicant paid any taxes 
owed resulting from his late filings. He currently owes no back taxes to the IRS.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a $1,222 debt to a telecommunications provider. Applicant 
settled and paid the debt in April 2017. (AE 3) SOR ¶ 1.c alleged Applicant was $2,000 
late paying his $162,000 mortgage. Applicant explained that he had two periods of 
unemployment of about three to four months each, between 2000 and 2003 that 
resulted in a financial hardship and he was unable to bring the mortgage current. He 
relinquished the property to his ex-wife through a Special Warranty Deed executed in 
June 2007. In return, his ex-wife agreed to indemnify and hold harmless Applicant from 
paying the note and any performance of the obligations specified in the documents 
securing payment of the note. (AE 3) The creditor foreclosed on the property in 2012. 
The creditor stopped any collection actions against Applicant after Applicant provided 
the creditor with the Special Warranty Deed and copy of the divorce decree. 
Subsequently, the creditor went out of business. In 2017, Applicant requested the credit 
bureaus to remove the debt from his records. Applicant’s June 2018 credit report does 
not reflect Applicant owes any mortgage, mortgage payments, or debts related to any 
mortgages. (AE 3) 
 
Applicant’s tax problems started after his 2007 divorce. He had difficulty 
communicating with his ex-wife and he was deployed most of the year living and 
 
4 
 
 
working overseas. He only returned to the United States once a year. Applicant 
acknowledged he exercised poor judgment by not seeking assistance from the IRS, or 
by promptly seeking an accountant to help him with his tax problems. In 2011, Applicant 
retained the services of a certified public accounting firm (CPA) to help him prepare and 
file his income tax returns. His only motivation to resolve his tax problems was his 
knowledge that it was his obligation to do so. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he should have been more diligent filing his income 
tax returns and paying his taxes. However, he believes that he is more mature now and 
worked hard to resolve his tax problems even before the SOR was issued. He 
understands the seriousness of the security concerns raised by his tax problems. He 
promised to timely file and pay his taxes in the future.  
 
Applicant’s wife is a Tunisian citizen. Her 73-year-old father (mother deceased), 
and four siblings are residents-citizens of Tunisia. Applicant’s father-in-law is retired. He 
worked for the Tunisian government as a Border Patrol policeman. Applicant stated that 
his first in-person contact with his in-laws was when he traveled to Tunisia to get 
married in 2009. After that, in-person contact has been every one or two years when he 
and his wife traveled to Tunisia to visit with her relatives. All other contact has been 
through the internet, telephone calls, or text messages, approximately three to four 
times a year, during special occasions such as holidays or birthdays. Applicant 
indicated that his contact with his in-laws is limited due to the language communication 
barrier. 
 
Applicant has two sisters-in-law and two brothers-in-law. One of the brothers-in-
law is an attorney who works some cases for the Tunisian parliament. The second is a 
tourist guide in the same Middle East country where Applicant works. One sister is 
married and works as a homemaker. The second sister receives disability income from 
the Tunisian government and worked in a bank.  
 
Applicant’s wife is a teacher and from 2005 to August 2017, she worked and 
lived in the same Middle East country where Applicant works. Applicant testified that 
she is very pro-American and has been residing in the United States since August 2017. 
Applicant and his wife traveled to the United States for their son to be born in the United 
States. In November 2016, she submitted her petition for U.S. citizenship. 
 
In his 2016 SCA and during interviews, Applicant indicated his plans to purchase 
a vacation property in Tunisia. After his hearing, on August 16, 2018, Applicant 
submitted a written statement re-stating his future plans to retire and purchase property 
in the United States and not in Tunisia. He now understands the security concerns 
raised by him buying property or retiring in another country. 
 
Applicant highlighted his 20 years of service in the Air Force, plus his 14 years 
working with federal contractors while holding a clearance without any issues or 
concerns, except for those in the SOR. Applicant credibly promised to continue paying 
his legal debts and to avoid any future tax problems. Earning $100,000 a year, his 
 
5 
 
 
financial situation is stable, and his income will allow him to pay his debts and taxes on 
time.  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Tunisia. Tunisia is a 
republic with a multiparty, a unicameral parliamentary political system, and a president 
with powers specified in the constitution. The diplomatic and military relationship 
between the United States and Tunisia has long been one of trust and mutual support, 
especially on curbing terrorism and crime. The United States have been instrumental in 
shoring up Tunisia’s security since the 2011 revolution. Tunisian government officials 
and security forces have occasionally violated the rights of political prisoners and 
committed other human rights violations. Security forces aggressively monitor and 
question those suspected of threatening Tunisian security.  
 
Citizens of Tunisia are limited in political freedoms. Rights such as freedom of 
association, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press are limited. There are also 
human rights violations reported, including torture and extended pretrial detentions. 
Tunisia has “open borders with Libya and Algeria” creating an unpredictable security 
environment. U.S. citizens are warned against travel to southeastern Tunisia as well as 
the west mountainous areas due to the threat of terrorism. Terrorist attacks have 
previously targeted Tunisian government and security forces and popular tourist sites. 
Many terrorist organizations are active in Tunisia. The Tunisian government has 
intensified its counterterrorism efforts and secured U.S. assistance to overhaul its 
military and civilian security forces. The Tunisian government requires Tunisian-
Americans to enter and leave Tunisia on a Tunisian passport.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the  Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
 
6 
 
 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He failed to 
timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2012. He also had one 
consumer debt charged-off and a delinquent mortgage that was later foreclosed. AG ¶ 
19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”; and “(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or 
 
7 
 
 
local income tax returns or failure to pay . . . . income tax as required.” The record 
established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 
(App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 Most of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised 
by the facts in this case and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
 
8 
 
 
problems started after his 2007 divorce because of lack of communication with his ex-
wife and his overseas employment that kept him out of the United States for most of the 
year. He failed to file a tax return in 2008 and his negligence snowballed into not filing 
returns into 2012. In 2011, Applicant retained the services of a CPA firm that helped him 
file his delinquent returns and established payments for any back taxes. Between 2013 
and 2017, Applicant timely filed his income tax returns (within his extensions to file) and 
paid all back taxes. Currently, Applicant owes no back taxes to the IRS.   
 
 Applicant settled for less and paid a charged-off debt to a telecommunications 
company in April 2017. (AE 3) Concerning the delinquent mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c), 
Applicant explained that periods of unemployment between 2001 and 2003 caused him 
to become delinquent and he was unable to bring the account current. In June 2007, he 
executed a Special Warranty Deed in favor of his ex-wife. In return, his ex-wife agreed 
to indemnify and hold him harmless from paying the note and complying with any 
performance of the obligations specified in the documents securing payment of the 
note. (AE 3) The creditor foreclosed on the property in 2012. The creditor stopped any 
collection actions against Applicant after Applicant provided the creditor with the Special 
Warranty Deed and a copy of the divorce decree. Subsequently, the creditor went out of 
business. Applicant’s Experian credit report from June 2018 (AE 3), does not reflect 
Applicant owes any mortgage, mortgage payments, or debts related to any mortgages.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, 
circumstances beyond his control, specifically, his periods of unemployment with the 
subsequent decrease in family earnings, and the financial hardship resulting from his 
2007 divorce and maintaining two households. I find these circumstances to be beyond 
his control.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his lack of judgment and diligence in timely filing his 
income tax returns and paying his taxes. Notwithstanding, Applicant established that as 
far back as 2011, he retained the services of a CPA firm to help him file his delinquent 
tax returns and pay his back taxes. The IRS documents on evidence show Applicant 
timely filed his income tax returns after 2013, paid all back taxes, and is current on his 
income tax filings and paying his taxes.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur 
and they do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. His 
evidence is sufficient to establish that his financial problems were caused or 
aggravated, to some extent, by circumstances beyond his control. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, Applicant has been financially responsible under the 
circumstances. There are clear indications that his financial problems are resolved. He 
has been timely filing his tax returns and paying his taxes and promised to continue to 
do so. With his job earnings he should be able to pay for his family’s living expenses 
and current debts. Moreover, Applicant has matured and understands the security 
clearance consequences of not maintaining his financial responsibility and complying 
with his legal obligation to timely file and pay his taxes. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Tunisia and she has immediate family members 
who are citizens and residents of Tunisia. Tunisia has problems with terrorist 
organization in bordering states and within its own borders. It also has human rights 
problems; and it has been victimized by terrorism. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the 
evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following is potentially applicable:  
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
 
10 
 
 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Tunisia. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen. He served 20 years in the Air Force and has 
continued to serve the United States abroad working for federal contractors supporting 
deployed U.S. forces. None of his Tunisian family members have any direct connection 
to the Tunisian government. Applicant’s wife lived and worked in another Middle East 
country between 2005 and August 2017, when she moved to the United States. She 
recently applied for U.S. citizenship. Applicant has no plans to move to Tunisia or to 
purchase property in Tunisia. He and his wife traveled to the United States so that his 
son would be a native-born U.S. citizen, and they are ready to purchase property in the 
United States. He expressed his undivided loyalty for the United States, which he 
considers his home. 
I find that Applicant’s wife and his in-laws ties to Tunisia are outweighed by his 
deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in the United States. I find that there 
is no conflict of interest, because he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
credible testimony and service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude financial 
consideration concerns and foreign influence security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
