 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03759 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: A. Jay Fowinkle, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 22, 2017, and January 22, 2018, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 2, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on May 22, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 25, 2018. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A though D. There were no objections to any of the exhibits, and they were 
admitted into evidence.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 2, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2010. He worked from 
June 2010 until August 2011. He has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, since June 2016. He is not married and has no children.2  
 
 In July 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with homicide-negligent 
manslaughter-weapon-killing human other than by murder or homicide-felony 2nd degree. 
He pled nolo contendere to manslaughter. He did not have a plea agreement. He was 
sentenced to five years of imprisonment, followed by ten years of probation. Applicant 
was incarcerated from approximately August 2011 to April 2015. He is on probation until 
approximately 2025.3  
 
 The circumstances surrounding the charge and conviction are as follows. Applicant 
was a senior in college and had secured employment that began in June 2010. In April 
2010, Applicant and his roommate, who was his best friend, were consuming alcohol and 
watching television. Applicant admitted they both had too much to drink that night. 
Applicant went to the kitchen to get more alcohol. Applicant kept a loaded handgun in 
their apartment under his bed. He owned the gun legally and had a concealed weapon 
permit for it. He stated he had the gun because he liked shooting when he was growing 
up and also for personal protection. His roommate got the gun, walked into the kitchen 
where Applicant was and handed the gun to Applicant.4  
 
 Applicant testified that it was the first time in his life he did not check to see if the 
gun was loaded. Applicant pulled the trigger believing nothing would happen. The gun 
discharged killing his best friend.5  
 
 Applicant takes full responsibility for his actions and offered no excuses. He 
testified that every day he lives with the fact that he killed his best friend. He has not 
forgiven himself. He considered his friend his brother. Applicant has wanted to die. He 
fights the pain and darkness from his action. He now does what he can to bring joy to 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits I and II are the Government’s exhibit list and discovery letter. 
 
2 Tr. 20-21, 38. 
 
3 Tr. 31; 48-50; GE 3, 4. 
 
4 Tr. 29-31, 43, 48, 57-58. 
 
5 Tr. 29-31. 
 
3 
 
 
others and carry his friend’s legacy. He stated that he cannot erase the tragedy that 
occurred, but he will continue to strive to be a better person.6  
 
 Applicant has been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major 
depression, and anxiety disorder. Before this event, he did not have mental health issues. 
Since then, he had suicidal thoughts and was consumed with guilt. Since October 2017, 
he has been voluntarily treated by a licensed mental health counselor. He is on prescribed 
medication for depression and anxiety.7 
 
Applicant served four years and three months of his five-year prison sentence 
where he received psychiatric care because he was on medication at the time. He 
received psychiatric treatment for about three years. In April 2015, he was transferred to 
work release. He was required to find his own job. He found one and began work in June 
2015. He was released to go to work and then had to return to prison each day. He stayed 
in the work release program until he was released from prison in November 2015. Upon 
his release, he went to live with his father. It took him seven to eight months to find a job. 
His current employer is aware of his felony conviction.8  
 
 Applicant testified that the terms of his probation are that he cannot have a firearm 
and cannot use drugs or alcohol. He was tested weekly for a period and is now tested 
monthly. He is required to give talks about the dangers of guns and alcohol. He cannot 
travel outside a three-county area without permission. He must report to his probation 
officer if he moves residences. He is required to report the type of car he drives and 
driver’s license information. He must report his place of employment and if it changes. He 
must not have any association with criminal activity. He is prohibited from contact with the 
victim’s family. He must report to his probation officer each month in person. Applicant 
will be eligible for release from probation in 2025. Once he has completed fifty percent of 
his supervised probation, he may apply for early termination of his probation.9  
 
 Applicant admitted that he used alcohol one time while on probation, and it 
occurred after his mother passed away. He explained that he had no medical insurance 
to see a mental health counselor and he was in emotional pain. He has otherwise been 
compliant with the terms of his probation.10  
 
 Applicant participated in online schooling while in prison, so he could get a job 
upon his release. He has worked on certification programs since his release. He 
purchased a car and has a credit card that he is current on payments. Applicant had a 
credit card before he went to prison. When he was incarcerated, he had not had time to 
                                                          
6 Tr. 29-31. 
 
7 Tr. 31-34, 46-47; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 21, 51-57. 
 
9 Tr. 34-35, 39-43; AE C. 
 
10 Tr. 43-44. 
 
4 
 
 
put his financial affairs in order, and he believed the credit card had been paid, but 
apparently it had not. He defaulted on the credit card, but has subsequently paid it. He is 
paying his student loans on time.11  
 
 Applicant testified that prior to his incarceration he was working and received two 
peer-to-peer awards from his company. He provided character letters, including from the 
president of the company where he is currently employed. Those writing letters are aware 
of Applicant’s conviction. His work record is described as impeccable. He embraces the 
opportunity to work with enthusiasm and ambition. He exceeds performance expectations 
and is reliable and dependable. He has earned the full trust of those he works for and 
with. Applicant is hard-working, self-motivated, humble, grateful, honest, mature, 
respectful, compliant with rules and regulations, and trustworthy. He is devoted to his 
family. Applicant was in the Boy Scouts and attained the rank of Eagle Scout.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
11 Tr. 35-37; AE D. 
 
12 Tr. 25-27; AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 31, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of manslaughter when he 
tragically killed his friend with a gun. He was incarcerated for almost five years and is on 
supervised probation until 2025. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
6 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant tragically killed his friend. He was drinking alcohol at the time. He served 
almost five years in prison for his offense. He participated in a work release program. He 
has a good job and is highly regarded by his employer and those with whom he works. 
He is remorseful and takes full responsibility for his conduct. He suffers the emotional 
trauma one would expect from a life-altering tragedy. Except for one violation of using 
alcohol after his mother passed away, he is in compliance with the terms of his probation. 
It is unlikely Applicant will be involved in future criminal conduct, but the fact is that he 
remains on supervised probation until 2025. The state where the offense occurred has 
deemed Applicant must be supervised while on probation due to the seriousness of his 
conduct. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) have some application, but while he is on probation, it is 
too soon to conclude that Applicant’s conduct has been sufficiently mitigated and there 
are no security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He was convicted of manslaughter when he killed his 
friend with a gun while they were drinking alcohol. He completed his prison sentence, but 
 
7 
 
 
remains on probation until 2025. Although Applicant has made significant strides in 
putting his life back on track, he is still on supervised probation, which indicates the state 
continues to monitor him because of its concerns. At this time, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline J, criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
