 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00176 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. The concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, were mitigated. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 29, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct and Guideline J, criminal conduct. DOD 
CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 
(AG). 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR with an undated response, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 26, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 7, 2018. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
Government’s exhibit list was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE I). Applicant testified and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. I left the 
record open until September 7, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
She submitted AE D through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 15, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, she admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. She denied ¶ 1.e and ¶ 2.a 
(same underlying conduct for both allegations). Her admissions are adopted as findings 
of fact. After a thorough and careful review of all the pleadings and evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. She has worked for a government contractor since 
2013 as an electronics technician. She is engaged and has two children and a 
stepchild. She has an associate’s degree.1   
 
 The allegations raised in the SOR include: (1) In March 2013, Applicant struck a 
coworker while on the job and was told not to return to work (SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) In August 
2016, Applicant ripped a thermostat on the wall at her work location for which she 
received a written warning for damaging company property (SOR ¶ 1.b); (3) From 2016 
to about February 2017, Appellant engaged in a pattern of unprofessional 
communications within the workplace for which she was repeatedly counseled (SOR ¶ 
1.c); (4) In December 2016 and January 2017, Applicant violated a direct order from her 
supervisor to refrain from discussing with coworkers an internal investigation for which 
she was placed on 90 days of probation for unprofessional behavior and insubordination 
(SOR ¶ 1.d); and (5) In May 2017, Applicant struck her cohabitant in the face during a 
domestic dispute for which she was arrested and charged with third-degree assault 
(SOR ¶ 1.e, cross alleged as criminal conduct in SOR ¶ 2.a). 
  
 In March 2013, while Applicant was working as a server at a local bar/restaurant, 
she got into an argument with a coworker. When Applicant perceived the coworker as 
“getting in her face” and grabbing her arm, Applicant slapped the coworker. Her 
manager called her into the office and asked what was going on with the coworker. 
Applicant was scheduled to resign from her server job in two days to take another job 
(her current position). She claims she told her manager that she “was done” today. He 
told her to go home and come back tomorrow to talk with the owner about what 
happened. Later that day, the manager called her to tell her not to come back. She 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6, 21; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
admitted that she became emotional and lost her cool with the coworker. She has been 
back to that establishment since the incident on numerous occasions as a customer.2 
 
 In approximately August 2016, Applicant was performing her duties at her work 
location. The time was after five p.m., and Applicant was working alone. While working, 
she became uncomfortably cold because of the temperature setting of the central air 
conditioning unit (ACU). The ACU had a central control panel that was locked by a 
plastic cover. Applicant claimed she was so cold she could not properly perform her 
duties. She then knocked the cover off of the control panel so she could adjust the 
temperature. When she did this, the screws holding the locking cover came out of the 
wall. She claims that the cover was not properly installed and that her action did not 
damage the unit. She reported her action to her supervisor the next day. She received a 
written warning from her supervisor for “ripping the thermostat cover off the wall in order 
to change the temperature.” The warning was placed in her personnel file.3 
 
 On at least two occasions, November 10, 2016 and January 10, 2017, Applicant 
sent unprofessional emails to coworkers. She was formally counseled for these 
instances and told to apologize. She sent an apology email to the original recipients.4 
 
 In December 2016, Applicant’s fiancée, who worked at the same company, was 
being investigated by the company for inappropriate conduct at the recent holiday party. 
Applicant was made aware of the investigation by the company and was specifically 
directed not to discuss the investigation with other company employees. In January 
2017, Applicant sent text messages to two company employees discussing aspects of 
the investigation. In addition to violating the direct order not to discuss the investigation, 
Applicant used crude and vulgar language in the texts to the employees. During her 
hearing testimony, Applicant acknowledged violating the order by texting the two 
employees. Applicant was placed on a 90-day probation period for her insubordination 
upon her return from maternity leave.5 
 
 In May 2017, Applicant was arrested for third degree assault for striking her 
fiancé in the face. There is conflicting evidence in the record as to what actually 
happened between Applicant and her fiancée on this occasion. Applicant told a police 
officer on the day of the incident that during a verbal argument with her fiancé she 
scratched him on the nose with her fingernail because he threw a towel at her. The 
officers observed bleeding on the fiancé’s nose and scratches on his cheeks. Her fiancé 
told the officer that he cut himself shaving or from being scratched while doing yardwork 
earlier. In Applicant’s October 2017 statement to a defense investigator, she said she 
accidentally scratched her fiancé when he waved a towel in her face. After Applicant 
                                                          
2 Tr. 23; SOR answer (Ans.); GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. 26; Ans.; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 27-29; GE 3; AE A-B. 
 
5 Tr. 31-33; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
attended an unspecified period of court ordered counseling, her criminal case was 
dismissed with prejudice in August 2017 and the arrest and other criminal records 
pertaining to the case were ordered sealed. Applicant has had no further arrests since 
this incident.6 
 
 Applicant explained that from 2016 through 2017 she was going through a 
difficult emotional time. She was pregnant, then breast-feeding her baby, which caused 
hormonal issues during this time. She received pastoral counsel from March 2016 to 
July 2017 (32 sessions) for marriage, anger, and parenting issues. She resumed this 
counseling in August 2018 and has had three sessions for anger and childhood/family 
impact issues. She also is an active client in an additional counseling practice. She has 
attended this counseling “for the last several months.” No specific diagnoses, prognosis, 
recommended treatment regimes, or other substantive information about Applicant’s 
counseling sessions was contained in the record. Applicant participates in her church’s 
women’s group study and marital group sessions. Her current supervisor provided a 
letter in which she noted the growth in Applicant’s professionalism over the past several 
months. She also noted that Applicant “stepped up” to mentor a newer team member. 
Her supervisor deems her an asset to their department.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
6 Tr. 48-49; Ans.; GE 2, 4-5. 
 
7 Tr. 50; AE C, E-I. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
Applicant’s assaults in 2013 and 2017 and her unprofessional and insubordinate 
behavior at work in 2016 and 2017 support the application of both the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
Applicant struck two different people, in the heat of the moment, vented her 
emotional rage using text messages to coworkers, and displayed other unprofessional 
and insubordinate conduct in the workplace on multiple occasions in 2016 and 2017. 
These are not infrequent occurrences for Applicant. Her most recent incident occurred 
in May 2017. It is too soon to determine whether Applicant has changed her behavior 
when under stress. Her willingness to attend counseling is a positive sign. However, 
 
7 
 
 
because the record contains no evidence of the progress she has made while attending 
counseling, specifically on dealing with her anger issues, it is too soon to determine 
whether the stressors or other circumstances that led to her inappropriate behavior 
have been ameliorated because of her counseling. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply, but AG ¶ 
17(d) has some application.  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
The record contains sufficient evidence that Applicant assaulted her fiancé in 
May 2017. I find AG ¶ 31(b) applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 Applicant has not been involved in a domestic issue since her arrest in May 
2017. Her arrest occurred under unusual circumstances and the charges were 
ultimately dropped by the prosecution. AG ¶ 32(a) applies.8  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
8 I found the Guideline J allegation mitigated, but I also found the same conduct not mitigated under 
Guideline E because I viewed the conduct under Guideline E as an additional act in her pattern of overall 
behavior, while under Guideline J, I viewed it as a single act. 
 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s years of 
contractor service, her counseling, and her supervisor’s statement. However, I also 
considered that she engaged in unwanted physical contact with others and 
unprofessional conduct while on the job on multiple occasions. Applicant failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
although Applicant mitigated the Guideline J, criminal conduct concerns, I conclude she 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph     2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
