 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00237 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 1, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 5, 2018, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on April 4, 2018. 
She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant did not submit a response to the 
FORM or object to the Government’s documents. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. She denied the SOR 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f and 1.i through 1.n. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She earned an associate’s degree in 2000. Applicant 
enlisted in the military in October 1990 and was honorably discharged in November 1991 
due to hardship. She remained in the inactive reserves until October 1992.1  
 
Applicant married in July 2006 and divorced in January 2008. She remarried in 
April 2008, and at the time she completed her electronic Questionnaire for Investigation 
Processing (e-QIP) in July 2016, she was waiting for her divorce from her second 
husband to be finalized. She has a 27-year-old child. She also has children ages seven 
and six years old from her second marriage.2 
 
Applicant has been employed by her present employer, a federal contractor, since 
July 2013. She was a stay-at-home mother from March 2012 to July 2013. She worked 
for a federal contractor from January 2011 to March 2012. She was unemployed from 
March 2010 to January 2011. Applicant did not provide information about the cause of 
her financial problems other than stating during her September 2017 background 
interview with a Government investigator that she is a single mother and was unemployed 
for different periods. The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by Applicant’s 
admissions and credit reports from September 2017 and December 2017.3 
 
 In her e-QIP, Applicant did not disclose any financial problems or delinquencies. 
During her background interview, she told the Government investigator that she was 
currently seeking credit counseling from a nonprofit organization to help her consolidate 
her debts and make a budget. She disclosed that she defaulted on her student loans, and 
estimated the amount owed to be about $20,000, but she was not certain. She opened 
the student loan account in 2000, and it became delinquent in approximately 2015, 
because she was unemployed and a single mother. She said that loan payments were 
being garnished from her pay. She provided a December 2017 pay stub that shows $247 
is garnished from her pay every two weeks. It also shows a total of $6,200 was paid in 
2017. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a defaulted student loan account for $4,263. The account was 
transferred to a collection company. It appears this is a different account than the one for 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4. 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
 
which Applicant’s pay is being garnished. Her credit reports from September 2017 and 
December 2017 show there are three student loans. The one alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is 
listed as past due and in collection. The other two are Government unsecured guaranteed 
loans and the accounts were closed and transferred. Applicant did not provide 
documentary evidence that she is taking action on the loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b or that 
this loan was consolidated with the other.4 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied the debt in ¶ 1.a ($9,946) stating 
“The dollar amount owed on this entry is larger than the actual amount owed.”5 She said 
she was disputing the debt. She said the amount owed was $3,455, but the creditor added 
“heavy additional fees; in which some may be illegal.”6 She further stated she was 
obtaining an attorney to “fight these charges. Once the determination is settled, I will make 
payments on the agreed upon amount.”7 Applicant did not provide any documentary 
evidence to support her actions to dispute the account or to show she has hired an 
attorney to do it. She did not respond to the FORM and provide an update on any actions 
she may have taken.8 This debt is not resolved.  
 
 Applicant was confronted during her background interview with the medical debts 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d ($654-medical), ¶ 1.e ($451-medical); ¶ 1.f ($407-medical); ¶ 1.m 
$210-medical); and ¶ 1.n ($153-medical). She denied being aware of any of the debts. In 
her Answer to the SOR, she denied these debts stating she was unsure “what this amount 
is owed for.”9 They are all listed on either her September 2017 or December 2017 credit 
reports, or both. Some are several years old. Applicant did not provide any information 
about her efforts to contact her medical providers or creditors to resolve the debts, or 
efforts she made to dispute the individual debts.10 They are unresolved.  
 
 Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c (collection account-$656) stating 
she was unsure of what this debt was. Applicant did not provide any information about 
her efforts to contact the collection creditor to determine the original creditor or efforts to 
resolve or dispute the debt.11 It is unresolved.  
                                                          
4 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. I have not considered any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR for 
disqualifying purposes. I may consider this information when making a credibility determination, in applying 
the mitigating conditions, and in a whole-person analysis. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Items 2, 6. 
 
9 Item 2. 
 
10 Items 2, 4, 5, 6. 
 
11 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
 The SOR alleged unpaid judgments in ¶¶ 1.i ($1,990), 1.j ($815), and 1.k ($1,534). 
Applicant stated in her Answer to the SOR that she believes the judgment in ¶ 1.i is a fee 
associated with the debt in ¶ 1.a that she is disputing. She stated that she “settled” the 
judgments in ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k in 2017, and she no longer owes them. On Applicant’s 
September 2017 credit report, it shows that Applicant satisfied four different judgments to 
the same creditor as that in SOR ¶ 1.j. There were three remaining judgments that are 
not satisfied and they are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k. During her background 
interview, she told the investigator when she was confronted with the unpaid judgments 
alleged in the SOR that she recalled receiving many judgments and satisfying some of 
them, but did not recall the details. She was working with a nonprofit agency to help her 
consolidate her judgments that are owed to the same creditor and satisfy them. She said 
these judgments related to late fees owed for rent. She told the investigator that she did 
not know when she would be able to satisfy her debts. Applicant did not provide evidence 
that the judgments are satisfied or particulars on a plan to resolve them. She did not 
provide documents to show these are the same judgments she satisfied. The judgments 
alleged are unresolved.12 
 
 Applicant provided a document to show that she began making automatic 
payments ($108) to a collection company in March 2017. She showed four payments 
were made from March through June 2017. In her background interview, she stated she 
had a debt for a loan she obtained in April 2015 for $700. She was unable to make the 
payments, and the amount owed increased to $949 and went to collections. She said she 
began making monthly payments of $108 and resolved the debt in August 2017. A review 
of Applicant’s credit reports indicates that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.l are the same 
debt. Her September 2017 credit report shows the account was in collection and 
delinquent for $949. Her December 2017 credit report shows the account was charged 
off and transferred. I am unable to determine if the account has been settled and 
completely paid, even though it appears Applicant made at least four payments. She did 
not provide updated information in response to her FORM. The debt is not resolved.13  
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($268) and stated in her Answer that her 
“current credit counselor asked me not to pay this account yet as I would be over the 
budget set to keep my housing.”14 The debt is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant mentioned during her background interview that she had a budget. She 
did not provide an updated budget to reflect her current finances. It is unknown if Applicant 
receives child support. No other information regarding Applicant’s finances were 
provided. In her Answer, Applicant provided a certificate of achievement for her 
outstanding performance and dedication.15 
                                                          
12 Items 2, 4, 5, 6. 
 
13 Items 2, 4, 5, 6.  
 
14 Item 2. 
 
15 Item 2. The certificate was not dated, but there is handwriting on it that says 2017.  
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.16 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous debts, judgments, and a student loan that have been 
delinquent for several years. Applicant is unable to satisfy her debts. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
                                                          
16 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial obligations. She has numerous 
delinquent debts and judgments. She attributes her financial problems to periods of 
unemployment and being a single mother. Applicant has been employed steadily since 
2013. Her debts are unpaid and therefore recent. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that her behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure to pay her financial 
obligations casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment and status as a single mother are conditions that are 
beyond her control. Applicant has been employed steadily since 2013. It is unknown if 
she receives child support. It appears Applicant is working with a nonprofit organization 
to help her budget her finances. This is a responsible way to begin to address her 
finances. However, Applicant provided limited information regarding how long she has 
been working with the organization, what plans have been developed for her to pay her 
delinquent debts, and a copy of her current budget and finances. Without additional 
information, AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. 
 
 There is some evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. Without 
additional specific evidence, I am unable to conclude there are clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. One of Applicant’s student loans 
is being paid through garnishment, but this loan in not alleged. Applicant did not provide 
evidence that her student loans were consolidated, so I am unable to conclude the 
education loan in SOR ¶ 1.b is being paid. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.l are 
 
8 
 
 
the same. Applicant said the debt was settled through monthly payments, but only 
provided documents to show four payments and no proof that the debt has been resolved. 
I find for her for SOR ¶ 1.g because it is a duplicate. AG ¶ 20(c) has minimal application 
and AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputes many of the debts in the SOR, stating she does not know what 
the debts are for; she paid them; or her credit counselor told her not to pay a debt. 
Applicant was made aware of many of the debts during her background interview. She 
did not provide sufficient evidence that she has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the delinquent debts. She did not provide evidence that she contacted the 
creditors to learn the specifics about each debt that she disputes. She did not provide 
documentation to substantiate the basis of her dispute or evidence of her action to resolve 
the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old. She has delinquent debts that she is unable to satisfy. 
She has been working with a nonprofit organization to help her with her finances, but 
provided minimal evidence to substantiate actions she may have taken to resolve her 
delinquent debts. The state of her current finances is unknown. Applicant did not provide 
evidence of a reliable financial track record. At this juncture, she has not met her burden 
of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.n:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
