 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00298 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline M, use of information 
technology. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, Guideline H, drug involvement, 
and Guideline M, use of information technology. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 15, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2018. The Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 5, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 14, 2018. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. As part of Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she included 
Exhibits (EX.) A through M. At her hearing she testified and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A and B and EX A through M. There were no objections to any exhibits, and all 
were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 22, 2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Applicant’s counsel submitted a written motion and requested at the hearing that 
I recuse myself from the hearing. His documents and the Government’s responses are 
attached as hearing exhibits. The motion was denied.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a with an explanation. She partially admitted and 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 2.c. She denied SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.d, and 3.a. She provided 
explanations for all of the allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. She is not married. She is the mother of a ten-year-old 
son. She has some college education, but has not earned a degree. She served in the 
Army from 2005 to 2014, and was honorably discharged in the paygrade E-6. She 
worked overseas for a federal contractor from approximately May 2015 to May 2016. 
She was unemployed until she began working for her current employer in November 
2016. She was hired to work in the network administration department, but is working 
on the help desk until the security clearance process is completed. She testified that 
she held a security clearance from 2005 until March 2016.2 
 
 In January 2016, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
She signed it attesting to its accuracy. In May 2017, June 2017, and July 2017, 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. She included the May 2017 
summary of the personal subject interview (PSI) in her Answer to the SOR as evidence 
(AE J). Applicant was sent Government interrogatories that included the three PSIs (GE 
2). The interrogatories requested that Applicant furnish full and truthful answers to the 
questions and sign the interrogatories under oath. The interrogatories advised Applicant 
to carefully review the PSIs and verify their accuracy. She checked “yes” (and initialed 
it) as to the accuracy of the information of the PSIs on the dates she was interviewed. 
She checked “yes” (and initialed it) that subject to additions or deletions, she adopted 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through IX are relevant to the motion. HE X and XI are Department Counsel’s 
exhibit list and discovery letter, respectively. HE IX is attached to HE IV to be considered with the 
Government’s brief.  
 
2 Tr. 9, 19-26, 43-44; GE 1, 2; Answer: EX. B, C, D, E, and G. While serving in the Army, Applicant was 
authorized to wear numerous campaign ribbons and other personal medals. GE 4 shows Applicant’s loss 
of security clearance eligibility occurred when she separated from employment in May 2016.  
 
3 
 
 
the PSIs as accurately reflecting the interviews. She signed the document before a 
notary swearing (or affirming) its accuracy. She made a change to the date that was in 
the affirmation paragraph and printed “May 26, 2017” reflecting the accurate date of her 
first interview. In the copy of the PSI (AE J) that she introduced as evidence, she did not 
make changes to it or provide comments in her Answer to the SOR that there were 
inaccuracies or it was false.3  
 
Applicant testified that when she received the Government’s interrogatories she 
did not read them. She was only attesting to having had an interview. She claimed 
Department Counsel told her to sign the interrogatories and send them back. She said 
he did not tell her to verify the facts, but only to verify the interview took place. She said, 
“I called to verify exactly what needed to be done, if I needed to make any changes like 
spelling or grammatical errors or anything, and he was like, ‘No, you’re just verifying that 
the interview happened.’”4 Applicant then stated, “So basically just verify like I’m 
verifying that the interview had happened.”5 She said Department Counsel did not say 
anything about the content of the document or what she should do.6  
 
Department Counsel denied Applicant’s version of that conversation. He said that 
he followed his standard format of what he tells all applicants and that is, he does not 
give legal advice; they should review the document; make whatever changes or 
corrections necessary to reflect its accuracy; and return it.7 
 
Applicant testified that when she marked the interrogatories as accurate that it 
was false. When she signed the statement swearing to its accuracy, she testified that it 
was false. When she adopted the PSIs, subject to any additions or deletions, as 
accurately reflecting the interviews, she said that was also a false statement. She said 
she did not read the PSIs line by line and was unaware that she could make changes. 
Applicant did not make changes in the copy of the PSI she entered into evidence. She 
said she did not know she had the option of checking “no” instead of “yes.” She thought 
the process would stop if she checked “no.” She said after she had signed the 
interrogatories she asked people in the military security intelligence division where she 
worked about it. She said she did not ask advice before she signed it because she was 
in a hurry, and she did not think to do it. She testified that she made her corrections in 
her Answer to the SOR.8 Applicant’s testimony was not credible. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 44-46, 67; GE 2; Answer EX. J. 
 
4 Tr. 68. 
 
5 Tr. 68. 
 
6 Tr. 68-79. 
 
7 Tr. 66-79. 
 
8 Tr. 48-51, 66-79. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant disclosed in her SCA that while in the Army she went to an Article 15 
nonjudicial punishment in approximately July 2010. The SCA asked her to describe the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) offense for which she was charged. Her 
answer was “UNKNOWN.” Applicant disclosed during her May 2017 PSI that while 
deployed, she used someone else’s computer credentials and password because she 
did not have administrative rights. She was the non-commissioned officer-in-charge of 
the information technology section at the time. She told the investigator that she was 
supposed to have administrative rights and access so she could fix network computer 
accounts for people while deployed, but it was not set up at the time, even though it was 
required in order for her to do her job. She explained that she used an account of a 
soldier, who worked for her and was an E-4 or below. She only used the account 
information in order to work on someone’s account when they needed help. People in 
her unit knew this was occurring. After this information was made known to her 
superiors, she was reduced from staff sergeant to sergeant at an Article 15 hearing. 
She later earned her rank back. She advised the investigator that she was aware that 
using another person’s account and password was not permitted, but she needed it in 
order to perform her job because access to her account had not been approved at the 
time.9   
 
 In Applicant’s January 2016 SCA, which asked if she had “EVER” been charged 
with an offense involving alcohol or drugs, she answered “No.” During Applicant’s May 
2017 PSI, she disclosed to the investigator that she had been charged with driving 
under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in March 2012.10 Applicant provided a letter from 
the attorney who represented her that stated they had appeared in court in January 
2013. A not guilty verdict was entered by the judge.11 Applicant was asked by the 
investigator why she did not disclose the DUI on her SCA as required. She stated that 
she was trying to hurry and complete the SCA, and thought when she was interviewed 
she could bring up the information, rather than list it in the SCA. She denied to the 
investigator that she was trying to hide the information.12 
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, she explained the reason she did not disclose her 
2012 DUI charge on her January 2016 SCA was because she was found not guilty and 
believed she did not have to disclose it. She stated in her SOR answer that she now 
understood she was required to disclose any charges, not just those where there was a 
guilty verdict. Applicant testified that the reason she failed to disclose the DUI in her 
January 2016 SCA was because she misunderstood the question. She did not 
                                                          
9 GE 2. This information was not alleged in the SOR. Any derogatory information that was not alleged will 
not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but may be considered when making a credibility 
determination, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
10 GE 2, 3. 
 
11 Answer: EX. K. 
 
12 GE 1, 2. 
 
5 
 
 
understand what “charge” meant. She did not commit the offense, so she did not think 
she had to disclose it. She now understands she should have disclosed it.13  
 
 In Applicant’s January 2016 SCA, which asked if she had “EVER” illegally used 
or otherwise been involved with a drug while possessing a security clearance, she 
answered “No.” Applicant answered “No” to all of the questions on the SCA regarding 
illegal drug use, including if she had used any in the past seven years. During 
Applicant’s May 2017 PSI, she disclosed to the investigator that she used marijuana in 
April 2015, while possessing a security clearance. She explained during the interview 
that she went to a friend’s bachelorette party, and her friend brought a chocolate bar 
laced with marijuana. Applicant ate a square of the chocolate. Applicant was consuming 
alcohol at the time. She told the investigator she did not have to pay for the marijuana. 
She noticed the effects of it as it made her jumpy and paranoid that she was going to 
get in trouble. She did not like the way it made her feel. She is no longer friends with 
those people who attended the party because they live far away from each other. When 
questioned by the investigator why she failed to disclose this information on her SCA, 
she said she was attempting to hurry and fill out the SCA to complete it, and she 
thought that when she was interviewed she would bring up the information, rather than 
put it in the SCA. She denied to the investigator that she was trying to hide the 
information. She did not tell the investigator that she ingested marijuana unknowingly.14  
 
Applicant disclosed during her PSI to the government investigator that in either 
June or July 2016, she visited family in another state. While there she ate a brownie 
laced with marijuana that she got from her cousin. She was unemployed at the time, 
thought it was legal in the state where she used it, and she was not affected by it. She 
was consuming alcohol at the time. She did not have to pay for the marijuana. Her 
cousin and other family members who were present were aware of her use. She did not 
have a security clearance at that time.15  
 
Applicant explained to the investigator that the reason she used marijuana on the 
two occasions mentioned in 2015 and 2016 was because she wanted to try it in that 
form. She told the investigator, she had not used any illegal drug, including marijuana, 
in the past seven years, except for the two times mentioned.16 
 
 Applicant testified that she used marijuana in April 2015 while holding a security 
clearance, but said she used it unknowingly. She said while attending the bachelorette 
party she was given candy, and she did not know it had marijuana in it. She later 
learned from people attending the party that the candy had marijuana. She said she has 
never knowingly used any illegal drug. She has taken random drugs tests in the military 
                                                          
13 Tr. 34-35, 55. 
 
14 GE 1, 2.  
 
15 GE 2. 
 
16 GE 2.  
 
 
6 
 
 
and as a civilian with negative results. She provided the results of drug tests from March 
2018 (two different weeks), July 2018 and August 2018 that showed negative results for 
illegal drugs.17 
 
Applicant stated in her Answer that the reason she failed to disclose her drug use 
while holding a security clearance in her January 2016 SCA was because she believed 
she only had to disclose information if she had been found guilty in a court of law. She 
testified that the reason she failed to disclose this drug use was due to an “honest 
mistake.”18  
 
Applicant denied she told the investigator that she knowingly used marijuana in 
April 2015 while holding a security clearance. She testified this was a misunderstanding. 
She said at the time she consumed the candy, she did not know it was laced with 
marijuana.19  
 
In Applicant’s Answer, she admitted using marijuana around June or July 2016, 
but said she did not hold a security clearance at the time as she was unemployed. She 
stated in her Answer that she regretted her conduct and has not used marijuana since 
then. She did not say her use was unknowing. At her hearing, Applicant testified that 
she used marijuana in June or July 2016 unknowingly. She said she did not hold a 
security clearance in June 2016. She did not recall the circumstances of the use; did not 
recall how she learned the brownie and candy contained marijuana; and did not recall 
who told her the items contained marijuana.  She admitted that she consumed the 
marijuana in both instances, but denied she was aware that the brownie and candy 
contained marijuana until after the fact.22 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR stated:  
 
Furthermore, this behavior was fully admitted during my personal subject 
interview. I regret my actions during this time and I have not used an 
illegal substance since 2016, a period of almost two years, and have no 
desire.23 
 During the May 2017 interview, Applicant told the investigator that when she was 
working for her employer from November 2016, she had not been approved at that time 
for a security clearance, and she did not have an interim clearance. Her coworkers and 
supervisors were aware she did not have a clearance. She was assigned to the call 
center help desk. She explained that she received calls for both unclassified and Secret 
clearance level computer issues. She stated that most calls were for issues with the 
Secret computer systems. When she began working at the help desk, she transferred 
                                                          
17 Tr. 26-31, 33, 46; AE B; Answer: EX. L. 
 
18 Tr. 35; Answer to SOR. 
 
19 Tr. 49. 
 
22 Tr. 31-34, 79-80; Answer to the SOR. 
 
23 Tr. 79-83; Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
7 
 
 
the calls for customers that had Secret computer system issues to other coworkers who 
had the appropriate clearances. She brought up this topic with her supervisor, advising 
the supervisor that Applicant did not have a SIPR token, which is a classified computer 
access card, and that Applicant was unable to help customers with classified computer 
issues. She further told the investigator that through natural progression, without much 
discussion, she was allowed access to her coworkers’ computer stations by having the 
coworker enter their tokens and passwords when Applicant received a call from 
someone through the help desk that was using a classified computer. She told the 
investigator that she was actually performing the function under the coworkers’ 
usernames and has also done this under her supervisor’s username at his desk. She 
was able to do this when her coworkers or supervisor were not using their classified 
computers because access was limited to one user at a time.  
 
 Applicant explained to the investigator that at the call center each employee has 
three computers at their work station. One is unclassified, one is classified, and the third 
is CIE, another unclassified system. She did not know what the abbreviation stood for. 
Applicant only had access to the unclassified and CIE computers at her work station. 
She further explained that when someone called for help and they had an issue on a 
classified system, she was not able to help them using her credentials. So, while her 
coworkers were on the phone with someone and they were using one of their 
unclassified computers, she would go to a coworker’s work station and the coworker 
would enter their token to access their classified computer along with their password, 
and then Applicant used their classified computer to assist the person with their 
classified computer issues. She stated that she was not permitted to have access to the 
Secret classified system or the building. She believed the officer-in-charge had seen her 
in the building and was aware she did not have the proper clearance to be there. She 
did not think the officer-in-charge knew her coworkers and supervisor had given her 
access to the classified computer system by allowing her to login with their usernames 
and passwords. She told the investigator that she was aware that she was not 
supposed to use her coworkers’ computers. She explained that she would not be able 
to do her work if she did not have access to her coworkers’ classified computers. She 
needed her job to pay bills while she was waiting for her clearance.25  
 
 Applicant testified that she explained to the investigator that she worked in the 
help center and received calls requiring access to classified computers. She would pass 
these calls to her coworkers who had access. She said she was unable to help 
customers who had issues with their classified computers. She testified that she was 
never informed that her clearance was suspended. She testified it was a 
misunderstanding that she personally accessed classified computers. She denied she 
accessed classified computers. She said she would ask a coworker to assist a customer 
who had problems with their classified computer. She denied that she ever used 
someone else’s credentials to accessed classified information. There was no official 
action taken against Applicant for her conduct. Applicant testified that she did not 
                                                          
25 GE 2. 
 
8 
 
 
access classified computers without proper authorization. She said the investigator 
misunderstood her when he indicated this in his report.26  
 
 During the interview with the government investigator, Applicant was asked by 
the investigator why she had brought her cell phone into a facility that was marked on 
the door to the building “no personal electronic devices” (PED) allowed. This issue 
came up when during this interview, which took place in the secure building, Applicant 
referred to information from her cell phone. She told the investigator that she normally 
does not bring her cell phone to work, but because no one was at work that day, she 
brought it with her. Applicant also explained that the area where this interview took 
place was an unclassified area, even though it was in the building with the sign that 
prohibited PEDs. She said that she normally leaves her cell phone in her car or in the 
cell phone lockers just inside of one of the building entrances. Applicant stated that she 
did not bring her cell phone to work and use it because there were random scans for 
PEDs. She admitted to the investigator that it was wrong to bring her cell phone into 
work the day of her interview, and she did not normally do it.27  
 
 Applicant testified that she brought her cell phone into a building that had a sign 
outside prohibiting PEDs. She said she told the government investigator during the 
interview that she had information on her cell phone. She testified that the investigator 
told her to retrieve the phone to get the information and Applicant did. Applicant stated 
she was not in a secure area at the time. This contradicts the PSI that says the 
investigator asked her why she had brought her cell phone into a secure facility during 
her interview.28  
 
 Applicant testified that when she completed the January 2016 SCA she was in a 
hurry to complete the form. She knew she would be interviewed. Understanding that 
many questions require a “yes” or “no” answer, she did not have an explanation for why 
checking the accurate answer would take more time. She stated she wanted an 
opportunity to provide explanations for certain questions on the SCA.29  
  
 Applicant’s testimony was not credible. She deliberately omitted material facts on 
her January 2016 SCA when she failed to disclose her March 2015 marijuana use while 
holding a security clearance. She knowingly brought her cell phone into a building 
where PEDs were prohibited. Since about November 2016, she knowingly and 
repeatedly, without holding a security clearance, intentionally used other employees’ 
access credentials to gain unauthorized entry to classified computer systems and 
networks at the command where she provided information technical support.  
                                                          
26 Tr. 38-40, 60-63. 
 
27 Tr. 65-66; GE 2. 
 
28 Tr. 35-38, 64-65. 
 
29 Tr. 53-55, 57-59, 84. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant provided a statement of her intent not to use illegal drugs in the future 
and agrees to the revocation of a security clearance if she fails to abide by her intention. 
She provided character letters. In them, she is described as loyal, trustworthy, 
exceptional, serious, reliable, honest, courageous, ambitious, generous, resilient, 
respectful, dignified, motivated, patient, professional, competent, hard-working, and 
valued. She is involved in her community. She provided copies of certifications she has 
completed. She also provided a copy of her 2012-2013 enlisted evaluation. 30 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
30 Answer: EX. A, B, F, and I. 
 
10 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and 
substance misuse is set out in AG & 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 25 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any substance misuse;  
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
 There is sufficient evidence that Applicant knowingly used marijuana in March 
2015, while holding a security clearance. After she completed her SCA in January 2016, 
she again used marijuana in June or July 2016. In order to use it, she had to possess it. 
There is sufficient evidence to establish the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
11 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome the problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were being used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant knowingly used marijuana while holding a security clearance in 2015. 
After completing her SCA in January 2016, she again used marijuana in June or July 
2016. She did not hold a security clearance at that time. Applicant says she no longer 
associates with people who use illegal drugs and provided a letter of intent to not use 
drugs in the future. These facts weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, her 2016 use was 
with a family member. It is unknown whether she will disassociate herself from him. The 
concern is that Applicant held a security clearance when she used marijuana in April 
2015. She admitted to the investigator the details of her 2015 use. Later she denied her 
use was knowing. She admitted to the investigator that she used marijuana in 2016 with 
her cousin, and then denied it was knowing. This second use took place after she 
completed her SCA and was on notice of the importance of not using illegal drugs. I find 
that her behavior casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. She does not acknowledge her drug involvement, but apparently has 
disassociated herself from friends who use drugs. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. AG ¶ 
26(b) has some application, but it is not sufficient to overcome the security concerns 
raised under this guideline.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility:  
 
 
12 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
There is sufficient evidence that Applicant knowingly used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance. There is sufficient evidence that Applicant deliberately 
omitted her prior drug use on her January 2016 SCA, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b.  
 
The PSI is detailed and specific in which Applicant provided a step-by-step 
explanation to the government investigator regarding her drug use; her unauthorized 
conduct in gaining access to the command classified computer system; and her failure 
to disclose information she was required to on her SCA. She testified that the reason 
she failed to disclose the information alleged in her SCA was because she wanted to 
explain it during the government interview. She took that opportunity to explain her 
actions. It is not believable she was unaware of the contents of the PSI and that the 
investigator misunderstood numerous statements she made regarding her conduct as 
alleged. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
There is sufficient evidence that Applicant knowingly brought her personal cell 
phone into a building where PEDs are prohibited. There is sufficient evidence that 
beginning in November 2016, Applicant knowingly, without holding a security clearance, 
intentionally used others’ credentials to gain unauthorized entry to the classified 
computer systems and networks at a command where she provided information 
technology support. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply to SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d. 
 
Applicant’s explanation that because she was found not guilty to the 2012 DUI 
charge, she mistakenly believed she did not need to disclose it on her January 2016 
 
13 
 
 
SCA, and she was confused about the differences between being charged and 
convicted, was somewhat credible. There is insufficient evidence to conclude she 
deliberately omitted this information. I find in her favor for SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to prove mitigation. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying security 
concerns based on the facts: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant made a prompt good-faith 
effort to correct the omissions before being confronted with the facts. She provided 
inconsistent and contradictory explanations for her conduct in her Answer to the SOR, 
the PSI, and her testimony. None of her actions were minor or infrequent, but rather 
there is considerable evidence and a pattern of behavior that cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply.  
 
Applicant has not acknowledged her behavior. She gave the investigator a 
detailed account of how she did not have authorization to access the classified 
computer system, but gained access by using coworkers’ credentials with their 
permission. She brought her cell phone into a secure area against the rules. She then 
denied all of her past admissions during her testimony. I cannot find that AG ¶¶ 17(d) or 
17(e) apply. 
 
Guideline M: Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for drug involvement and 
substance misuse is set out in AG & 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
 
14 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations.  
 
AG ¶ 40 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) unauthorized entry into any information technology system; and 
 
 (e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 There is sufficient evidence that Applicant intentionally used other employees’ 
access credentials to gain unauthorized entry to the classified computer system and 
network at the command where she provided information technology support. While 
working at the help desk, when a call came in for assistance that involved a classified 
computer, her coworkers used their credentials to access a classified computer and 
then allowed Applicant to work on the classified computer, without proper authorization, 
to assist the customer. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The 
following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness;  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification to 
appropriate personnel; and  
 
(d) the misuse was due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions.  
 
Applicant’s conduct was not a one-time occurrence. Beginning in November 
2016, she repeatedly worked on classified computers using the credentials of 
coworkers. Her explanation was she needed to do this so she could assist those 
customers who had problems with their classified computers. Otherwise she was unable 
to assist them because she had not yet been granted the necessary credentials. The 
 
15 
 
 
misuse was not minor, but recurring. There is no evidence that she was attempting to 
do anything other than help the customers. She intentionally violated the rules and 
regulations. Applicant has been a part of the information technology program since she 
served in the Army. There is no evidence that her actions were inadvertent or that she 
was unaware of the proper protocol. Applicant knew she was not authorized to access 
classified computers until after she had the proper clearance. She was aware that 
working on a classified computer without the proper clearance was prohibited, and that 
it was wrong to use coworkers’ credentials, even with their permission. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, E, and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old Army veteran. She knowingly used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance. After submitting her SCA in January 2016, she used 
marijuana again. Applicant provided different explanations in her PSI, Answer to the 
SOR, and testimony for why she failed to disclose required information on her SCA. 
Applicant did not have a security clearance when she deliberately and repeatedly 
worked on classified computers using coworkers’ credentials to gain unauthorized entry. 
Applicant was disciplined while in the Army for similar conduct. Her testimony was not 
credible and inconsistent with prior accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
 
16 
 
 
security concerns arising under the drug involvement, personal conduct and use of 
information technology guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   3.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
