 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00564 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 14, 2015. 
On March 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.1  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 22, 2018. She elected to have her case 
decided on the administrative (written) record in lieu of a hearing. On April 9, 2018, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), 
including documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections to the Government’s evidence, and to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on April 13, 2018. She 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. The SOR 
and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the debts alleged in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.bb). 
She provided no explanations and no documents with her answer. I have incorporated 
her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. She has never married. She has a seventeen-year-old 
son. She has worked as an office manager for a defense contractor since March 2015. 
She was previously employed as an executive assistant for a corporation from August 
2006 to December 2008, when she was laid off. She was then unemployed for over two 
years, until April 2011. She worked as an executive assistant for another company for 
three-and-a-half years, until December 2014, when she was again laid off. She was 
unemployed for two months until starting her current position. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant disclosed no delinquent debts on her August 2015 SCA. Her background 
investigation revealed the 28 debts in the SOR. All of them are listed on credit reports 
from September 2015 or February 2018. (Items 5, 6) In the summary of her October 2016 
background interview, Applicant acknowledged some of her debts but claimed not to 
recognize others. (Item 4)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a is a debt to an auto company. It is $1,779 past-due, with a total balance 
due of $30,642. SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,541) is a consumer debt that has been charged off. SOR 
¶¶ 1.c ($2,336), 1.e ($2,214), 1.w ($1,617), 1.y ($525), 1.z ($273), and 1.aa ($121) are 
debts placed for collection by phone companies or cable television providers.  
 
SOR ¶¶1.i ($1,099), 1.p ($65) and 1.r ($399) are debts to retail or grocery stores. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($2,324), 1.g ($1,366), 1.s ($273), and 1.x ($1,006) are other debts in 
collection. SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($1,601), 1.k ($917), 1.l ($871), 1.m ($823), 1.n ($606), 1.q ($458), 
and 1.t ($185) are past-due medical debts. SOR ¶ 1.j ($979) is a debt to an insurance 
company. SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($1,290), 1.o ($169), and 1.u ($180) are debts to banks or for credit 
cards. SOR ¶ 1.v ($2,643) is a debt to a credit union. SOR ¶ 1.bb ($40) is for an unpaid 
speeding ticket.  
 
 
3 
 
 
When she answered the SOR, Applicant gave no explanation about the origin of 
any of the debts, all of which she admitted. While it is likely that some of the debts 
occurred during a period of unemployment, Applicant has not said this. She provided no 
information about any steps she has taken to settle, resolve, dispute, or otherwise 
resolve, any of the debts in the SOR, nor has she set out a plan to do so. She provided 
no documentation of the current status of any debt alleged. She also provided no details 
or documents about her current financial situation, such as her monthly income and 
expenses or her assets.  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.2 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”3 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
                                                          
2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
3 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.4 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns:  ¶¶ 19(a) “inability 
to satisfy debts” and (c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations” are applicable, 
given the record evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts.  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to apply any of these mitigating 
conditions. She admitted all of the debts, but offered no explanations or updated 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
information about their current status to show that any of the debts are resolved. She 
provided no documents about the current status of her debts. Applicant provided 
insufficient evidence from which to conclude that her financial issues are unlikely to recur 
and do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant did not establish that her debts occurred due to conditions beyond her 
control. Moreover, even if that were the case, Applicant did not establish that she 
undertook reasonable efforts under the circumstances to resolve the debts. AG ¶ 20(b) 
therefore does not apply. Similarly, she did not establish that she undertook sufficient 
good-faith efforts to pay or otherwise resolve her debts. She did not establish that AG ¶ 
20(d) should apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant did not provide sufficient documented 
information that she attempted to resolve her debts in a good-faith, responsible manner. 
She did not establish that her debts are being resolved or are under control, and did not 
establish that her debts are unlikely to recur or no longer cast doubt on her current 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.bb:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
       
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
