 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 18-00259 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns related 
to his history of delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2018, and requested his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing 
(Answer). On April 9, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by him on May 15, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant 
that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response 
to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to me on September 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted the 10 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. (Item 1) His 
admissions are incorporated into these findings. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is married to his second wife and has two children. 
He has served in the Army National Guard since 2005. He has worked for his current 
employer, a defense contractor since 2016. (Items 2, 3) 
 
 On September 29, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). In April 2017, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about information 
in his SCA and other background issues. During the interview, Applicant was asked about 
numerous delinquent debts. Applicant did not recognize several debts mentioned during 
the interview, but did recognize others. He said he would investigate the debts and resolve 
them if necessary. (Item 3) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2016, August 2017, and 
January 2018, the SOR alleged 10 debts that became delinquent between 2011 and 
2017, and totaled over $29,031. They included an automobile repossession, unpaid credit 
cards, a medical debt, and miscellaneous bills. In his Answer, he admitted that he is 
responsible for resolving his debts and intended to do that. He said that he is paying the 
$23,314 automobile repossession debt through a garnishment. He indicated that the debt 
arose after he co-signed a car loan for his brother-in-law, who defaulted on the loan. He 
stated that he intended to pay three alleged debts after he received an income tax refund. 
He was attempting to correct his financial mistakes that occurred when he was younger 
and did not know how to manage his finances. (Items 1, 4, 5)  
 
 Applicant did not include any evidence confirming his assertions that he was 
making payments on the repossession or had resolved any of the other debts. He did not 
provide a current budget or other information related to his financial obligations from 
which to determine his current financial reliability, compliance with payment agreements, 
or ability to maintain payments on the debts.  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
  
 
 
3 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
Based on his admissions and CBRs, Applicant has a history of being unable or 
unwilling to meet financial obligations, which began in 2011 and continues into the 
present. The evidence raises security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, 
and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. Four are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
There is insufficient evidence in the record to establish mitigation under any of the 
above mitigating conditions. The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR arose between 
2011 and 2017; all 10 remain unresolved. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. Applicant attributed 
his largest debt, the automobile repossession, to his brother-in-law, who defaulted on a 
loan that Applicant co-signed for him. His other debts occurred when he was younger and 
financially irresponsible. Both of those circumstances were within his control. He did not 
provide evidence that he has attempted to responsibly manage his financial obligations. 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant participated in credit or 
financial counseling, and that his delinquent debts are being resolved and are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He did not provide evidence that he has made-good 
faith efforts to repay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
 
 
6 
 
 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual, who has been serving in the National Guard since 
2005. He began working for a defense contractor in 2016. During an April 2017 
background interview, Applicant discussed his delinquent debts. In the February 2018 
SOR, the Government placed him on notice that his debts raised security concerns. After 
reviewing his Answer to the SOR, Department Counsel notified him in the FORM that he 
failed to submit sufficient documentation to address the status of the debts and to mitigate 
the financial allegations. Despite that notice, he did not provide additional evidence to 
confirm that he was resolving the largest alleged debt as he stated in his Answer or any 
of the other smaller debts. At this time, he has failed to present sufficient evidence of 
mitigation, including a track record of responsibly managing debts and financial 
obligations. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:      Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                 
   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
