 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00896  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq., Attorney at Law, The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
 
October 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
                                           
                 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
(Government Exhibit 1.) On April 19, 2018, the Department of Defense issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017.  Due to a 
typographical error, Department Counsel motioned to have the matter changed from an 
Applicant for a Trustworthiness Determination (ADP) case to an Industrial Security 
Clearance Review (ISCR) case without objection.  The motion was granted.     
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 30, 2018, (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
on July 18, 2018, scheduling the hearing for September 7, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  The Government offered five exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
offered fifteen exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through O, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record then 
closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 19, 2018.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 40 years old, and divorced with two children.  She has a high school 
diploma and military training.  She holds the position as Facility Security Officer for a 
defense contractor.  Applicant has served in the Army National Guard from 1998 to the 
present.  She is currently a Staff Sergeant.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made questionable decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
  Applicant has worked in the security field for the defense industry for the past 
sixteen years, and has held a security clearance that entire time.  She has never been 
accused of mishandling classified information.  Since April 2018, she has been working 
for her current employer.   
 
From March 2011 to 2018, Applicant worked for the Navy and held a TS/SCI that 
she received in November 2012.  She also serves in the Army National Guard, and held 
the position of Security Manager for the Joint Force Headquarters HIARNG from July 
2004 to March 2011. 
 
Applicant resigned from the civilian position with the Navy when she learned that 
a proposal for her removal was issued, and her clearance was suspended over 
complaints about her marijuana use.  Applicant admits to using marijuana with varying 
frequencies from approximately 2014 through at least 2016.  During that time, she held 
a security clearance and was a Security Specialist for the Navy.  It is a given that 
Applicant was well aware of the rules and regulations that govern the DoD security 
program, including the no drug tolerance policies.  Applicant has informed her current 
employer of her past illegal drug use. 
 
 Applicant explained that she and her same sex partner were in a committed 
relationship for about eleven years.  They fostered children, and eventually they 
adopted two children, with their legal parent being the Applicant’s partner.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit H.)  When marriage became legal, Applicant and her partner were married in 
April 2013.  In 2014, they divorced and Applicant’s ex-partner completely removed all 
contact with Applicant and the children.  It has now been about four years since 
Applicant has seen the children.  The divorce and losing the children was very difficult 
for Applicant and she believes it attributed to her lapse in judgment.  She has suffered 
 
3 
 
prolonged depression and anxiety and has been unable to sleep since then.  Applicant 
believes that this vulnerable state of mind caused her to use marijuana when she knew 
better.     
 
 In November 2014, after her divorce, Applicant started another relationship with a 
new partner.  This partner had a medical marijuana card and access to marijuana oils 
and other such products.  She introduced the Applicant to marijuana to help her relax 
and sleep.  She also provided it to Applicant.  Applicant states that she used marijuana 
about five times, the last time being sometime in 2016.  In retrospect, Applicant realizes 
that this relationship was toxic.  Applicant testified that she was afraid to start taking 
prescribed medication to sleep and declined it from the doctor.  She admits to making 
poor decisions by using the marijuana in the first place.  Applicant explained that when 
she and this partner broke up, her partner was upset with her and submitted an IG 
complaint which detailed that she witnessed Applicant use marijuana oils.  The 
command was made aware, an incident report was filed and a Department of the Navy 
Security Access Eligibility Report was issued against the Applicant.  (Government 
Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant is no longer associated with this partner and does not 
associate with anyone that uses illegal drugs.  She states that she will never repeat her 
misconduct and that she has now developed strong coping skills to avoid this situation 
in the future.     
 
 Applicant has signed a notarized statement of intent dated June 19, 2018, 
indicating that she will abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse in the 
future.  In the event that she uses any illegal drug again there will be grounds for 
revocation of her national security eligibility.  (Applicant’s Exhibit K.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation from former coworkers, fellow soldiers, professional 
associates and friends of the Applicant attest to her great work ethic, competence, 
knowledge and positive attitude. She is a hard worker who is diligent about her work 
product.  She is described as an exemplary performer, who is intellectually and 
emotionally well suited to serve under the Department of Defense.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
A.)      
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals for 2016 and 2017 reflect favorable ratings.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 The Army National Guard conducted two random drug tests on Applicant, one on 
September 11, 2016, the other on July 9, 2017 and both tests had negative results for 
any illegal drugs.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  Applicant also underwent a drug test in 
August 2018 that was negative for any illegal drug.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L.)    
 
 A letter from Applicant’s therapist dated November 1, 2017, who has worked with 
Applicant for a year and a half, indicates that in her opinion, Applicant has strong work 
ethics, integrity, and is fair, honest, and compassionate.  She did not find a need for 
referral to any alcohol or drug treatment program.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  
 
 
4 
 
 An Alcohol and Substance Use Assessment dated July 21, 2018, was conducted 
on Applicant by a licensed counselor and health professional. Based upon Applicant’s 
self-report and the American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
5, there was no evidence of an alcohol or substance use disorder.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
M.) 
 
 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying.  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive positon.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of the conditions are applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
6 
 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior, when considered as a whole, demonstrates that she was 
aware of the seriousness of her conduct by using illegal drugs while holding a security 
clearance, but that she was willing to disregard the law.  Furthermore, she may be 
subject to undue influence based upon her questionable judgment. The above 
disqualifying conditions have been established. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use is a serious violation of security rules and regulations 
in place to protect and control the defense industry.  Working in the security field and 
holding a security clearance is a critical mission requiring an individual’s utmost trust 
and confidence.  As a security specialist, Applicant is not only required to follow all 
security rules and regulations, but is required to ensure that other employees are 
equally as diligent.  In this case, Applicant let the Government down.  She made poor 
decisions that has affected her ability to properly protect the national secrets.  By using 
marijuana she violated company security policies, DoD security policies, and Federal 
law.  Her serious lapse in judgment is a security violation that cannot be taken lightly.  
She is remorseful for her misconduct.  However, at this time, not enough time has 
passed to show that her misconduct will not be repeated.  She has not offered sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant’s use of marijuana, regardless of the consistency, whether it be oil or 
otherwise, while holding a security clearance, and working in the defense industry will 
not be tolerated to any degree.  The conduct is egregious, recent, and also against 
Federal law.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   AGAINST Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
