 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No. 18-00349 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. Based on a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for a position of trust is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 16, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 24, 2018, and June 11, 2018. (Item 2.) She 
requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 2.) On June 14, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on June 15, 2018, and received by her on 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
July 12, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 45 days of her receipt 
of the FORM. Applicant’s reply was due on August 26, 2018. She did not file a response 
to the FORM. On October 11, 2018, the case was assigned to me. Items 1 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She has worked for a government contractor since 
December 2012, and reported no periods of unemployment since August 2007.1 In 2007 
she received a technical diploma in her chosen field. She married her second husband in 
September 2009, and has five children. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was indebted to 31 creditors in the total 
approximate amount of $20,500. On her March 2017 electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP) she disclosed that she was “looking for a reliable credit 
counselor.” Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.ee, with 
explanations. Applicant’s admissions, statements, and credit reports from April 2017 and 
January 2018 substantiate the debts addressed in the SOR. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 5; Item 
6.) 
 
 Of her 31 SOR listed debts, 24 of them were medical accounts placed for 
collections and ranged from $51 copays to $1,806 bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.k 
through 1.ee). They became delinquent between 2013 and 2017. During her July 2017 
subject interview, Applicant explained that she had not been able to afford to pay her 
medical bills due to being a single mother. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) In her Answer, she 
indicated that the debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.k through 1.ee had been 
removed from her credit report. However, she did not present evidence to show that she 
contacted any of these creditors, paid any of these debts, or that she had a legitimate 
basis to dispute any of them. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c alleged that Applicant was indebted on charged-off 
accounts in the amount of $3,144; $470; and $406, respectively. These debts have been 
delinquent since 2012. However, she failed to produce evidence of any payments or 
documentation of receiving financial counseling. In her Answer, Applicant claimed 1.c “will 
be p[ai]d when consultant states by July 2018,” but provided nothing to support that claim. 
(Item 2; Item 5; Item 6.) These debts are unresolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleged that Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the 
amount of $108. This debt became delinquent in 2012. In her Answer, Applicant claimed 
this debt was removed from her credit report. While this debt does not appear on the 
credit report she attached to her Answer, she did not present documentation that she 
                                                 
1 She was unemployed from January 2007 through August 2007, while attending school. 
 
 
3 
 
 
contacted this creditor, paid this debt, or that she had a legitimate basis to dispute it. (Item 
2; Item 6.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleged that Applicant was indebted on a judgment filed against her in 
the amount of $1,027. In her Answer, Applicant claimed this debt was removed from her 
credit report. While this debt does not appear on the credit report she attached to her 
Answer, she did not present documentation that she contacted this creditor, paid this 
debt, or that she had a legitimate basis to dispute it. (Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleged that Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the 
amount of $1,433. In her Answer, Applicant claimed this debt was removed from her credit 
report. While this debt does not appear on the credit report she attached to her Answer, 
she did not present documentation that she contacted this creditor, paid this debt, or that 
she had a legitimate basis to dispute it. (Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j alleged that Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the 
amount of $57. This debt became delinquent in 2017. In her Answer, Applicant claimed 
this debt was in the “process of being removed” and “being p[ai]d.” However, she did not 
document any payments or to otherwise support her claim. (Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant alluded to receiving help from a consultant in her Answer. However, she 
did not document any financial counseling or provide budget information from which to 
predict her future solvency. (Item 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
 
 
4 
 
 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Beginning in 2012, Applicant accumulated 31 delinquent debts that she has been 
unable to resolve. The evidence raises the above trustworthiness concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
There is insufficient evidence of mitigation under any of the above conditions. She 
has a long history of not meeting her financial obligations. While she attributed her debts 
to being a single mother, she has been married since 2009 and fully employed since 
September 2007. Her SOR-listed debts became delinquent while married. She did not 
produce evidence of any payments on her delinquent accounts or of receiving financial 
counseling. While the majority of her debts do not appear on the credit report she included 
with her Answer, she did not document legitimate disputes with her creditors. It is likely 
that Applicant will continue to experience financial difficulties. She failed to meet her 
burden to mitigate the Government’s concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
 
 
6 
 
 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 45-year-old 
employee of a government contractor. At this time, she has not established a reliable 
track record of resolving delinquent debts and achieving financial solvency. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility, 
and suitability for a position of trust. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.ee:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. National security eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                               
  
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
