 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 18-00102 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate concerns 
raised by his history of marijuana use, purchase, and continued use after being granted 
public trust eligibility in June 2011. He also failed to mitigate personal conduct concerns 
raised by his drug involvement and the falsification of two personnel security 
questionnaires. His request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 16, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the drug involvement and 
substance misuse and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
2 
 
access to sensitive information and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility 
to occupy a public trust position. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 27, 2018. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on May 18, 2018, and did not respond. The items appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 32, has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since 
November 2012. Applicant graduated from college in 2010 and has spent the last eight 
years working on federal contracts. He completed a Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Position in December 2010 and was adjudicated favorably in June 2011. He completed 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in August 2016. He 
did not list any derogatory information on either application. During his first subject 
interview in March 2017, Applicant admitted to drug involvement. The SOR alleges that 
Applicant used marijuana from 2004 to approximately January 2017, and after being 
granted public trust eligibility (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he purchased the drug on multiple 
occasions between 2009 and January 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and, that he intends to use 
marijuana in the future (SOR ¶ 1.c). The SOR also alleges Applicant’s drug use under 
the personal conduct guideline (SOR ¶ 2.a) in addition to the falsification of Section 21: 
Illegal Drugs3 on his December 2010 public trust questionnaire (SOR ¶¶ 2.d) and 
Section 23: Illegal use of Drugs or Drug Activity4 on his August 2016 e-QIP (SOR ¶¶ b – 
c).5  
 
Applicant admits his history of marijuana use, purchase, and continued use after 
being granted a public trust position. He admits purchasing and using marijuana with a 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 Section 21: Illegal Drugs: (a) In the last year, have you illegal used any controlled substance, for 
example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, 
etc.) or prescription drugs? (b) In the last 7, years, have you been involved in the illegal purchase, 
manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving, or sale of any narcotic, depressant, 
stimulant, hallucinogenics, or cannabis, for your own intended profit or that of another? 
  
4 Section 23: Illegal Use of Drugs or Controlled Substance: In the last seven (7) years, have you 
illegally used any drugs or controlled substances? Use of a drug or controlled substance includes 
injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experiment with or otherwise consuming any drug or controlled 
substance?  Illegal Drug Activity: In the last seven (7) years, have you been involved in the illegal 
purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking production, transfer, shipping, receiving, handling or sale of 
any drug or controlled substance? 
 
5 GE 1-6. 
 
 
3 
 
friend with whom he maintains ongoing contact.6 However, he denies the falsification 
allegations claiming: 
 
It was a long form and I did not read the question thoroughly enough. It is 
a complicated worded question that doesn’t even mention marijuana. I had 
to read through it several times to actually figure out if I should even admit 
guilt. When I see the word, controlled substance, I think of something like 
heroine. Now I understand it says illegal drug; that is myself being tired 
and my personal views on marijuana being different than a controlled 
substance. I also know that this is inconsistent with the law. I admitted to 
using the substance as much to the investigator and have been consistent 
with my statement after the fact.7  
 
I filled in the form incorrectly, and readily corrected my mistake when 
asked for clarification from the investigator. I have fully complied and been 
truthful with all of my answers to the best of my ability.8  
 
 Applicant continued to use marijuana after his March 2017 interview. In his 
response to DOHA interrogatories, dated February 6, 2018, Applicant admitted that he 
used marijuana in the two weeks before in January 2018. He admits in his answer to the 
SOR that he will continue to use marijuana in the future.9  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision. 
 
                                                          
6 GE 6.  
 
7 GE 2.  
 
8 GE 2.  
 
9 GE 2, 5.  
  
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
 Applicant admits using marijuana from 2004 to January 2017, including after 
being granted public trust eligibility in June 2011, and purchasing the drug between 
2009 and 2017.10 The illegal use of controlled substances can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, because such behavior may lead to physical 
or psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.11 Applicant’s 14-year history of 
drug involvement is disqualifying on its own and is exacerbated by his continued use of 
marijuana after being granted public trust eligibility and during the current adjudication 
of his ongoing eligibility. Applicant acknowledges that his views are inconsistent with 
federal law and that he will continue to smoke marijuana in the future.12 Given the 
ongoing nature of Applicant’s illegal drug involvement, none of the relevant mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s ongoing reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive information.13 Here, Applicant’s ongoing 
marijuana use creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group.14 
 
An applicant’s lack of candor or dishonesty also raises questions about his public 
trust eligibility. Of special interest in any adjudication, and this case in particular, is an 
applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
                                                          
10 AG ¶¶ 25 (a), (c), (f). 
 
11  See, AG ¶ 24.  
 
12 AG ¶ 25(g). 
 
13 AG ¶15.  
 
14 AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
 
5 
 
process.15 The SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his history of 
marijuana use and purchase on a December 2010 public trust questionnaire and an 
August 2016 e-QIP. The record supports a finding that Applicant intentionally falsified 
both questionnaires.16 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). 
However, an omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person 
genuinely misunderstood the question. Applicant’s explanation that he not understand 
the term ‘controlled substance’ is not credible. Section 23 on the August 2016 e-QIP 
clearly asks about illegal drug use and purchase. Applicant knows the marijuana is an 
illegal drug. Section 21 on the public trust questionnaire is more direct, specifically 
listing marijuana as an illegal controlled substance. However, the language of both 
questionnaires is clear. A reasonable person with Applicant’s history of drug 
involvement, reading the same questions, would have understood that his history of 
drug use should have been disclosed.  
 
 Applicant’s falsifications are not mitigated because he volunteered his drug 
involvement during his background interview. An applicant is expected to provide full, 
frank, and candid disclosures to the Government at all times. Anything less provides a 
rational basis for a finding against an applicant’s security worthiness. On the December 
2010 questionnaire, Applicant withheld material information that prevented the 
Government from properly vetting his public trust eligibility. It is unlikely that Applicant 
would have been adjudicated favorably if he admitted contemporaneous drug use.  
 
Whole-person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to 
make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”17 During the current 
adjudication, Applicant revealed conduct that supports a negative whole-person 
assessment of his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. His behavior also casts 
doubt on his ability to follow rules and regulations and demonstrates a disregard for his 
fiduciary relationship with the government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 15. 
 
16 AG ¶16(b). 
 
17 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and  
Substance Misuse:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant public trust eligibility. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy 
a position of trust is denied.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
