 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00673 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on May 11, 2018, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on June 18, 2018. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on June 27, 2018. As of 
August 16, 2018, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 
2018. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2016. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 
2009 until he was honorably discharged in 2013. He deployed to Afghanistan twice 
while in the military. He attended college for a period without earning a degree. The 
most recent information available indicates that he has never married, but he lives with 
a cohabitant. He has two children.1 
  
 The SOR alleges state tax liens of $5,217 and $1,548; a $4,014 debt for back 
child support; a $1,523 debt to a state agency; and six miscellaneous delinquent debts 
totaling about $25,000. Except as described below, the debts are established by credit 
reports, a search of state court records, or Applicant’s admissions.2 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $11,757 charged-off auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
The September 2016 credit report shows the loan as opened in June 2016, current, with 
a $20,431 balance. The February 2018 credit report lists the account as charged off, 
with the balance and the amount past due both reported as $11,757.  Applicant wrote in 
response to the SOR that he had been talking to the creditor about removing the 
account from his credit report. He did not submit any supporting documentation or state 
the nature of his dispute.3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $4,014 child support arrearages alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c, but he stated that the amount owed was being taken out of his paycheck. He 
denied owing the $1,523 debt to a state agency (SOR 1.i). It is unclear, but that debt 
may also be related to child support. The September 2016 credit report lists the $1,523 
debt to a state agency and child support accounts with balances of $0, $554, and 
$2,044. The $1,523 debt to a state agency is not listed on the February 2018 credit 
report. That report lists four child support accounts: three with $0 balances and one with 
a $4,014 balance. Applicant reported owing $3,000 in child support arrearages on his 
August 2016 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), but he stated the 
amount owed was nearly paid.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleged a $115 debt to a cable services provider. Applicant admitted 
owing the debt, but he stated that it was recently paid. He did not submit any supporting 
documentation. The debt is reported with a $115 balance on the most recent credit 
report in evidence.5 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4. 
 
2 Items 2-8. 
 
3 Items 2, 5, 6. 
 
4 Items 2-6. 
 
5 Items 2, 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the state tax liens of $5,217 and $1,548, filed in 2016 
and 2017 respectively. On his August 2016 SF 86, he reported owing about $5,000 in 
state and federal taxes for 2014 and $2,000 in federal taxes for 2015. He noted that he 
did not have the money to pay the taxes when they were due, but he had payment 
plans in place. During his October 2017 background interview, he stated that his 
employer did not withhold enough for taxes from his paycheck in 2014. He stated that 
his child support obligations prevented him from completing the payment plans. He 
stated that he will not have any new tax problems because he changed the number of 
allowances to zero, which increased the amount withheld from his pay. He anticipated 
paying his taxes with his refund from tax year 2017. His response to the SOR included 
documentation from his state that $301 was withheld from what would have been his tax 
refund for 2017 and applied to taxes owed from 2014. No additional documentation was 
provided about his taxes.6  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the four remaining delinquent debts, which total about 
$13,300. He did not provide additional information about how or if he intends to pay the 
debts. He reported no periods of unemployment since he left the military. Except for the 
tax-withholding issue from 2014 and his child support obligations, there is little 
information about the cause of his financial problems. There is no evidence that he 
received financial counseling. Because he did not respond to the FORM, the current 
state of his finances is unknown.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
6 Items 2-4, 7, 8. 
 
7 Items 2-6. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including delinquent debts, child 
support arrearages, and unpaid state taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant stated that his employer did not withhold enough for taxes from his 
paycheck in 2014, and that his child support obligations prevented him from completing 
the payment plans he had in place to pay his taxes. He reported no periods of 
unemployment since he left the military. His failure to comply with tax laws suggests 
 
6 
 
that he has a problem with abiding by well-established government rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01726 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2018). A 
person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as paying taxes 
when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-
01382 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2018).  
 
 Applicant’s statement that his child support is being withheld from his paycheck is 
accepted, as is his statement that the $115 debt is paid. SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, and 1.i are 
mitigated. He denied owing the $11,757 charged-off auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but 
he did not submit any supporting documentation or state the nature of his dispute. That 
debt is not mitigated. He admitted owing the remaining debts and state taxes, but 
except for $301 that was withheld from what would have been his tax refund for 2017, 
he has not shown payments toward any of the debts. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
taxes. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Concerns about Applicant’s 
finances are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service, and particularly his deployments to Afghanistan. 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
