 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 18-00979 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana on several occasions from about June 
2011 to about August 2015 and once in January 2018. Guideline H (drug involvement 
and substance misuse) security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On May 13, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 2) On May 16, 
2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; 
and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective on June 8, 2017.   
 
The statement of reasons (SOR) detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under 
Guideline H. (Item 1) 
 
2                                         
 
On June 8, 2018, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. (Item 1) On July 2, 
2018, Department Counsel completed a File of Relevant Material (FORM) including three 
exhibits. (Items 1-3) On July 12, 2018, Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM. On 
August 10 and September 20, 2018, Applicant responded to the FORM. On October 16, 
2018, the case was assigned to me. There were no objections to my consideration of 
Items 1-3 and the FORM response, and all proffered documents are admitted into 
evidence. 
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 1) He admitted that 
he used marijuana with varying frequency from about June 2011 to about January 2018. 
(Item 1) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old engineer, and a defense contractor has employed him 
since February 2016.2 In 2011, he graduated from high school, and in 2016, he graduated 
from a top-tier engineering school with a bachelor’s degree. He has not served in the 
military. He has never married, and he does not have any children.  
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
In Applicant’s May 13, 2016 SCA, he admitted occasional use of marijuana from 
about June 2011 to about August 2015.3 Initially he used marijuana in social situations. 
Later, he used marijuana for medication and relief of anxiety. He used marijuana two or 
three times a month for one year. For the remainder of June 2011 to August 2015, he 
used marijuana less frequently. He said, “I no longer intend to use [marijuana] as it has 
relieved me of my past illnesses.” He denied that he had any drug-related arrests or 
convictions, and he denied use of any illegal substances while holding a sensitive position 
or security clearance. 
 
On January 31, 2018, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
conducted an enhanced subject interview of Applicant.4 Applicant reiterated the 
information in his SCA about his history of marijuana consumption, and he added that he 
ate a marijuana-laced brownie cookie in January 2018. He did not consume marijuana 
from August 2015 to January 2018, and he is not dependent on marijuana. He consumed 
the marijuana in January 2018 because he learned marijuana was now legal in his state. 
He associates with marijuana users. He has never had any treatment for drug misuse.  
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 The information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s May 13, 2016, Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 2) 
 
3 The information in this paragraph is from Section 23 of Applicant’s May 13, 2016 SCA. (Item 2) 
   
4 The information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s January 31, 2018 Office of Personnel 
Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI). (Item 3) 
 
3                                         
 
In Applicant’s FORM response, he provided drug test results for a urine sample he 
submitted on August 18, 2018, that was negative for cocaine, marijuana, 
methamphetamine, and opiates. He explained that during his adolescence, he rejected 
prescribed medication for being shy, introverted, and anxious, and instead he chose 
occasional marijuana use. He described his history of marijuana use as infrequent, 
immature, and unsophisticated. After his OPM PSI, he severed his contacts with frequent 
marijuana users. He was never dependent on marijuana. He has had a successful career 
working for the government contractor. He does not suffer from anxiety, and he has no 
reason to use marijuana in the future. He has matured, and he promised not to use 
marijuana in the future.       
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
 
4                                         
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Director of National Intelligence (DNI) Memorandum ES 2014-00674, “Adherence 
to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use,” October 25, 2014, indicates: 
 
[C]hanges to state laws and the laws of the District of Columbia pertaining 
to marijuana use do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines . . . . An individual’s disregard of federal law pertaining to the 
use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains adjudicatively relevant in 
national security determinations. As always, adjudicative authorities are 
expected to evaluate claimed or developed use of, or involvement with, 
marijuana using the current adjudicative criteria. The adjudicative authority 
must determine if the use of, or involvement with, marijuana raises 
questions about the individual’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
willingness to comply with law, rules, and regulations, including federal 
laws, when making eligibility decisions of persons proposed for, or 
occupying, sensitive national security positions. 
 
5                                         
 
AG ¶ 25 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition)”; and “(c) 
illegal possession of a controlled substance . . . .” Applicant possessed and used 
marijuana5 on numerous occasions. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
                                            
 5 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 
21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement 
Administration listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales 
v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6                                         
 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant provided some mitigating information. He ended his marijuana 
possession and use in January 2018, and he does not associate with frequent marijuana 
users. He understands that marijuana involvement is inconsistent with holding a security 
clearance. He promised not to use marijuana in the future.  
 
The evidence against mitigating drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns is more substantial. Applicant possessed and used marijuana from about June 
2011 to about August 2015 and in January 2018. Each time he possessed marijuana, he 
committed a federal crime. He used marijuana in 2018 after indicating in 2016 that he 
was not going to use marijuana and after completion of an SCA. His marijuana use in 
January 2018 is recent. Drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns are 
not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline H are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old engineer, and a defense contractor has employed him 
since February 2016. In 2016, he graduated from a top-tier engineering school with a 
bachelor’s degree. He describes his current employment with a defense contractor as 
highly successful. In his FORM response, he indicated he does not associate with 
frequent marijuana users, and he promised not to use marijuana in the future. There is 
no evidence that he used marijuana after January 2018.   
 
 
7                                         
 
The evidence against granting Applicant’s security clearance is more persuasive. 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana on several occasions from about June 2011 to 
about August 2015 and once in January 2018. Each time he possessed marijuana, he 
committed a federal crime. He used marijuana in 2018 after indicating in 2016 on his SCA 
that he was not going to use marijuana in the future. His marijuana possession and use 
“raises questions about [his] ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.” AG ¶ 24.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. More time without misuse of illegal 
drugs is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Guideline H 
security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
