 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00504 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 25, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On March 8, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
(December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear as to when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the 
case file. In a sworn statement, dated March 20, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on May 11, 2018, and he was afforded 
an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, 
Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative Guidelines 
applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on May 24, 2018. Applicant’s 
response was due on June 23, 2018. Applicant timely submitted several documents in 
response to the FORM, and they were admitted as Applicant exhibits without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.r., 1.t., 1.v., 1.x., 
and 1.y.). In addition, he added comments to some of his answers. Applicant’s admissions 
and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as a desktop support specialist with his current employer since March 2017. A 1991 high 
school graduate, Applicant earned an Associate’s degree in 2012, as well as some 
additional college credits, but no other degree. He has never served with the U.S. military. 
He has never held a security clearance. Applicant was married in 1997, and divorced in 
2002. He was remarried in 2015, and separated in 2016. He has six children, five of whom 
were born out of wedlock: three sons, born in 2002, 2005, and 2007; and three daughters, 
born in 1997, 2005, and 2008. 
 
  
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations1 
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in July 2016, he reported six issues regarding 
his finances: delinquent accounts or judgments associated with unpaid rent and an 
automobile loan. He denied having any other financial delinquencies. When he was 
interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 
May 2017, Applicant characterized his current financial situation as “getting better,” and 
he acknowledged that he is not meeting all his current obligations on time. He discussed 
several delinquent accounts that he had failed to list in his e-QIP. However, when the 
investigator confronted him with information regarding several other delinquent accounts, 
Applicant openly discussed some of them, but claimed to have no knowledge of 
numerous other delinquent accounts, including judgments.  In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant attributed his financial problems, in part, to his frequent periods of 
unemployment and having insufficient funds to maintain his financial responsibilities. He 
denied living above his means, and claimed that he “just ran into some hard times.” In 
fact, some of those “hard times” were the result of his being fired or otherwise terminated 
from positions with various employers. Applicant said he was doing his best until he could 
get back on his feet financially. He noted that he had managed to resolve some debts, 
and was current with contemporary child support payments, but he acknowledged still 
having some child support arrearage to catch up.  
The SOR identified 25 purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed for 
collection, charged off, or filed as judgments, as generally reflected by Applicant’s 2016 
or 2018 credit reports. Applicant contended that some of the outstanding balances 
identified in the SOR would be reduced once a written repayment plan is established, but 
he offered no documents to reflect that any such repayment plans had been established, 
or any payments had been made. Those debts, totaling approximately $97,245, are 
described below: 
 There are 11 student loan accounts, all of which were at least 120 days or more 
past due, with remaining balances of $14,274 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); $9,578 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); $9,331 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.); $5,573 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); $5,391 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); $5,349 (SOR ¶ 1.g.); $4,336 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.); $3,592 (SOR ¶ 1.j.); $2,749 (SOR ¶ 1.l.); $1,875 (SOR ¶ 1.m.); and $458 
(SOR ¶ 1.o.).2 Applicant’s May 2018 credit report reflects that he has made no monthly 
payments on the accounts since 2016, some of the accounts were in a deferred status 
until August 6, 2018, and until that date, those accounts were considered current. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that all of the student loans remain delinquent. 
Other than his comment regarding the largest student loan being in forbearance,3 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: Item 2 (Answer to the SOR, dated March 20, 2018); Item 3 (e-QIP, dated July 25, 
2016); Item 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated January 23, 2018); Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, 
and Equifax Credit Report, dated August 2, 2016); Item 6 (Judgment Filings, various dates); and Item 7 
(Personal Subject Interview, dated May 19, 2017); TransUnion Credit Report, dated May 22, 2018, attached 
to Applicant’s Response to the FORM.  
 
2 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2-3. 
 
3 Item 2, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Applicant submitted no documents to support conclusions that the accounts were still in 
a deferred status, or that he had made any payments regarding them. The accounts have 
not been resolved; 
There is a child support arrearage in the approximate amount of $13,058 that 
remains unpaid (SOR ¶ 1.b.);4 a credit card with a past-due and remaining balance of 
$4,365 that remains unpaid, although Applicant contends the balance will be reduced with 
a repayment agreement , but no such agreement was submitted (SOR ¶ 1.h.);5 a furniture 
store charge account for which $3,415 was charged off that remains unpaid, although 
Applicant contends the balance will be reduced with a repayment agreement , but no such 
agreement was submitted (SOR ¶ 1.k.);6 a telephone account with an unpaid balance of 
$897 that remains unpaid, although Applicant contends the balance will be reduced with 
a repayment agreement, but no such agreement was submitted (SOR ¶ 1.n.);7 an internet 
account with an unpaid balance of $425 that remains unpaid, although Applicant contends 
the balance will be reduced with a repayment agreement, but no such agreement was 
submitted (SOR ¶ 1.p.);8 a department store charge account with an unpaid balance of 
$344 that was charged off and remains unpaid, although Applicant contends the balance 
will be reduced with a repayment agreement, but no such agreement was submitted (SOR 
¶ 1.q.);9 an automobile loan for a repossessed vehicle with an unpaid balance of $4,737 
that was charged off and remains unpaid, although Applicant contends the balance will 
be reduced with a repayment agreement, but no such agreement was submitted (SOR ¶ 
1.v.);10 an unspecified type of account with an unpaid balance of $1,126 that remains 
unpaid, and Applicant claims to have no idea about the account (SOR ¶ 1.w.);11 a medical 
account with an unpaid balance of $858 that remains unpaid, although Applicant contends 
the balance will be reduced with a repayment agreement, but no such agreement was 
submitted (SOR ¶ 1.x.);12 and a telephone account with an unpaid balance of $156 that 
remains unpaid, although Applicant contends the balance will be reduced with a 
repayment agreement, but no such agreement was submitted (SOR ¶ 1.y.).13 Those 
accounts have not been resolved. 
                                                          
4 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2; Item 5, supra note 1, at 14, 16. 
 
5 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2; Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
7 Item 4, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
8 Item 4, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
9 Item 4, supra note 1, at 3; Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
10 Item 5, supra note 1, at 8, 16. 
 
11 Item 5, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
12 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
13 Item 5, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
5 
                                      
 
There are two separate default judgments based on unlawful detainer14 in the 
amounts of $999 each, filed by the same creditor in June and July 2010, neither of which 
has been paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.r. and 1.s.);15 and there are another two separate default 
judgments based on unlawful detainer in the amounts of $1,590 each, filed by another 
creditor in May and June 2011, neither of which has been paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.t. and 1.u.).16 
Although Applicant contended that the latter two judgments were duplicates, they are not, 
as each one has a separate case number. In May 2017, Applicant claimed to the OPM 
investigator that he was not aware of the four judgments,17 a situation that was possible, 
but not likely, considering that they were all default judgments. However, during the 
ensuing year, he offered no indication that he had established any repayment plan or 
made any payments to the creditors. Those judgments have not been resolved. 
Applicant contended that when his financial circumstances permitted, he was able 
to resolve some non-SOR debts, but the few documents he submitted reflected minimal 
or unspecified payments to some creditors in February 2014; August 2015; and June 
2018. He also indicated that when he is in a better financial situation, he intends to set up 
repayment arrangements to pay off his delinquent accounts in the very near future.18  
Applicant’s recent Pay Statement reflects that through June 1, 2018, he had 
received gross wages of $19,555.59, but after deductions, his net pay was $5,967.84. 
Among his deductions were separate child support payments totaling, year to date, 
$3,451.80 and $3,560.51. There are no payments to creditors listed.19 He did not indicate 
if he has any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending or 
savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of financial counseling. 
Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his financial situation is now under control, 
but to the contrary, he stated that if he can obtain a security clearance, his financial 
situation should improve. 
  
                                                          
14 Unlawful Detainer is the act of retaining possession of property without legal right. The term 
unlawful detainer ordinarily refers to the conduct of a tenant who is in possession of an apartment or leased 
property and refuses to leave the premises upon the expiration or termination of the lease. See  
https://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Unlawful+Detainer 
 
15 Item 5, supra note 1, at 5; Item 6, supra note 1, at 1-2. 
 
16 Item 5, supra note 1, at 5; Item 6, supra note 1, at 3-4. 
 
17 Item 7, supra note 1, at 14. 
18 It should be noted that the Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts 
in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting 
in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
19 Pay Statement, dated June 1, 2018, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Policies 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”20 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”21   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”22 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.23  
 
                                                          
20 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
21 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
22 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
23 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”24  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”25 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
                                                          
24 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
25 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had 25 delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, charged 
off, or filed as judgments, totaling approximately $97,245. He has never expressed an 
unwillingness to satisfy his debts, but instead claimed that he had insufficient funds to do 
so. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) have been established. AG ¶ 19(b) has not been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;26 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;27 and 
                                                          
26 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
27 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
 
9 
                                      
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it 
is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant attributed his financial difficulties, in part, to his frequent 
periods of unemployment and having insufficient funds to maintain his financial 
responsibilities. He denied living above his means, and claimed that he “just ran into some 
hard times.” As noted above, some of those “hard times” were the result of his being fired 
or otherwise terminated from positions with various employers. There is no documented 
proof that Applicant has actually contacted his creditors or collection agents to settle 
them.  
Applicant’s declared future intentions to pay his debts is simply a hope for financial 
improvement, not an established strategy for a financial plan. There is no documentation 
to reflect that Applicant made any efforts, before or after he was interviewed by OPM in 
May 2017, or before or after the SOR was issued in March 2018, to: obtain financial 
counseling from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; dispute his delinquent accounts with the credit reporting agencies or the creditors 
themselves; contact his creditors to set up repayment plans; or indicate that payments 
had been made to his creditors.28 An applicant who begins to resolve his financial 
problems only after being placed on notice that his or her security clearance is in jeopardy 
may be lacking in the judgment and self-discipline to follow rules and regulations over 
time or when there is no immediate threat to his or her own interests.29 In this instance, 
to date, there is no meaningful evidence that any corrective actions have been taken by 
Applicant. There is little evidence to conclude that Applicant’s finances are under control. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
                                                          
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
28 See ISCR Case No. 12-01335 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017). 
 
29 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018); ISCR Case No. 17-00569 at 
3-4 (App. Bd. Sept. 18, 2018). 
 
10 
                                      
 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed action, are insufficient.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.30  
  
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 46-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor serving as a desktop support specialist with his current 
employer since March 2017. A 1991 high school graduate, Applicant earned an 
Associate’s degree in 2012, as well as some additional college credits.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has 25 delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection, charged off, or 
filed as judgments, totaling $97,245. Among those debts are 11 student loan accounts, 
all of which were at least 120 days or more past due; 4 separate default judgments based 
on unlawful detainer; $13,058 in child support arrearage; and a variety of delinquent credit 
cards, charge accounts, telephone accounts, medical accounts, and Internet accounts, 
none of which have been addressed by Applicant over a lengthy period.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:31 
                                                          
30 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
31 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding the debts in his name. Overall, the evidence leaves 
me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 
2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.y.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
