 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 18-00805 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations or Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on 
May 24, 2018, and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 27, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on July 2, 2018, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided an undated, 
one-page response to the FORM, with attachments including the names and addresses 
of four character references, a copy of a July 18, 2018, pay stub, and a letter from his 
community college. The Government’s evidence, was identified as Items 1 through 6. 
 
2 
 
 
All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to 
me on October 11, 2018.  
 
 Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. He graduated from high school in 2008, and had some 
community college courses, but did not obtain a degree. Applicant has been employed 
as a structural design learner by a federal contractor since March 2017. He has never 
been married and he has an eight-year-old son. Applicant states that he had a period of 
unemployment from October 2006 to November 2008. He reports no military service or 
previous security clearance.  
 
Applicant disclosed an arrest in February 2008 for possession of marijuana (MJ) 
with intent to sell in section 22 of his Security Clearance Application (SCA).2 He stated “I 
was in someone’s car driving it. When I got pulled over, there was marijuana in the 
glove box and I got arrested for it.” The case was dismissed when Applicant agreed to 
attend a drug-substance abuse course. In section 23 of the SCA, he disclosed that he 
smoked MJ in social settings with friends, approximately once every six months during 
the last seven years. He does not intend to use MJ again because he does not like the 
way it makes him feel. In his clearance interview, Applicant said he smoked blunts once 
every three months, due to peer pressure, but he no longer associates with these 
friends.3 The MJ supposedly had no impact on him, and he quit smoking it because of 
consequences to his career.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR (Answer), Applicant admitted 12 of the 14 delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR totaling $37,974. These included eight delinquent student loan 
debts owed to the Department of Education (DOE), a child support arrearage, consumer 
debts, and medical debts. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.n, claiming 
that his mother used his personal information and took out these “fast loans” in his 
name. He is working with an attorney to have these removed from his credit history. 
However, Applicant has provided no documents or evidence to support his claims. 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant also admitted the five allegations under 
SOR ¶ 2 for personal conduct, with explanations. In SOR ¶ 2.b, Applicant admits to 
making the false statement alleged regarding being charged with any felonies. He 
responded negatively in the SCA because the charge was reduced to a misdemeanor. 
Further, “the incident occurred when I was 18 years old, and the girl was 15. It was 
consensual, but I realize it was wrong due to the age difference between us.”4 In SOR ¶ 
2.c, Applicant responded that his MJ use was in the past, and he has changed his 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 26, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 2) 
 
2 Item 2.  
 
3 Item 3, p. 6.  
 
4 Item 1, Answer to SOR at p. 2.  
 
3 
 
 
lifestyle. In SOR ¶ 2.e he responded that his arrest for possession of MJ with intent to 
sell, was seven years ago and it was a misdemeanor charge. “I realize now that it was 
wrong, and it will never be an issue again.” Attached to his Answer, were a letter of 
representation from his attorney dated May 18, 2018, and two job performance reviews 
from March and April 2018.  
 
In his clearance interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator on December 8, 2017, Applicant explained that he previously worked full 
time at a casino from December 2013 to April 2017, and part time for three years at a 
community college where he took classes for one semester. When confronted by the 
OPM investigator with a discrepancy, Applicant admitted that he only actually worked at 
the college for four months from August 2009 to December 2009. Applicant 
acknowledged that he purposely misrepresented the dates of this employment to fill in 
the gaps because Applicant had a long period of unemployment from December 2009 
to January 2012. Applicant was terminated by the casino in April 2017.  
 
Applicant told the OPM investigator that he wasn’t earning enough money to 
repay his student loans, which Applicant said totaled $40,000. Sometime in 2017, 
Applicant started to have $40 per week deducted from his paycheck for student loan 
repayments. He initially claimed to have no knowledge about his delinquent debts to 
Department of Education (DOE) at SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h, totaling $34,172. He stated 
his intention to pull his credit report and confirm these debts, and if legitimate, he 
promised to take care of them.5 In his undated response to the FORM (response), 
Applicant said he was aware he was in default on his student loans, but was in the 
process of getting out of debt. He had met with an attorney to help him and he started 
weekly payments of $40 for his student loans, and $154 for child support payments – to 
be deducted from his paycheck. He attached a July 2018 pay stub that confirmed this.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleges an account placed for collection in the amount of $470 and 
SOR ¶ 1.m is for another account placed for collection by telecommunications 
providers. Applicant told the OPM investigator that he would contact the two providers 
and start payment plans, but he produced no documentary evidence to substantiate 
this. He thought that the medical debt at SOR ¶ 1.l was for a visit to a hospital. He 
promised to contact the creditor, but provided no documents to substantiate any efforts 
to resolve this delinquent debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleged a falsification in the SCA at section 26. Applicant admitted this 
in his Answer, and explained that at the time, he did not have a stable job. I find that it 
was intentional. Similarly, Applicant admitted to the falsification allegation in section 22 
of his SCA at SOR ¶ 2.b. His explanation was that the sexual assault felony charge was 
later reduced to a misdemeanor charge of reckless endangerment, which he pled guilty 
to as a part of a plea bargain. Nonetheless, he was clearly charged with a felony. He 
admitted to the criminal offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c – 2.e. He explained that the bag 
containing 2-3 ounces of marijuana, which fell out of the glove compartment, when 
                                                          
5 Item 3, at p. 10. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was stopped by police, was actually his friend Michael’s bag. Yet, Applicant 
produced no corroboration from Michael, or other evidence to substantiate his claims.    
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and his clearance interview of December 2017. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(b) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.6 Applicant has not met that burden. 
None of the delinquent debts have been resolved.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant endured a long period of unemployment. Arguably, this condition was 
beyond his control. He has produced a May 2018 letter of representation by his attorney 
with his Answer to the SOR and two favorable job performance evaluations. It is unclear 
if his attorney is providing financial counseling. In addition, Applicant attached to his 
response to the FORM, a July 2018 pay stub showing deductions weekly for child 
support and student loans. This is some evidence of at least one repayment on these 
debts. These efforts were on the eve of his FORM. He claims that his mother took out 
loans in his name in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.n. He may have reason to dispute these 
delinquencies, but he has provided no evidence of disputes. In short, he has provided 
insufficient documentation to mitigate the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. These 
debts are recent and ongoing. He has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to 
show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred 
under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The mitigating conditions 
enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard  classified or 
sensitive information.  
Since Applicant admitted his intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, his intent is not an issue. Applicant responded negatively when asked if 
he had any delinquencies regarding routine accounts in the last seven years in section 
26 of his SCA (Financial). The wording of the questions in section 26 of his SCA could 
not be more straightforward and unambiguous. Similarly, he responded negatively to 
questions in section 22 (Police Record) in the same SCA when asked if he was ever 
 
8 
 
 
charged with any felony offense. Since he had been charged with a sexual assault on a 
15-year old eight years before completing the SCA, it is difficult to envision 
circumstances under which he could have misunderstood the question or forgot about 
the sexual assault allegation. Although it was not alleged in the SOR, Applicant 
admitted his duplicity about the length of his employment with the community college, 
(four months vice three years) when he was interviewed by the OPM investigator. 
Applicant did not answer the SCA questions honestly. I conclude that he had the 
specific intent to deceive when he provided this false answers in sections 22 and 26, 
and he deliberately falsified the SCA. He admitted to the other transgressions alleged in 
SOR ¶ 2. SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.e have not been mitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E and Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
been candid or forthcoming in the security application process, and he has not mitigated 
his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations or under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.n:             Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.e:                       Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                   Administrative Judge 
 
