 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00090 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 5, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 14, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
(Government Exhibit 1.)  On March 1, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations; Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the DoD after 
June 8, 2018.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 17, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on July 26, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 28, 2018.  The Government offered four 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits but she testified on her own behalf. The 
 
2 
 
record remained open until close of business on September 11, 2018, to allow the 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant did 
not submit anything.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 6, 
2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 25 years old. She has completed four years of college, but has no 
degree.  She is employed by a defense contractor as a Control Center Specialist.  She 
is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
 The SOR identified eight delinquent student loan accounts totaling  
approximately $30,000 showing a history of financial problems.  Applicant admits each 
of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.  She has been working for 
her current employer since January 2017, and has never held a security clearance 
before.  The following student loans were outstanding:             
 
 1.a.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $2,795.   
 
1.b.  A delinquent U.S department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $2,270.            
 
 1.c.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $2,229.        
 
1.d.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $2,635.   
 
1.e.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $5,914.         
 
1.f.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $5,864. 
       
1.g.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $3,687.       
 
 
3 
 
1.h.  A delinquent U.S. department of education student loan debt was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $4,797.         
 
 Applicant testified that she is now paying her student loans.  She believes that 
they have been consolidated and based on upon her bills, she pays $5 monthly toward 
her student loans.  She states that since she began working for her current employer 
she has been making these payments.  (Tr. pp. 20-21.)  
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has used controlled substances that 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.  
 
 Applicant has a history of marijuana use from 2010 to at least August 2018.  She 
testified that she smoked marijuana a few times a week during this period.  She has 
also purchased marijuana during this period.  She estimates that she has smoked 
marijuana a total of more than 200 times, but not more than 500.  On August 14, 2017, 
she was interviewed by a DoD investigator, and at that time she indicated that she 
intended to continue using marijuana in the future and at that same frequency.  
Applicant understands DoD policy and regulations that prohibit the use of illegal drugs.  
She also realizes that her company has a no drug policy as well as the fact that 
marijuana use is against Federal law.  She stated, in part, … “personally I don’t see the 
harm.”  Applicant last used marijuana a few days before the hearing.  (Tr. p. 23-24.) 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated May 14, 2017.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  In response to Section 23 
concerning her illegal drug use, Applicant was asked if “in the past seven years, has 
she illegally used any drugs or controlled substances?” The Applicant answered, “NO.” 
This was a false response.  Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her marijuana use 
set forth under subparagraph 2(a) of the SOR.         
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the above mentioned allegation set 
forth under this guideline.  She admitted that she was scared about how her marijuana 
use would affect her job and so she lied in response to the question on her security 
clearance application.  She is remorseful about her deliberate falsification. (Tr.pp. 25-
26.) 
 
 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant remains excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  She 
has failed to demonstrate that she has done much to resolve her delinquent debts.  The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have 
considered each one of them below:    
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;    
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply.  Applicant states that she is paying her 
student loans, but has provided no documentary evidence that substantiates this.  The 
record was left open for her to provide evidence of these payments and she failed to 
submit anything.  She has failed to establish any meaningful track record of repayment.  
Moreover, Applicant has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  In 
fact, presently there are no indications, other than her testimony, that her student loans 
are being addressed in any fashion or are under control.  
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and  
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse.  
 
7 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 Despite DoD policy, Federal law, and her company policies that prohibit illegal 
drug use, Applicant plans to continue using marijuana in the future. 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
 
8 
 
 From the evidence provided, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her use of 
marijuana on her security clearance application.  The fact that she did not admit this use 
in response to questions on her security clearance application indicates behavior that 
shows questionable judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness.     
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F, Guideline H, and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has 
failed to provide sufficient documentation to show proof of payment toward her 
delinquent student loans.  She also continues to use marijuana despite the Federal law 
and DoD policy and she deliberately falsified her security clearance application 
concerning her illegal drug use.  Applicant is young and naïve, and does not understand 
the importance of holding a security clearance, or the responsibilities that come with 
that privilege.  She is not an individual with whom the Government can trust to be 
provided access to classified information, or that the information will be properly 
protected.  Applicant has not demonstrated that she meets the qualifications for a 
security clearance.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with many questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations, Drug Involvement 
and Substance Misuse, and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
