 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00636 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
  For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esquire 
                                               For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct).1  Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on June 29, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on July 12, 2018. Applicant 
did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to the 
FORM. The Government’s evidence, included in the FORM and identified as Items 1 
through 6, is admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 
2018. Based on my review of the documentary evidence, I find that Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He graduated from high school in 1994. He served in 
the U.S. Navy from 1995 to 2007, receiving an honorable discharge. He is married and 
has three children. He has been employed as a test engineer with various contracting 
companies. Applicant was granted a security clearance by DOD in 2006, but he does 
not currently hold a security clearance. Applicant completed his latest security clearance 
application (SCA) in December 2016. He has been employed with his current company 
since 2016. (Item 3)    
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that between April 1, 2015, and April 22, 
2016, while working for a shipbuilding company, he directly and indirectly billed the 
Government for approximately 296 hours of work time which he did actually work; that 
during the time billed but not worked, he downloaded and catalogued more than 10,000 
images of women on his work computer and approximately 850 of these images 
involved nudity or could be considered pornographic; and finally, as a result of the first 
two SOR allegations, he was terminated from that job on or around May 2, 2016. (Item 
2) 
 
 Applicant explained that there was no work to do on the ship but he had to be 
available to support the Navy crew should they need it. He stated that no actual work 
was being done but he was directed to charge his time to the project. (Answer to SOR) 
He emphasized that while on the project, even though, there was little or no work to do, 
he was directed by his supervisor to continue charging hours to the project. Applicant 
reported that he kept himself busy by surfing the Internet as described in the SOR. He 
acknowledged that what he did was wrong and that his termination in 2016 was 
justified.(Answer to SOR) 
 
 An incident history report (JPAS) notes that Applicant during an interview and 
investigation, he admitted falsifying the work records. He was terminated for misuse of 
company resources on May 2, 2016. (Item 4, 6)  
 
 On June 27, 2017, the Department of the Navy debarred Applicant from 
Government contracting for three years through June 27, 2020. The hours mischarged 
were adjusted in the amount of about $28,568. (Item 6) 
 
          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
 
 
 
 
3 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, and 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected 
information;  
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources;  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing;  
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations under personal conduct and the 
investigation that ensued establish that he charged the Government 
contract time when he was not working on the contract. He accessed 
websites and downloaded images of non-work related images of females. 
This occurred from April 1, 2015 to April 22, 2016. He downloaded some 
 
 
 
 
5 
images that could be pornographic. As a result of this behavior he was 
terminated from his employment. He has been debarred from contract 
work for about three years. He admitted to falsifying his work records. 
Therefore, AG 16(d), (e) and (f) apply. 
 
17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant intentionally knowingly and willfully misreported the number of 
hours worked on Government contracts. This occurred over a period of one year. It is 
not the result of a one-time mistake or an isolated incident. Although he admitted to the 
wrongdoing, he explained that his supervisor directed him to report all hours to the 
contract project. Applicant’s actions reveal untrustworthy or unreliable behavior and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. This was a misuse of Government 
time and resources. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. Applicant admitted to the SOR allegations and provided 
no response to the FORM. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old test engineer. He served honorably in the U.S. Navy 
from 1995 to 2007. He is married and has three children. He was granted a security 
clearance in 2006, but he does not hold one at this time.  
 
Applicant admitted to the wrongdoing of mischarging work on a government 
contract (296 hours). He downloaded and catalogued more than 10,000 images of 
women, some of which could be considered pornography. This occurred over a period 
of one year while employed as a government contractor.  
 
 Applicant explained that due to a lack of work at that time, his supervisor agreed 
that he charge all hours to the Government project. The reasons he gave are not 
plausible. He was ultimately terminated and debarred from Government contract work 
until June 2020. He acknowledged that what he did was wrong. I have doubts as to 
Applicant’s trustworthiness, judgment, and reliability. Any doubts must be resolved in 
favor of the Government. Under these circumstances, I find Applicant has not mitigated 
the personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
7 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
