 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00027 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew W. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 24, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on February 16, 2018. The case was 
assigned to me on May 10, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on June 11, 2018, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on August 8, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit list was 
marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A-C, 
 
2 
 
which I admitted without objection. The record was held open until February 16, 2018, 
for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE D-G, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 16, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b., but he denied the remaining 
allegations. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 2011 as 
an aircraft mechanic. He served in the Air Force from 2002 to 2010. He was honorably 
discharged while holding the rank of staff sergeant (E-5). He has a high school diploma. 
He married in 2004 and divorced in 2008. He has no children.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to timely file his federal tax returns for 
2014 and 2015; that he failed to timely file his state tax returns for 2014 and 2016; and 
that he owes delinquent federal taxes for 2014 in the amount of approximately $10,236, 
and for 2015 in the amount of $8,377. He admitted in his security clearance application, 
his security clearance interview, and his hearing testimony not filing his federal and 
state tax returns and owing federal taxes for the stated years.2  
 
 Applicant claimed that he did not realize he had to file tax returns if he was due a 
tax refund. For that reason, he did not timely file his 2014 federal and state tax returns. 
He timely filed his 2015 federal tax return and has since timely filed all federal returns. 
Applicant claims he filed his 2014 state tax return, but failed to document any filing. He 
provided documentation establishing that he filed his 2016 state tax return, although the 
date of the filing is not indicated in the documentation.3 
 
 After filing his 2016 federal income tax return in March 2016, he was informed by 
the IRS that he owed delinquent taxes for tax years 2014 and 2015. He allowed his tax 
representative from a nationally known tax service to contact the IRS to set up a 
payment plan. Once he filed his 2014 and 2015 federal tax returns, it was determined 
that Applicant owed $10,236 for 2014 and $8,377 for 2015. Applicant was sent notices 
by the IRS of these delinquent taxes in May and June 2016.4 
 
 Applicant documented that he obtained a bank loan for $14,000, which he used 
to pay $10,540 for his 2014 federal tax debt and pay $2,959 toward his 2015 federal tax 
debt. He made these payments in August 2018. He claimed that he could not afford to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 18-20; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-26; GE 1-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-29; GE 2; AE F. 
 
4 GE 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
make any payments before then. For the remaining balance of his 2015 federal tax 
debt, Applicant arranged a payment plan with the IRS (no date on document) whereby 
he will have $200 monthly taken out of his bank account payable to the IRS. Under the 
terms of his bank loan, Applicant is to pay $340 monthly for 60 months. At the time of 
his hearing, he had made one payment.5 
 
 Applicant presented his performance evaluations for 2013 through 2017, with the 
resulting overall ratings: 2013—exceeds expectations; 2014—exceeds expectations; 
2015—effective performer; 2016—effective performer; 2017—highly effective 
performer.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25-26, 39-40; AE A-C, E. 
 
6 AE G. 
 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant had unfiled federal and state tax returns for 2014, and unpaid federal 
taxes for 2014 and 2015. I find all the above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Even though Applicant filed his delinquent federal and state tax returns (at least 
his 2016 state return) before the issuance of the SOR, he failed to show significant 
progress toward paying his federal taxes for 2014 and 2015 until after the SOR was 
issued in this case. This pattern shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment for someone who served in the military. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant claims he was unaware of the requirement to file tax returns if he was 
due to receive a refund. His mistaken belief of his legal requirement is not a condition 
beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant claimed he used a professional tax service to deal with the IRS in 
2016, however, he failed to make payments toward his delinquent debt until August 
2018. He receives some credit for making lump-sum payments to the IRS in August 
2018 and establishing a payment plan with the IRS for the remaining balance of his 
2015 tax owed. However, he failed to timely address his federal tax filings and 
payments and failed to document that he filed his 2014 state tax return. His delayed 
action does not equate to a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his tax issues. AG ¶ 20(c) 
and AG ¶ 20(g) partially apply, and AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service. However, I also considered that he 
delayed in dealing with his federal and state tax issues. He has not shown responsibility 
in exercising his lawful duty to file his federal and state tax returns and pay his taxes 
owed.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.c:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
