 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00267 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 6, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) After reviewing the results of the 
background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On February 6, 2018, DOD 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2018. He admitted all but one of the 23 
delinquent debts. (SOR 1.s). He requested that the matter be decided on the written 
record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on April 
20, 2018. (Item 6) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
MAY 3, 2018, and he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not 
provide a response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on July 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from college in 2009 with a bachelor’s degree in 
electrical engineering. After receiving his degree, he worked as a laboratory assistant at 
his alma mater, and as a technical service engineer for a private business. He is not 
married but has had a cohabitant since March 2014. He has not served in the military 
and has no children. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated December 6, 2016) 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that he did not timely file his federal and 
state income tax returns for tax year 2012. (SOR 1.v and 1.w) The SOR also alleges 
and credit reports (Item 4, dated January 10, 2018; Item 5, March 31, 2017) confirm the 
following delinquent debts: student loans in collection for $20,696 (SOR 1.a), $19,413 
(SOR 1.b), $8,474 (SOR 1.c), $6,349 (SOR 1.d), $5,286 (SOR 1.e), $4,212 (SOR 1.f), 
$3,638 (SOR 1.g), $3,032 (SOR 1.h), $1,598 (SOR 1.i), $1,459 (SOR 1.j), $1,028 (SOR 
1.l), $771 (SOR 1.n), $669 (SOR 1.o ), $385 (SOR 1.p),and $257 (SOR 1.r). Also listed 
are an account placed for collection for $1,280 (SOR 1.k), a credit card account in 
collection for $939 (SOR 1.m), a medical account in collection for $302 (SOR 1.q), and 
two credit card accounts to the same creditor for $20,589 (SOR 1.t), and $6,949 (SOR 
1.u). He denies a judgment for $1,611 (SOR 1.s), stating that it is a mistake on his credit 
report. The total amount of the SOR delinquent is approximately $107,526. 
 
 On the e-QIP, Applicant reported he did not timely file his 2011 and 2012 federal 
and state income tax returns. He stated he failed to file the returns because of personal 
relationship challenges complicated by a very demanding and stressful job in his first 
years of a new career requiring long hours and undivided attention. He tried to file his 
2011 tax returns but he was told by his tax accountant that the time for filing was past. 
He did not think any action was required because he owed no taxes. He also noted that 
his economic deferment for student loans ran out in fall 2010. His father provided him 
with guidance and advice on financial matters, but his father passed away. Since his 
father could not advise him, Applicant did not know he could take advantage of an 
opportunity to renegotiate the terms of his student loan payments. He was unable to 
keep up with the loan payments when he lost his girlfriend’s income, and he had to rely 
only on his income. He reported that he has not taken action to consolidate the student 
loans to lower his payments. On his other debts, he reported that “life events led to my 
losing track of financial obligations.”  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not present any documentary evidence of negotiations with the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to file or paying any taxes he may owe. He did not 
present any evidence to verify any payments made on any of his debts. He did not 
present any evidence to show that the judgment at SOR 1.s is not a judgment issued 
against him.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial 
obligations. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage 
his or her finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s admitted in in his e-QIP and his response to the SOR that he failed to 
timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2012.  Information in the 
credit reports establishes the delinquent debts noted in the SOR. The evidence of 
record is sufficient to raise the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. The information provided by Applicant in 
his e-QIP and in response to the SOR establishes that Applicant did not timely file his 
2012 tax return. Applicant has to establish his good-faith efforts to meet his financial 
obligations. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant must act responsibly given his 
circumstances. He must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial 
problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s 
plan must show a systematic method of handling financial obligations. Applicant must 
also establish a meaningful track record of filing tax returns and resolving debts. A 
meaningful track record of tax return filing and resolving debt can be established by 
evidence of actually filing tax returns and establishing a plan to pay debts. A promise to 
file tax returns and pay debts is not a substitute for a track record of filing returns in a 
timely manner and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
 Failure to timely file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. It is well known that 
federal tax returns for a particular tax year are to be filed by April 15 of the following 
year, unless an extension is applied of and granted. Voluntary compliance with 
government rules and systems is essential for protecting classified and sensitive 
information. A person who fails to fulfill his or her legal obligation to timely file tax 
returns does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required 
for a grant of access to classified or sensitive information. An applicant’s failure to timely 
file tax returns is a strong indication that the individual may not follow the rules and 
guidance concerning safeguarding classified and sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant has not presented any evidence that he filed his past-due tax returns. 
There are procedures available to a taxpayer to file tax returns even if they do not have 
the funds to pay the taxes due. Applicant did not follow the established government 
 
6 
 
 
rules and procedures and contact federal and state tax authorities for help to 
understand the actions she must take. He just simply failed to file the tax returns. 
Applicant presented no evidence that he received financial counseling.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence to establish that he is paying or resolving his other 
SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his tax filing and financial problems are 
being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all these 
circumstances, Applicant failed to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to establish that he took reasonable and responsible 
action to resolve his tax and financial obligations. Applicant did not demonstrate 
appropriate management of his finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
He has not established his suitability for access to classified information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
