 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00169 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq., The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
 
October 5, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 6, 2010, and June 22, 2015, Applicant submitted security clearance 
applications (e-QIP’s). (Government Exhibits 1 and 2.)  On March 12, 2018, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 24, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on July 30, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on September 14, 2018.  The Government offered 
six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered nineteen exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s 
 
2 
 
Exhibits A through S, which were admitted without objection.  He also called two 
witnesses and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on September 24, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old, is divorced a second time, and has three children.  He 
is currently finishing up a Bachelor’s degree.  He is employed by a defense contractor 
as an Integrative Platform Manager.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.  Applicant began working for his current employer in 
May 2018.  
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has used controlled substances that 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Navy from 1998 to 2008.  He 
received an honorable discharge from the Navy in January 2008, and retired as an E-5.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  During his military career he received a number of awards and 
commendation including the National Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service 
Medal, Good Conduct Medals (2), the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal and others.  
He entered the Navy on a delayed entry program, and during a urinalysis, he tested 
positive for cocaine.  He explained that when he was called to the MEF to start 
processing to join the military, in addition to giving blood, getting shots and 
immunizations, he was given a urinalysis.  At that time, Applicant tested positive for 
cocaine.  Ultimately, he was given a waiver for this misconduct, and allowed to join the 
Navy.  Applicant obtained a security clearance in 2007 while the military.   
 
 After retiring from the Navy, Applicant went to work for a number of defense 
contractors assigned overseas, as a civilian.  Applicant testified that he spent almost a 
total of five years deployed overseas during which time he worked for five different 
defense contractors.  While overseas, from February 2010 to May 2010, on a weekly 
basis, Applicant used hashish, while holding a security clearance.  He testified that he 
purchased the hashish from a local bazaar in the area.  Applicant explained that he 
used the hashish to help him deal with stress.  At the time, Applicant was having 
problems with his ex-wife, child custody issues, transitioning out of the military and 
immediately going overseas for a civilian job, as well as the hostile environment he 
encountered on the job.  (Tr. p. 76.)  He was also dealing with an ill sister.   
 
 Applicant further testified that while working overseas for the defense 
contractors, he was assigned to work on a Federal Installation.  He was aware of 
“General Order Number One” which prohibits alcohol use, sex, and any illegal drug use 
on base which applies to everyone on a Federal installation.  (Tr. p. 77.) 
 
3 
 
 In September 2010, the U.S. military accused the Applicant of wrongful 
possession of hashish with the intent to distribute, wrongful distribution of opiates, 
wrongful distribution of dangerous drugs, wrongful possession of hashish and wrongful 
use of hashish.  Applicant stated that one of the defense contractors did not like the fact 
that Applicant, or anyone else for that matter, would use hashish and called for an 
investigation.  Applicant stated that he left the area to come back to the United States 
about two days after the investigation started.  He was given a one year bar order from 
the Commander and told to go home and take care of his family.  (Tr. p. 80.)   
 
 Applicant states that he last used hashish in Afghanistan in May 2010.  He states 
that he purchased it for $5, and never sold it or intended to sell hashish to anyone while 
overseas.  He purchased it for himself to use only.  He states that he has no future 
intent to use illegal drugs of any sort.  He signed a letter of intent indicating that if he 
uses any illegal drug he consents to the automatic revocation of his security clearance.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  He does not associate with anyone who uses illegal drugs.  He 
believes he has matured since the incident, and learned a tough lesson from his 
misconduct.  (Tr. pp. 85-86.)   
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his offer of employment from his current employer.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit K.)  He submitted a Substance Use Assessment Report dated April 
6, 2018, and the results of a drug test on April 5, 2018, both of which indicated that 
there were no substance use concerns observed at that time.  (Applicant’s Exhibits F 
and J.)  Applicant states that his security officer is aware of his situation, and a security 
clearance is a condition of employment.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 6, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Section 23 concerning illegal 
drug use, Applicant was asked if “in the past seven years, has he illegally used any 
drugs or controlled substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, 
hashish, ect.) narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, ect.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, ecstacy, ketamine, etc.), 
depressants (barbituates, methaqualone, tranquillizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, 
PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs?” The 
Applicant answered, “NO”. This was a false response.  Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose his use of hashish weekly from February 2010 to May 2010.         
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 6, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  In Section 23 concerning his 
illegal drug use, Applicant was asked if “he has ever illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance; while employed as a law enforcement 
officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; or while in a position directly and immediately 
affecting the public safety?”  The Applicant answered, “NO”. This was a false response.  
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his use of hashish weekly from February 2010 to 
May 2010.         
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 6, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  In response to Section 23 
concerning his illegal drug use, Applicant was asked if “in the past seven years, have 
you been involved in the illegal possession, purchase, manufacture, trafficking, 
production, transfer, shipping, receiving, handling, or sale of any controlled substance 
including prescription drugs?”  The Applicant answered, “NO”. This was a false 
response.  Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his purchase of hashish weekly in 
February 2010.         
 
 In July 2010 and again in August 2012, Applicant was interviewed by DoD 
investigators and on both occasions he deliberately failed to disclose that he used 
hashish weekly from February 2010 to May 2010; that he used hashish after being 
granted a security clearance in April 2007, and that he purchased hashish in February 
2010. 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 22, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  In Section 23 concerning his 
illegal drug use, Applicant was asked if “in the past seven years, have you illegally used 
any drugs or controlled substances?”  The Applicant answered, “NO”. This was a false 
response.  Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his use of hashish weekly from 
February 2010 to May 2010.         
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 22, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  In Section 23 concerning his 
illegal drug use, Applicant was asked if “in the past seven years, have you been 
involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, 
transfer, shipping, receiving, handling, or sale of any drug or controlled substance?”  
The Applicant answered “NO”. This was a false response.  Applicant deliberately failed 
to disclose his use of hashish weekly in February 2010.         
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated June 22, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  In Section 23 concerning his 
illegal drug use, Applicant was asked, if he has ever illegally used or otherwise been 
involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance 
other than previously listed?”  The Applicant answered, “NO”. This was a false 
response.  Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that he used hashish after being 
granted a security clearance in April 2007.          
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the above mentioned allegations set 
forth under this guideline.  He realizes that he had four different opportunities on his 
security clearance applications to disclose his use of hashish to the Government.  He 
also had about four different interviews with a DoD investigators where he should have 
disclosed his hashish use, and did not.  This is a total of eight opportunities to disclose 
his hashish use and did not do so.  He explained that he continued to lie because he 
knew he had lied in 2010, and just wanted to bury the situation.  He felt he had to stick 
to his story.  He was afraid of losing his job and his security clearance.  (Tr. pp. 89-90.)  
Applicant was granted a Top Secret security clearance based upon this erroneous 
 
5 
 
information.  In 2015, Applicant was up for a periodic review of his security clearance.  
Again, he did not disclose his use of hashish and decided to lie again on the application. 
(Tr. p. 92.)  It was not until June 2016, when Applicant met with a DoD investigator that 
he disclosed his hashish use.  After six years of telling the lies, he states that he knew it 
was not the right thing to continue to do.   
 
 Applicant gives great credence to a program he entered that has helped him deal 
with his decision making and honesty.  In November 2015, Applicant participated in a 
program to become a Life Coach and his morals and values and ethical standpoint 
changed.  He wanted to be honest about everything.  He has now obtained his Life 
Coach Certificate and Master Life Coach Certificate and is active in the program.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.)   
 
 Letters of recommendation submitted on Applicant’s behalf from his professional 
colleagues, friends, and ex-wife, attest to his strong work ethic, maturity, his ability to 
properly handle classified material, and his overall trustworthiness and reliability.  
(Applicant’s Exhibits I and N.)   
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluation from 2014 to 2015 shows that he 
“consistently exceeds expectations,” has “exceptional performance,” or is a “stand out”.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit H.)   
 
 Two witnesses who have known the Applicant for many years and consider him a 
good friend, attest to his hard working nature, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
Applicant is described as a loyal person, intelligent, self-starter who loves his job, and 
feels terrible about his mistakes in the past.  Applicant is highly recommended for a 
security clearance.  (Tr. pp. 26-57.)       
 
 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding sensitive position.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of the conditions are applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors demonstrate full mitigation.  Although the use of 
hashish occurred about eight years ago, Applicant used hashish while holding a security 
clearance, while deployed and working overseas for the Government, and while working 
on a Federal Installation.   
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
8 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false information or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
 
 Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his hashish use on multiple security 
clearance applications and during numerous interviews with DoD investigators during 
his security background checks over the course of about six years.  The fact that he 
continued to conceal this information from the Government from 2010 to 2016, and was 
subsequently granted a Top Secret clearance based on fraudulent information raises 
serious questions about his credibility and indicates behavior that shows questionable 
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness.     
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate that he meets the qualifications for a security 
clearance.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with many questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
