KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Because Applicant has not raised an allegation of error on the part of the Judge, the
decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 18-00020.a1
DATE: 10/18/2018
DATE: October 19, 2018
In Re:
----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 18-00020
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 19,  2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)  and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).1  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On August 17, 2018, after
considering the record, Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, it
contains a narrative statement about his financial situation and his efforts to pay his debts.  His brief
also contains a document that was not previously submitted to the Judge for consideration.  The
Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
  
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale          
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
1 In the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Department Counsel withdrew the sole Guideline E allegation.
2
