 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00019 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 22, 2018, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on March 22, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on March 29, 2018. He did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. I admitted the Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 in 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 13, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is 60 years old. He married in 
1982, divorced in 1994, and remarried in 2011. He has three adult children and one 
adult stepchild.1 
 
 Applicant obtained his high school diploma in 1977. He has worked as a tooling 
technician for various defense contractors since 1991. As of his 2017 security clearance 
application (SCA), he has worked for his current defense contractor since July 2005. He 
was first granted a security clearance in 1989. He has owned his home since 1994.2  
 
 The SOR alleges three judgments totaling $14,345, two filed against Applicant by 
the same creditor in 2010 for $663 and $665 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d), and one filed against 
him in 2012 for $13,017 (SOR ¶ 1.b). It also alleges two medical accounts placed in 
collection for $39 and $179 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e). The June 2017 credit report verifies all of 
Applicant’s delinquent debts. SOR ¶ 1.a is the only delinquent debt reported in the 
December 2017 and March 2018 credit reports. Applicant also listed and discussed his 
delinquent debts in his 2017 SCA and background interview.3 
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the SOR: 
 
I do admit I was not the best at paying my past bills on time . . . I was not 
very good at keeping track and paying bills. As I have grown older, I have 
done a whole lot better and try to pay everything well before the due date.4  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.a is for a medical debt in collection for $39. Applicant stated in his 
response to the SOR that he was unsure to whom the original debt belonged. He 
intended to locate the collection agency to determine such and resolve the debt. He did 
not provide documentation to show that he paid or otherwise resolved this debt.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b is for a $13,017 judgment filed against Applicant in May 2012. 
Applicant indicated in his SCA and response to the SOR that the underlying account is 
for a loan he was pressured to obtain with his mortgage. He indicated that the creditor 
from whom he obtained the loan subsequently went out of business. After his mortgage 
was purchased by another lender, “the rest of the note has since been bought by 
                                                          
1 Items 1-6. 
 
2 Items 1-6. 
 
3 Items 2-6. 
 
4 Item 1. 
 
5 Items 1, 4-6. 
 
3 
 
several different companies.” He indicated that he would attempt to negotiate with the 
current creditor, who was unwilling to take payments in the past, and he did not have 
the income to make a one-time payment of the judgment in full.6 
 
 During his background interview, Applicant stated that SOR ¶ 1.b was for a 
personal loan that he later disputed when the creditor tried to charge him more than the 
amount he owed. He stated that the debt remained unpaid due to his dispute. After the 
original creditor went out of business, he did not hear from the current creditor until two 
to three years later. As of his background interview, he had not heard from the current 
creditor for years and he did not intend to pay the judgment until he had. He did not 
provide documentation to show that he paid or otherwise resolved this judgment.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is for a $663 judgment filed against Applicant in December 2010, and 
SOR ¶ 1.d is for a $665 judgment filed against him in August 2010. Both judgments 
were filed by the same creditor. Applicant indicated during his background interview and 
in his response to the SOR that he believed SOR ¶ 1.d was a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.c, 
and he intended to determine if, in fact, it was. He was also unsure for whom the debt 
underlying the judgments belonged, though he believed it might be related to a hospital 
bill for a sleep apnea test. He intended to ascertain the identity of the underlying 
creditors by contacting the creditor that filed the judgments. He stated that he would 
then try to reach a payment arrangement to resolve any valid judgment remaining. He 
did not provide documentation to show that he paid or otherwise resolved these 
judgments.8                                                                                                                                               
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e is for a medical debt in collection for $179. Applicant indicated in his 
SCA and response to the SOR that this debt was not filed properly with his insurance, 
and he waited too long to challenge it. He then forgot to pay it, but he intended to. He 
stated during his background interview that his wife paid the debt after he completed his 
SCA.9 
   
 Applicant stated during his background interview that his overall financial status 
was improving daily and he was timely paying his other debts. He indicated in his 
response to the SOR that he is a hardworking and proud U.S. citizen. He stated and his 
credit reports verify that he is current on his mortgage.10 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Items 1-4. 
 
7 Items 1, 2, 4. 
 
8 Items 1-4. 
 
9 Items 1, 4. 
 
10 Items 1, 4-6. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.e was only reported in the June 2017 credit report. 
Applicant’s statement that his wife paid this debt after he completed his SCA is 
corroborated by the December 2017 and 2018 credit reports, which no long report this 
debt. As such, I find SOR ¶ 1.e in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that his financial problems stemmed from poor financial 
management. As such, they did not result from conditions beyond his control. In 
addition, he did not provide documentation to show that he has taken action to resolve 
or dispute SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c., or 1.d. He did not provide documentation to 
corroborate his claim that SOR ¶ 1.d is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.c. At this time, there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and 
they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.e:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
