 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00677 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 22, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
(Exec. Or.); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on April 13, 2018. She requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2018. On June 21, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing, 
 
2 
 
scheduling the hearing on August 8, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered five documents into evidence, which I marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5. These exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered five documents, which I marked as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A-E and were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript on 
August 23, 2018 (Tr.). 
 
 I held the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional exhibits. On August 21, 2018, she provided Department Counsel with 21 pages 
of documents, which I have marked as AE F-L. These exhibits are admitted without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant was 26 years old at the time of the hearing. She has never married and 
has no children. She earned a bachelor’s degree in December 2013. After graduating, 
she worked for two years for a non-governmental employer. She left that job in January 
2016 and experienced four months of unemployment before she was hired in May 2016 
by her current employer, a major defense contractor. This position is a better fit for her 
interests and education. 
 
On August 7, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 
connection with her new job. Her employer pays her a good salary for a recent graduate 
and is also paying for her to continue her education. (Tr. 21-22.) Earlier this year, she was 
selected to be part of her company’s management rotation program to expose new 
employees to various parts of the company. (AE K.) Her work and her certifications 
involve planning and project management.  
 
Applicant testified that she is no longer a young college student. She is trying to 
be a responsible adult and to improve her credit. After living on her own following her 
graduation, she has learned the importance of having good credit. In June 2017, she 
moved back to her family home to save money, though she is still paying rent of $500-
$750 per month, and she helps with some bills. This was a big step for her since she had 
not lived at home since high school. She was previously paying a substantial rent and 
was living above her means. She realizes the mistakes she made. She is now saving 
money to pay her debts. She recently cancelled her satellite TV contract to save another 
$200 each month. (TR. 36; AE E.) She uses no credit cards, has no car loan, and drives 
a car with 250,000 miles, all in an effort to manage her expenses. She came from a 
background that did not teach her about the importance of handling her finances and 
credit. She is working hard to learn these skills.  
 
At the hearing, she presented her plan with respect to improving the status of her 
student loans and paying off her smaller debts. With respect to her consumer debts, she 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application, dated August 7, 2017 
(GE 1), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
is paying off the smaller ones first, and then she plans to pay the two larger credit-card 
accounts, which total about $4,300. (Tr. 14-20, 23, 25, 30, 35, and 43.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i: delinquent student loans owed to 
the U.S. Department of Education in the total amount of about $16,000. Applicant 
paid for part of her college education with federal student loans. She believes she 
currently owes about $18,000. At the time of her default she owed about $30,000. She 
initially paid $400 per month, but in early 2016, her income dropped and then she was 
unemployed until May 2016. (GE 2 at 5.) She was unable to continue paying her student 
loans for a period. Her wages were garnished once she was again employed and for over 
two years, her paychecks have been garnished in the amount of about $600 per month. 
Before she moved back home, she tried to rehabilitate her student loans with additional 
payments beyond the amount of the garnishment. She was unable to keep that up. After 
her move, she has been voluntarily paying an additional $90 per month that will lead to 
her loans being classified as in “good standing” and the garnishment will terminate. (GE 
2 at 5.) She is also seeking to consolidate her student loans with Nelnet. (Tr. 23.) She 
submitted an application for Federal Direct Consolidation Loans, which was scheduled to 
be processed one month after the close of the record. (AE B, D.) She has also submitted 
an Income-Driven Repayment Plan Request. (AE D.) She is in the process of resolving 
her delinquency on her student loans. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: credit card account in collection with a balance of $2,830. 
Applicant took out this credit card while in college to pay for her rent and living expenses. 
She defaulted on the account in August 2013. (GE 2 at 5; GE 4 at 2.) She testified that 
she has made two payments to the collection agency in a total amount of less than $300. 
She has made some efforts to resolve this debt and intends to do more when her finances 
permit. This debt is being resolved, though she has not developed a significant track 
record of payments on this debt. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: credit card account charged off for $1,472. Applicant opened this 
account in January 2013, again to help her pay her rent for two months while in college, 
and she defaulted a little over one year later. (GE 2 at 6; GE 5 at 2.) She has had difficulty 
obtaining the help she needs from the creditor to learn who owns the debt so she can 
make payments. She also admitted that she cannot afford to commit to paying too many 
debts at the same time. (Tr. 26-27.) The current student loan garnishment has limited the 
funds she has available to pay other debts and her living expenses. This debt is 
unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: payday loan in collection with a balance of $315. Applicant borrowed 
money while she was in college to help pay her rent. She defaulted shortly before she 
graduated. (GE 5 at 2.) Since then she had forgotten about this debt and is more focused 
on paying her student loans and the two credit card debts discussed above. (Tr. 27-28.) 
This debt is unresolved, though she intends to pay it next under her mitigation plan (Tr. 
35.) 
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k: delinquent utility account in collection with a balance of $121. 
Applicant testified that she had paid this debt in July 2018 and could provide evidence of 
the payment. (Tr. 28-29.) After the hearing, she produced a receipt supporting her 
testimony. (AE F.) This debt is resolved.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: delinquent utility account in collection with a balance of $36. 
Applicant first became aware of this debt during her September 2017 background 
interview. Applicant believes that it is a final bill for electricity at a former residence. 
Applicant defaulted in June 2015. (GE 3 at 3.) At the hearing, Applicant testified that she 
had simply forgotten about the bill. (Tr. 29-30.) After the hearing, she provided an account 
statement evidencing that she had paid this bill. (AE G.) This debt is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m: credit card account charged off for $1,472. Department Counsel 
conceded at the hearing that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is a duplicate of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. The debt is owed to the same creditor and in the same amount. (Tr. 
25-27.) Applicant only had one credit card account with this creditor. This is a duplicate 
debt, which requires no additional resolution. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant submitted her 2016 and 2017 Year-End Performance 
Reviews (AE H, J) and her 2017 and 2018 Midpoint Performance Reviews (AE I and K.) 
She also submitted documentation evidencing her continuing education and professional 
certifications, which are paid by her employer. (AE L.) Her performance reviews are 
impressive. One review states that she “has become one of the most valuable employees 
within the organization. She is extremely reliable and focused on accurate and quality 
data. She is confident in the way she carries herself and is destined for higher positions 
here within the company.” (AE I.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, testimony and the documentary evidence in the record 
establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indication that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s debts were incurred when she was a college 
student. When she graduated in December 2013, she was not sufficiently mature and 
financially sound to be able to handle her debt obligations. In light of subsequent events, 
I conclude that these circumstances are unlikely to recur. In the last two years, she has 
accepted that she must adjust her lifestyle to accommodate the garnishment of her wages 
to make it possible to pay her student loans on a responsible, voluntary basis going 
forward. She no longer uses credit cards because she now appreciates her mistake in 
using credit to pay for her rent and living expenses when she was a student. She 
described herself as “young and dumb” when she incurred these debts. (GE 2 at 7.) She 
is now a reliable, mature professional with an excellent future ahead of her. Her past 
behavior does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s debts arose out of her determination 
to better herself with a college education. The cost of that education and the opportunity 
cost of not being able to earn an income while she was a full-time student were not 
completely within her control. Her only other options were to forgo college, or perhaps, to 
go to college part time at night. Beginning two years after graduation, she was rewarded 
for the decision she made by being hired by an important employer and receiving an 
excellent employment opportunity. Since being granted that opportunity, she has resolved 
to straighten out her finances. She understands that this will take some time and that all 
of her debts cannot be addressed at once. She is acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant offered no evidence that she has 
received any formal financial counseling. It is apparent, however, from reading her 
performance reviews that her work experience and certification courses have taught her 
a lot about financial planning. The choices she has made in her personal life reflect that 
she has learned a lot about managing her own finances. As a result of this experience, 
she is implementing her plan to resolve her debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant has initiated a plan to reduce her living 
expenses so that she will not get further into debt. Her plan will also give her the extra 
funds needed to pay her student loans voluntarily and to pay off her two credit cards and 
the payday loan over time. She has applied for her student loans to be consolidated after 
two years of involuntary payments of $600 per month and an extra $90 per month. These 
payments have significantly reduced her student loan debt. She has also paid off two 
small debts. Applicant is acting in good faith to resolve her student loan delinquency and 
indebtedness and to address her three remaining, college-era debts, which total about 
$4,500. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
addressed above, but other factors warrant additional comment. I have considered 
Applicant’s age at the time she failed to handle her finances responsibly. Her use of two 
credit cards to help her pay her rent evidences the difficulties she faced paying for her 
education and living expenses when she was in her college years. She also candidly 
discussed how her background did not prepare her to manage her finances. Applicant’s 
work experience over the past two years has taught her a lot about planning and project 
management. She now has her own project to manage, and that is her finances. She has 
shown the flexibility to make difficult personal decisions and to make sacrifices to align 
her living expenses and debt repayments with her income. She presented herself at the 
hearing as an impressive, articulate individual, who is now maturely taking her financial 
responsibilities very seriously. She has made significant progress, personally and 
professionally, in the last two years. She still has some work to do on her finances, but 
she is determined to correct them. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
