 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00198 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient information in response to the Government’s 
case to overcome the security concerns raised by his financial problems and by his 
intentional falsification of answers to questions in his security clearance application. 
Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 6, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly 
 
2 
 
consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified 
information.1 
 
On January 31, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).2 Applicant timely responded to the 
SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without a hearing.  
 
On May 21, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on June 13, 2018, and he was informed he had 30 days 
from the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and 
to submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on July 28, 
2018, after Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I received this case for decision on 
October 11, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $236,435 for 13 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.m). The $228,582 delinquent mortgage 
alleged at SOR 1.i comprises about 96 percent of the total debt at issue. Under Guideline 
E, it was alleged that Applicant deliberately made false official statements when he 
omitted from his e-QIP the debts alleged at SOR 1.a – 1.m (SOR 2.a). Applicant admitted, 
without explanations, all of the SOR allegations. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
 
 All of the SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions to the SOR; by 
his responses to questions in his e-QIP; by the summaries of three personal subject 
interviews (PSI); and by the contents of two credit reports obtained during his background 
investigation. (FORM, Items 2 – 8) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since July 2016. He previously worked for another defense contractor between 
October 2011 and July 2016. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from September 1999 
until May 2011, when he was honorably discharged. He first received a security clearance 
in 1999, and, including the current background investigation, he has been re-investigated 
for clearance eligibility three times. (FORM, Items 2 and 3) 
 
 During Applicant’s previous background investigation, he completed a PSI with a 
government investigator on November 21, 2011. During the interview, Applicant 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on eight enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 8). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
discussed a number of topics, including his financial problems and his proposed efforts 
to pay his delinquent debts. Applicant also discussed the fact that he had not disclosed 
many of those debts in his security clearance application. On November 27, 2012, based 
on the results of that PSI and the rest of that background investigation, the DOD CAF 
issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories about his finances. Applicant was asked for 
information about several debts, including those listed in the SOR in this case at SOR 
1.a, 1.d, 1.j, and 1.k. Applicant told the investigator that he was living paycheck to 
paycheck, but that he was going to work overseas and would use the extra income from 
that job to pay his debts. In his January 4, 2013, response to the DOD CAF 
interrogatories, Applicant also provided a personal financial statement (PFS). The PFS 
showed that Applicant had a negative monthly cash flow of $1,034. (FORM, Item 4) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his most recent e-QIP, he answered “no” to all 
questions in Section 26 (Financial Record) and did not list any of the debts reflected in 
the credit reports obtained by investigators or addressed in the SOR. Instead, he stated 
that he was “currently going over [his] credit report to fix any issues and to see if there is 
any outstanding issue that that need (sic) to be dealt with.” During a PSI on May 22, 2017, 
Applicant again was presented with adverse financial information not disclosed in his e-
QIP. He explained that he did not list his debts because he did not know all of the details 
about his debts at the time he submitted his e-QIP. (FORM, Item 5) 
 
 During his May 2017 PSI, Applicant and the investigator discussed the details of 
each delinquent or past-due account reflected in a February 28, 2017, credit report. 
Applicant indicated that he would resolve each debt within the next six months. In 
response to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant did not avail himself of his opportunities 
to provide information about any actions he has taken to resolve his financial problems. 
Nor has he provided any information about the current state of his personal finances. 
(FORM, Items 5 and 6) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
 
4 
 
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
                                                 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). By contrast, none of the information presented in this record supports 
application of any of the pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. Applicant’s financial 
problems have persisted for most of the past eight years. They are recent, because none 
of the debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved. Despite previously being interviewed 
and queried about his debts on multiple occasions, Applicant has not presented any 
information to show he has tried to pay his debts or otherwise improve his personal 
finances. The security concerns raised by the adverse information about Applicant’s 
finances are not mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is stated at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 In December 2016, Applicant answered “no” to all questions in Section 26 of the 
e-QIP he submitted to renew his eligibility for a security clearance. In some cases, 
Applicant’s statement therein that he was reviewing his credit report to fix any outstanding 
financial problems might be construed as notice that he had outstanding debts. This is 
not one of those cases. Applicant has submitted such applications in the past, and as 
recently as 2012, he was made aware of the security concerns about his finances during 
a PSI and through DOD CAF interrogatories. Prior experience notwithstanding, during the 
current adjudication of his eligibility, he has decided to be evasive and untruthful about 
his debts. My review of all of the available information probative of his intent when he 
completed his e-QIP leads me to conclude that he deliberately provided false information 
 
6 
 
in his e-QIP. The debts alleged include a mortgage foreclosure and four debts discussed 
in the earlier investigation. He knew or should have known that given his circumstances, 
he should at least have answered “yes” to one or more of the e-QIP Section 26 questions. 
This information requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a):  
  
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 This record does not support application of any of these mitigating conditions. 
Further, there is nothing minor about Applicant’s willingness, over the course of his last 
two background investigations, to provide false and misleading answers to fundamental 
and reasonable questions from the government. In response to the SOR and the FORM, 
Applicant did not present any information that shows why his omissions should not cast 
doubt on his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. The security concerns under this 
guideline are not mitigated. 
   
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F, I have reviewed the record before me in 
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). My review of all of the available 
information leaves unanswered the doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information that were raised by his financial problems and by his intentional 
omissions of information from his application. Because protection of the national interest 
is the principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved 
against the individual. 
  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
