 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00817 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient information in response to the Government’s 
case to overcome the security concerns raised by her financial problems. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 30, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
On April 19, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
decision without a hearing. On June 21, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on July 2, 2018, and timely submitted additional 
information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on July 10, 2018, after 
Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s response to the FORM without objections to 
the admissibility of Applicant’s additional information. I received this case for decision on 
September 24, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that owed $80,859 for 25 delinquent 
or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.y). The debts alleged at SOR 1.e – 1.x are for past-due 
student loans totaling $72,202, or about 90 percent of the total debt at issue. Applicant 
admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR allegations. In addressing her student loan 
debts, Applicant averred she is in a repayment plan and provided a copy of her agreement 
with a federal student loan servicing organization. With her response to the FORM, 
Applicant provided additional information showing payments made as part of that 
agreement. Her responses established that Appellant made initial plan payments of $193 
each month between November 2017 and January 2018. Since then, she has made $73 
monthly payments as required by the agreement. (FORM, Items 1 and 2; Response to 
FORM) 
 
 The SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions in response to the 
SOR, by her disclosures in Section 26 of her e-QIP, by the contents of two credit reports 
obtained during her background investigation, and by the summary of a personal subject 
interview (PSI) Applicant had with a government investigator on November 16, 2017. 
(FORM, Items 2 – 6) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In her e-QIP, 
Applicant disclosed the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.c, and 1.y. In her SOR Answer and her e-
QIP, she also explained that she was working with those creditors in an effort to resolve 
them through monthly payment plans. During Applicant’s November 2017 PSI, she 
explained that her delinquencies resulted from a period of insufficient income after 2012. 
Applicant opened credit card accounts and financed the purchase of a car but soon found 
she was not able to meet the required payments on those obligations. (FORM, Items 2 
and 3) 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on six enclosed exhibits (Items 1 
– 6). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 At the time of her PSI, Applicant had begun the student loan rehabilitation program 
described above. During the PSI, she claimed that she was in contact with her creditors 
and intended to resolve some of the debts discussed by early 2018; however, the record 
does not contain any information that corroborates those claims or that shows she has 
made any progress in resolving those debts. (FORM, Items 2 and 4; Response to FORM) 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about the current state of her finances. 
The record does not contain information about her current income, her regular expenses, 
and other facts relevant to an assessment of her ability to resolve her remaining debts. 
She has not sought or received any professional financial assistance or counseling. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
4 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). 
 
In response, Applicant presented sufficient information to show that she is repaying 
the student loans addressed at SOR 1.e – 1.x. It appears her efforts in this regard began 
at or near the time she submitted her e-QIP. While Applicant heeded Department 
Counsel’s comments about production of documentation of payments on her student 
loans, she did not provide any information about efforts to resolve her other debts. 
Available information also does not show that Applicant’s finances are currently sound. 
There is no pay stub or budget worksheet or other personal financial information that 
would alleviate the Government’s concerns about her finances.  
 
Applicant benefits from application of AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) to 
                                                 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
her student loan rehabilitation. Nonetheless, without more, this is not sufficient to mitigate 
the security concerns under this guideline. Although Applicant’s claim of insufficient 
income might invoke AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), she did not establish that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Further, none of the remaining AG ¶ 20 mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant’s financial problems are recent in that several delinquencies 
remain unresolved, and Applicant did not establish that her financial situation is improved 
and unlikely to be of concern in the future. On balance, she did not provide sufficient 
information to mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
 
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s information did not 
resolve the doubts about her suitability for access to classified information that were 
raised by her financial problems. Because protection of the national interest is the 
principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the 
individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d, 1.y:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.x:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
