 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00173 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant responded to the SOR on March 26, 2018, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 25, 2018, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 22, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for July 12, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open 
for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that I have 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F and admitted without objection.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2017. He served in the U.S. military from 2006 until he 
discharged under other than honorable conditions in 2017. He attended college for a 
period without earning a degree. He married in 2006 and divorced in 2010. He married 
his second wife in 2011, and they divorced in 2017. He is the legal father of four 
children, but he is not the biological father of his oldest child.1 
 
Applicant was stationed overseas from about April 2011 until April 2014. He 
deployed for about five to six months in 2013. He transferred to the United States in 
2014, but he deployed to the Middle East from about October 2014 to April 2015. In 
February 2016, military pay personnel notified military investigators that an audit was 
conducted, and Applicant was suspected of basic allowance for housing (BAH) and 
family separation allowance (FSA) fraud. While living overseas, Applicant claimed FSA 
and BAH on behalf of his children in the United States. His paperwork suggested he did 
not have the physical and legal custody necessary to claim the entitlements. The audit 
indicated that Applicant’s paperwork may have been altered in order to justify the 
entitlements. The potential loss to the government was tabulated as $47,882.2 
 
Applicant’s 2010 divorce order included a custody agreement. In April 2011, 
Applicant submitted to the military an amendment to the 2010 court order granting him 
full custody of his younger child with his first wife. The investigation revealed the 
amendment was not a legitimate court document, and had never been issued by the 
court. Applicant’s ex-wife’s signature was forged on the document, and the judge’s 
signature was copied and pasted from the original document. The document allowed 
Applicant to collect BAH and FSA that he would not otherwise be entitled to. The 
additional BAH was to pay for his child’s housing in the United States; and FSA is 
designed to offset the incidental expenses that arise when a family is separated.3 
 
In November 2016, Applicant was charged with the following offenses under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ): 
 
 Article 107: False official statement in April 2013 when he signed with intent to 
deceive an official record, to wit: DD Form 1561, which he knew to be false in 
that his dependent children were in the legal custody of another person. 
 
 Article 107: False official statement in April 2013 when he signed with intent to 
deceive an official record, to wit: DD Form 2367, which he knew to be false in 
that he was not entitled to overseas housing allowance for dependents residing 
in a U.S. zip code. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 64; GE 1, 2; AE D.   
 
2 Tr. at 15-21, 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3.  
 
3 Tr. at 51-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3.  
 
 
3 
 
 Article 121; Larceny in that between April 2013 and April 2014, he stole more 
than $500 from the U.S. Government in basic allowance for housing. 
 
 Article 121; Larceny in that between April 2013 and April 2014, he stole more 
than $500 from the U.S. Government in family separation allowance.4 
 
The military did not charge Applicant with submitting the fraudulent court order. 
The Article 107 charges were for submitting false forms related to military pay 
entitlements. Applicant requested a discharge in lieu of trial. The request was approved, 
and he was discharged under other than honorable conditions in 2017. He paid about 
$20,000 in restitution for his overpayment, and he has been paying the remainder 
since.5 
 
Applicant’s responses to military investigators in 2016 and during the security 
clearance adjudication process have been consistent. He asserted that he did not know 
that the 2011 court order was a fake. He stated that his first wife was having difficulties 
and asked him to take custody of their daughter. He told her that he would not do so 
unless a court approved it. He did not want to have custody of his daughter and still 
have to pay child support. He stated his first wife provided him the court order, which he 
assumed was legitimate. His first wife has questionable character, and he surmised that 
she had someone forge the document so that she would continue to receive child 
support.6 
 
Applicant’s daughter never moved to Applicant’s overseas location or his location 
in the United States. He stated that he never intended to accept pay that he was not 
entitled to receive. He planned to have her live with him, but his deployments made that 
impossible. He documented that each month from August 2012 through January 2014, 
$779 was paid directly by allotment from the DOD to a joint account he held with his first 
wife. The credit union statements show withdrawals in the United States while Applicant 
was living overseas, which indicates the withdrawals were made by his first wife.7 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in July 2017. He 
discussed the false court order. He stated that the military did not find him at fault for 
filing the incorrect documents, but he had to repay the amount that he should not have 
received. He stated that he received an honorable discharge in March 2017, and he 
chose not to reenlist. When confronted, he admitted that he received a discharge in lieu 
of trial by court-martial, but he did not believe that he received an other than honorable 
conditions discharge. He did not believe he would be eligible for the benefits he 
receives from the Department of Veterans Affairs if he was not discharged under 
honorable conditions. Applicant testified that he did not tell the investigator that he 
                                                          
4 GE 4.  
 
5 Tr. at 28-31, 63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5.  
 
6 Tr. at 15-24, 32-34, 42, 51-55, 72; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE AE A, D.  
 
7 Tr. at 17-21, 27, 42, 56, 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, B, F.  
 
4 
 
received an honorable discharge; he told the investigator that he did not receive a 
dishonorable discharge.8 
 
 Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent performance 
of duties in the military. He is praised for his trustworthiness, leadership, dedication, 
professionalism, work ethic, dependability, reliability, loyalty, and integrity. He is 
recommended for a security clearance.9  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 35; GE 2. The SOR did not allege that Applicant provided false information during the background 
interview, and the false information will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered 
when assessing Applicant’s credibility. 
 
9 AE C. 
 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
6 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant submitted a falsified court document that allowed him to collect BAH 
and FSA that he would not otherwise be entitled to. He was charged with larceny and 
false official statement for submitting false forms related to pay entitlements. He 
requested a discharge in lieu of trial and was discharged under other than honorable 
conditions.  
 
Applicant denies any knowledge that the court order was fake before he was 
notified by military authorities. He stated that he had no intent to receive pay to which he 
was not entitled, and that he was the unknowing victim of a dishonest ex-wife. Having 
considered all the evidence, including all of Applicant’s statements; the more than 
$47,000 Applicant obtained based upon the false court order; the fact that his daughter 
never came to live with him; and his acceptance of a discharge under other than 
honorable conditions in lieu of trial by court-martial, I find by substantial evidence10 that 
Applicant knew the court order was fake when he submitted it; he intentionally 
submitted false pay-entitlement documents; and he knowingly received pay to which he 
was not entitled. That conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly 
applicable because Applicant’s conduct could have been sufficient for an adverse 
determination under the criminal conduct guideline. However, the general concerns 
about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established. Applicant’s false official submissions 
establish AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b).   
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
                                                          
10 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
7 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
Having determined that Applicant intentionally submitted false documents in 
order to defraud the U.S. Government, I have also determined that his testimony and 
claims of innocence were also false. It would be inconsistent to find his conduct 
mitigated.11   
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant an applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge’s rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence and military service, including his deployments. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
