 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00147 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant resolved his past-due mortgage debts, but he did not provide sufficient 
information to overcome the security concerns raised by his failure to file federal and state 
personal income tax returns since 2010. Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 9, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
required for his work as a self-employed federal contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
 On April 16, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
hearing.  
 
 I received this case on August 3, 2018, and scheduled the requested hearing for 
September 27, 2018. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 - 4. Applicant testified and proffered Applicant Exhibit (AX) 
A. All exhibits were admitted without objection, and the record was closed at the end of 
the hearing. I received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that as of the date of the SOR, 
Applicant had not yet filed his federal (SOR 1.a) or his state (SOR 1.b) income tax returns 
for the 2010 – 2016 tax years. It was also alleged that Applicant owed $7,230 for four 
past-due mortgage payments on four mortgage obligations totaling $767,040 (SOR 1.c – 
1.f). The mortgage debt addressed at SOR 1.d is for Applicant’s personal residence. The 
rest are for rental properties he owns. Applicant denied, with explanations, all of the SOR 
allegations.  
 
 In response to SOR 1.a and 1.b, Applicant admitted he had not filed those returns. 
In addition, he claimed that he always overpays his taxes and receives a check from the 
IRS and his state tax authority “after filing.” As to SOR 1.c – 1.f, Applicant denied those 
allegations, with explanations. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a self-employed 43-year-old software consultant who is seeking 
contracts with a federal agency for which he must be eligible for access to classified 
information. He has a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and a master’s degree 
in information technology (IT), earned in 1996 and 1998, respectively. He and his wife 
have been married since October 2000. They have three minor children together. After 
working for IT companies from 1999 until 2003, Applicant started his own business and 
has worked as a solo IT consultant for various private commercial interests. Since about 
2014, Applicant has been consulting for different federal government agencies. His 
business currently has $250,000 in annual revenue, from which he pays himself $125,000 
annually. (GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 32 – 33) 
 
 Applicant and his wife bought their primary residence in July 2004. Applicant owns 
three other houses as rental properties. Available information shows that Applicant, at 
times, has been a month late in paying the mortgage on all of his real properties. At 
hearing, Applicant established that all of his mortgage accounts are current. There is no 
indication any of those accounts has ever been more than 120 days past due. (Answer; 
GX 2 – 4; AX A; Tr. 23 – 30, 34 – 38, 53) 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has not filed his personal or corporate state or federal income tax returns 
after the 2009 tax year. He and his wife had always filed joint returns before then. In 2010, 
his wife was working in a sales position and was given a luxury car after she met or 
exceeded her company’s incentive goals. Unexpectedly, they received an IRS Form 1099 
that required them to declare the value of the car as income. Applicant disagreed with the 
IRS assessment and has cited this dispute as the basis for his failure to file his returns 
over the past seven years. However, in his e-QIP, Applicant attributed “procrastination” 
as the reason for his failures to file his returns to that point, and that he was working with 
his accountant to file his 2010 – 2014 returns. When he was interviewed by a government 
investigator in July 2016, Applicant stated that his accountant had just filed Applicant’s 
returns for the 2010 – 2015 tax years and was working to resolve other tax issues. There 
is no documentation for that statement in this record, and Applicant admitted at hearing 
that he has not yet filed those returns. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 33 – 34, 38 – 42, 45 – 
46) 
 
 In response to the Government’s information, Applicant has stated that he pays as 
much as $10,000 each month to the state and to the IRS in estimated personal and 
corporate taxes. He further averred that he receives refunds for amounts in excess of 
what he pays, and that the IRS and state have not contacted him about his failure to file 
annual tax returns. He did not document his claims about his estimated payments or any 
refunds he has received. Applicant’s accountant has advised him that he will likely have 
to pay a penalty for his failure to file his annual returns, and Applicant claims that he has 
the financial resources to do so. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 30 – 32, 38 – 42, 45 – 47) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
                                                 
3 See Directive, 6.3. 
 
4 
 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.5 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.6 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The allegations at SOR 1.c – 1.f do not present any disqualifying information. The 
Government’s information shows that Applicant has, at times, been 30 – 60 days late on 
one or more of his mortgage payments. This is not an unusual circumstance and does 
                                                 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
6 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
not indicate financial irresponsibility here. Further, I note that the relevant questions in the 
e-QIP regarding delinquent debts pertains to debts more than 120 days past due. The 
information he presented shows he is current on all of those accounts. SOR 1.c – 1.f are 
resolved for the Applicant. 
 
As to SOR 1.a and 1.b, Applicant has not filed any income tax returns for the past 
seven years. This information requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 
19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required), and is sufficient 
to establish the Government’s prima facie case and shift the burden of persuasion to the 
Applicant. 
 
The only pertinent mitigating condition to be considered here is AG ¶ 20(g) (the 
individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the 
amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements). In his e-QIP, Applicant 
attributed his failure to file his returns to “procrastination,” but that he and his accountant 
had filed returns for 2010 – 2015. In his subject interview, in response to the SOR, and at 
hearing, Applicant acknowledged that no returns have been filed. Applicant now claims 
that his failure to file his returns was the result of a dispute over reportable income for a 
car his wife received in 2010. Applicant has not produced any information to document 
his estimated tax payments and refunds. He also has not documented his dispute with 
the IRS and has not provided a plausible explanation of why that dispute might stop him 
from filing his returns. Finally, there is no indication in this record that Applicant has 
attempted any resolution of his dispute in the past seven years. All of the foregoing 
precludes application of AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s information did not 
resolve the doubts about his suitability for access to classified information that were raised 
by his failure to comply with basic income reporting requirements. His inability or 
unwillingness to file his income tax returns as required is indicative of an failure to 
requirements for protecting classified information. This, in turn, raises doubts about 
Applicant’s suitability for access to that information. Applicant’s response to the 
Government’s adverse information did not resolve those doubts, which, because 
protection of the national interest is of paramount concern, must be resolved against the 
individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
