 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04829 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristen E. Ittig, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP format) on 
September 11, 2006. On August 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 4, 2009. The case was assigned to me on November 16, 2009. On 
December 29, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
January 26, 2010. The case was heard on that date. The Government offered four 
exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4. Applicant testified 
and offered four documents which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – D. The 
record was held open until February 9, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents. A six-page document was timely received and admitted as AE E. 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel did not object to the documents. Department Counsel’s Response 
to AE E is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The transcript (Tr) was received on 
February 2, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old geospatial analyst for a Department of Defense 
contractor. He has worked for his employer since August 2006. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He has an undergraduate degree in geography. He 
is single and has no children. He is in a long term relationship and intended to propose 
to his girlfriend the weekend after the hearing. (Tr at 22; Gov 1)  
 
When Applicant was seven years old, he was diagnosed with Attention Deficit 
Disorder (ADD). He took various prescription drugs for his condition during his 
childhood until college. In college, he was prescribed Adderall, a stimulant. His 
psychiatrist, whom he saw when he was home from college, provided him with 
prescription slips that were written in advance so that he did not have come home to fill 
his prescription during the school year. In 2004, he became more dependent on 
Adderall and began to consume more of the drug than was prescribed to him. In the 
summer 2005, he began to forge prescriptions in order to maintain his habit. He 
scanned one of the prescription slips provided by his psychiatrist into a computer and 
altered the amount of the prescription. He did this approximately 16-20 times from the 
summer 2005 to January 2006. By the fall 2005, he was taking four times the dosage 
prescribed to him. (Tr at 27-31, 53-55; Gov 2 at 3; Gov 3 at 2, 6; AE 4 at 19) 
 
On January 19, 2006, he was arrested and charged with Obtaining Possession of 
a Controlled Substance by Fraud. On that date, Applicant dropped off a forged  
prescription at a pharmacy. The pharmacy contacted Applicant’s psychiatrist to verify 
the prescription. The psychiatrist told the pharmacist to call the police. When he 
appeared in court, Applicant was treated as a first offender and placed in a pre-trial 
diversion program, the requirements of which included three years probation, a $300 
fine, and treatment. He attended treatment until June 2006. During treatment, he 
learned alternative ways to handle stress. (Tr at 30-34; Gov 2 at 3-4; Gov 3 at 6)  
 
While on probation, Applicant took routine drug tests which he passed. Based on 
his good conduct, he was released from probation one year early. His probation ended 
in February 2009. He has not used Adderall since the day before his arrest in January 
2006. (Tr at 35-36; AE 3 at 4) 
 
Applicant started using marijuana occasionally while in high school. He began to 
use marijuana on a regular basis while in college. He used marijuana approximately 100 
times while in college.  He stopped using marijuana in the spring 2003 because of 
 
3 
 
 
added responsibilities related to his school activities, and it was expensive. He also 
wanted to stop using marijuana before he graduated from college and started his 
professional career. Applicant was aware that marijuana use was illegal when he used 
it. (Tr at 24-26, 46-49; Gov 2 at 17; Gov 3 at 2,5)  
 
After the hearing, Applicant provided a signed statement of intent stating that he 
had no intent to abuse Adderall or any other drugs in the future.  He acknowledges that 
any clearance that he is granted could be automatically revoked if he abuses Adderall 
or any other drugs in the future. (AE E at 2) 
 
From October 4, 2005, to May 24, 2006, Applicant was treated by Dr. C, a 
licensed psychologist, on issues related to his ADD, depression, and relationships.  In a 
letter, dated November 14, 2008, Dr. C indicates that Applicant worked diligently to 
enhance his coping skills with a combination of psychotherapy and appropriate 
medication. He states Applicant acknowledged his abuse of stimulant medication and 
worked to overcome it with healthier alternative methods. He would not hesitate to hire 
Applicant. (Gov 4 at 27) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter on his behalf indicating that Applicant has 
worked for him since August 28, 2006. Applicant started out as an entry level 
Geospatial Analyst and has advanced to his current supervisory position of Lead 
Geospatial Analyst.  He states that “[Applicant’s] competence, work ethic, dedication to 
quality, and attention to detail combined to allow him to move into his current position. 
His professionalism and maturity have contributed to him becoming an effective leader 
within the production group and also allowed him to handle the added responsibility that 
comes with the supervisory position. His dedication to his job and dedication to the 
United States of America cannot be questioned in any way.” (AE A) Several of 
Applicant’s friends and co-workers provided letters that say similar favorable things 
about Applicant. (AE B – D) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential rather than actual risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DI DC) & 25(a) (any drug 
abuse); and DI DC ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia) are 
relevant to Applicant’s case. Applicant admits illegally using marijuana in high school 
 
5 
 
 
and in college. He became dependent on Adderall in 2004. He forged prescriptions to 
feed his habit from the spring 2005 until he was caught in January 2006.   
 
Of the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC), two apply to Applicant’s 
case: 
 
DI MC ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies because 
Applicant has not abused drugs in over four years. His illegal marijuana use occurred in 
high school and college. He stopped using marijuana his senior year in college. His 
supervisor and co-workers state that Applicant is a good employee. After college, he 
has matured and worked his way up to a supervisory position. He has not taken 
Adderall since January 2006. There is no evidence of recent drug abuse. 
 
DI MC ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
…(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) applies. Applicant has not abused 
drugs in over four years. He intends never to abuse drugs again and signed a statement 
of intent acknowledging that any future drug abuse will result in the automatic 
revocation of his security clearance.  
 
DI MC ¶ 26(c) (abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended) applies 
with respect to Applicant’s abuse of the prescription drug Adderall.  Applicant has been 
prescribed medication to treat his ADD for most of his childhood. He became dependent 
on Adderall while in college. He quit taking Adderall after he was arrested in January 
2006. He has learned other ways to cope with his ADD and no longer takes prescription 
medication.   
 
 The drug involvement concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is 
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the 
 
6 
 
 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
 I considered Applicant’s history of marijuana use and his dependence on 
Adderall. His drug abuse occurred in high school and college. While his drug abuse 
cannot be considered experimental, Applicant has demonstrated that his drug abuse is 
no longer a concern. He has not used marijuana in over seven years and has not used 
Adderall since January 2006.  The favorable letters of his supervisor, friends, and co-
workers show that he has matured and has established a successful career as a 
geospatial analyst. He is in a long term relationship which he anticipates will lead 
towards marriage. He is aware that any future drug abuse will result in the automatic 
revocation of his security clearance.  He has met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns raised under the drug involvement concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
