1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 07-17614
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sunday Obinali Duru, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concern generated by his
parents, who are both Nigerian citizens and residents. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case 
On May 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2009, admitting the allegations
except SOR subparagraph 2.b, and requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me
on November 17, 2009. That day, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case
2
for December 9, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled. During the hearing, I
received three government exhibits, five Applicant exhibits, and the testimony of two
Applicant witnesses. Also, at the government’s request, I took administrative notice of
the facts set forth in seven exhibits marked as government exhibits (GE) 4 through 10.
DOHA received the transcript on December 17, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old married man with four pre-teen children. He has been
married for 10 years. A previous marriage ended in divorce in 1999 (AE 4 at 5). Since
2001, Applicant has worked as a security guard (AE 1 at 3). He has worked with his
current employer since 2008 (AE E). According to his supervisor, he is a reliable
employee who “consistently performs his duties as an officer with merit and valor” (AE
E). In 2007, Applicant received a certificate for completing a specialized training course
for security officers (AE B). 
Applicant earned a certificate in practical nursing in 2004 (AE C). Currently, he is
studying to obtain the requisite licensing to enable him to work as a nurse part time (Tr.
44).
Applicant was born and raised in Nigeria He immigrated to the United States
(U.S.) in 1986 (Tr. 37). In 1991, he earned an associate’s degree in science from a U.S.
university (AE D). He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1996 (Tr. 37).
Applicant’s wife is originally from Nigeria (AE 57). She became a naturalized U.S.
citizen in 2007 (Tr. 40). She is a registered nurse. They own their home, valued at
approximately $400,000 (Tr. 40). Their net worth is approximately $160,000 (Tr. 40). All
of their assets are located in the U.S. (Tr. 40, 59).
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Nigeria. They live in a remote
village in the eastern part of the country. His father is 87 years old, and his mother is 75
years old. Before retiring, his father owned a grocery store, and his mother was “a petty
trader” (Tr. 51). Applicant talks with them twice per week (Tr. 36). Both parents are in
fragile health (Tr. 52). Periodically, Applicant sends them money, averaging between
two and three thousand dollars yearly, to assist with their health care (Tr. 51). He most
recently sent them money in April 2009 (Tr. 52).
Applicant last visited his parents in the summer of 2008, staying for four weeks
(Tr. 52). He visited the previous year when his father was sick (Tr. 52). Applicant has
one sibling, a naturalized U.S. citizen and current U.S. resident.
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a Nigerian citizen (Tr. 56). She has been living with
Applicant and his family since 2005, and has a green card (Tr. 56). His father-in-law is
deceased.
3
Applicant is active in the community. He serves on a committee at his church that
coordinates charitable activities (Tr. 62). Also, he is active in the local parent teacher
association (Tr. 62).
Nigeria is a federal republic composed of 36 states (GE 4 at 1-2). It has a
bicameral legislature with a senate and a house of representatives (GE 5 at 4). Nigeria
has a history replete with military coups, ethnic conflict, and civil war. The emergence of
a democratic Nigeria in 1999 ended 16 years of consecutive military rule (GE 4 at 6).
Since then, Nigeria’s democratic institutions have progressed; however, they have been
challenged by “poor governance, entrenched corruption, internal conflict, ineffective
service delivery, and pervasive poverty” (Id. at 12). Approximately one million Nigerians
live, study, and work in the U.S.
Nigeria’s economic team is well-respected in the economic community (Id. at 10).
Nigeria has recently taken many encouraging steps toward fostering a healthy
investment atmosphere. It continues, however, to lack a highly developed infrastructure
either for transportation or commerce (Id. at 9-10). Rural areas largely do not have
access to banks (Id. at 9).
In 2007, Nigeria elected a new president, a political moderate who pledged
publicly to reform the military and promote electoral reform (Id. at 6). Since then, he has
“retired hundreds of military officers, ordered the release of scores of persons held
without charge . . . [and] moved to recover millions of dollars in funds secreted in
overseas accounts” (Id.). Also, the president’s new administration has allowed the
legislative and judicial branches to operate “relatively free” (Id. at 7). The new
government has been taking steps to reach out to disaffected communities (AE 5 at 18).
Respect for human rights has improved markedly under the new administration.
Nigeria is a staunch U.S. ally that lent strong diplomatic support after September
11, 2001 (GE 4 at 12). It continues to support military action against the Taliban and al-
Qaeda. It has played a leading role in forging an anti-terrorism consensus in Africa (Id.).
In November 2007, Nigerian security forces arrested a group of Islamic militants in
northern Nigeria who were alleged to have ties to al-Qaeda (Id. at 21).
Nigeria has played a pivotal role in the promotion of peace in Africa (Id. at 11).
Six thousand Nigerian peacekeepers are deployed on several United Nations’ missions
worldwide (Id. at 11).
In 2002, Nigeria and Cameroon, a contiguous neighbor, disputed an adjacent
territory. Rather than engage in armed conflict, they resolved the dispute through the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) at the Hague (Id.). After the ICJ awarded most of the
territory to Cameroon, the Nigerian president promptly signed an agreement
implementing the court’s decision, and removed troops from the area within 60 days
(Id.).
4
Nigeria has struggled with Islamic extremism, particularly in the majority-Muslim
north (GE 5 at 15). Applicant’s family lives in eastern Nigeria. Some communities have
adopted sharia, a draconian legal system imposed by fundamentalist Muslims (Id.). In
two cases, local courts, using sharia law, imposed the death penalty against two female
defendants accused of adultery (Id.). State courts overturned both judgments on appeal
(Id.).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These
guidelines are applied together with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
an individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interests” (AG ¶
6). The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 7:
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to
5
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,
apply; and
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Although Nigeria is a staunch U.S. ally and an emerging democracy, it is plagued
by ethnic, religious, and class conflict. Also, its political and economic development is
hampered by corruption, and the influence of Islamic extremists is growing in parts of
the country. Under these circumstances, Applicant’s contact with his parents residing in
Nigeria, and his mother-in-law, a Nigerian citizen with legal U.S. residency status who
lives with his family, triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d).
The potentially applicable mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 8 are as follows:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government, and the interests of the
U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interest; and
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.
There is a presumption that contact with one’s parents is not casual. Moreover,
Applicant talks with his parents twice per week, visits approximately once per year, and
provides financial support. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.
The country’s concern with Islamic extremism is primarily in the north, whereas,
Applicant’s parents live in the eastern region. Moreover, despite its struggles in
developing a representative democracy, Nigeria is firmly committed to the U.S.-led War
on Terror, and is a regional leader in promoting anti-terror policy. Also, Nigeria has
increasingly demonstrated its commitment to the international rule of law by resolving
disputes with other countries peacefully through international tribunals, and sending
peacekeepers, when requested, to areas of conflict worldwide. 
6
Although Nigeria is a U.S. ally, friendly countries may be just as likely to conduct
espionage against the U.S. as hostile ones. However, it is highly unlikely that Nigeria
has an espionage system sophisticated enough to target either its rural inhabitants,
such as Applicant’s parents, or its citizens living abroad, such as Applicant’s mother-in-
law, when it has yet to develop a banking or transportation infrastructure that serves the
entire country.
Applicant has lived in the U.S. for nearly 25 years. He received all of his
education and training past high school in the U.S., all of his immediate family lives in
the U.S., and all of his financial assets are in the U.S. Moreover, Applicant is heavily
involved in his community, volunteering for outreach programs through his church and
attending PTA meetings. 
Under these circumstances, I conclude that both AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply.
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Applicant is an industrious individual focused on excelling on the job, furthering his
earning potential through education, and raising his children. Upon considering these
factors, together with the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I conclude
Applicant has carried his burden. Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
