  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-09107 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 19 accounts placed for collection. She has paid seven of the 
accounts. However, nine of the accounts, which total more than $32,000, remain 
unpaid. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns 
under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 13, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On May 29, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
August 15, 2009, I was assigned the case. On August 17, 2009, DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing for the hearing held on September 10, 2009. The government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her 
own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through D, which were admitted into evidence. On 
September 25, 2009, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.o—1.t. She admitted the factual 
allegations, with explanations, in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.j. The SOR contains no SOR ¶ 
1.n. She also provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a 
security clearance. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated 
herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old field engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since Spring 2008, and she is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Her husband 
works for a telephone company. (Tr. 30) Applicant and her husband have been married 
ten years. Applicant has three children under the age of 14. (Tr. 27, 31) The oldest child 
currently lives in a behavioral facility run by the state. (Tr. 32)  
 
 In 1995 or 1996, Applicant obtained a $1,859 loan for the down payment on a 
Ford Escort. That car was repossessed. (Ex. 2) Neither the loan nor this vehicle 
repossession is listed as a debt of concern in the SOR.  
 
In 1999, before her marriage, Applicant purchased a 1998 Pontiac Grand Am on 
which she traded in a vehicle and paid an additional $11,000. (Tr. 54) She made her 
$229 monthly payments for two years before the car was repossessed in 2002, when 
she defaulted on the loan. (Ex. 2) In August 2008, the creditor first contacted Applicant 
about the remaining $19,335 debt (SOR ¶ 1.o). (Ex. 3, page 14, Tr. 54) Applicant paid 
$250 per month for three months in 2008. The creditor then demanded the monthly 
payment increase to $450. (Tr. 56) Applicant requested the creditor provide proof of the 
balance following the sale of the vehicle. When she received no reply, she stopped her 
payments. (Tr. 57) Applicant intends to make further payment when the creditor 
provides the requested documentation. Applicant asserts the creditor’s claim is barred 
by the statute of limitations. (Answer to SOR) In March 2009, the creditor brought suit 
on this debt. (Tr. 57) Applicant’s court date was a month after the hearing. (Tr. 56)  
 
 In May 2000, she married her spouse. As a network technician her annual salary 
was $20,000 and her husband’s salary as a service manager was $35,000. Following 
 
3 
 
 
their marriage, they obtained and used several credit cards. In 2001, her husband was 
laid off from his job and they moved from Idaho to Nebraska with their children. (Tr. 25) 
Shortly after their arrival, her husband was again laid off. (Tr. 25) Applicant worked for a 
company for a month before being laid off and starting her own business building 
computers and doing networks. (Tr. 26) In 2001, they moved to Mississippi where her 
husband found similar work. They lived in Mississippi one year. (Tr. 34)  
 
 In 2002, they moved back to Nebraska. (Tr. 34) Applicant experienced marital 
problems and separated from her spouse. They reconciled. In 2003, he was laid off 
while they lived in Nebraska. In 2004, they returned to Idaho where her husband was 
unemployed for six months and she was unemployed for two and a half years. (Ex. 2, 
Tr. 35, 36, Answer to SOR, Tr. 35) 
 
 At a date not listed in the record, Applicant became the legal guardian of her 16-
year-old brother when her mother died. In May 2008, Applicant moved to her current 
location and obtained a job as a field engineer. (Tr. 27, 35) From May 2008 through July 
2008, Applicant and her husband were separated due to marital problems. (Tr. 37) In 
2008, Applicant and her husband moved to their current location. As of June 2008, her 
annual salary was $40,000. (Ex. 2) Applicant reconciled with her husband. His salary is 
$51,000. (Tr. 65)  
 
 The moves and job losses strained their marriage and their finances. Applicant 
and her husband separated and filed for divorce four times. (Ex. 2) She provided dates 
for only two of the separations. In the fall of 2004, she incurred a $1,265 debt (SOR ¶ 
1.a) to her divorce attorney. The creditor has agreed to accept $125 monthly payments 
on this debt. (Tr. 38) Applicant is waiting for a letter confirming the arrangement before 
she begins payment. (Tr. 38)  
 
 In October 2001, Applicant and her husband purchased a two-year-old 
Suburban. (Tr. 45) In 2002, the vehicle was involuntarily repossessed. (Ex. 2) The 
creditor informed her husband of the balance owed on the vehicle following possession. 
Applicant never knew the balance due (SOR ¶ 1.h, Tr. 46). The information was sent to 
her husband and he had already left the home due to a divorce filing. In June 2008, 
during a personal subject interview Applicant stated she intended to pay the debt. (Ex. 
2) At the hearing, Applicant stated she was still responsible for the debt and would like 
to make a settlement or payment arrangement on this debt. (Tr. 46) 
 
 When Applicant moved to Mississippi in 2001, the cellular phone service provider 
did not have service in the area. Applicant was told she would still have to pay the debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.f). This cellular phone account (SOR ¶ 1.f) was settled in full. (Ex. A, Ex. B, Tr. 
42) Applicant also paid another telephone account (SOR ¶ 1.g) of $343. (Answer to 
SOR, Ex. B, Ex. 2, Ex. 1, Tr. 42) 
 
 Applicant had a $312 gas utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.b) and a $265 power bill (SOR ¶ 
1.d) turned over for collection, which she has paid. (Answer to SOR, Ex. B, Ex. D, Tr. 
 
4 
 
 
41) Applicant paid a $241 television service provider account (SOR ¶ 1.e). (Answer to 
SOR, Ex. E, Tr. 41) Applicant paid two medical debts: a $298 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
(Answer to SOR, Ex. C, Tr. 40) and a $155 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.j) (Answer to SOR, 
Ex. C, Tr. 48). The credit card debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,008) and SOR ¶ 1.k ($1,000) 
are two different credit cards with the same creditor. The creditor had sent Applicant a 
settlement offer, which she intends to accept. (Tr. 47, 50) Applicant asserts the $1,097 
collection account (SOR ¶ 1.m) for a department store has been paid. (Tr. 53)  
 
 In 2001 or 2002, Applicant incurred a $3,659 correspondence school debt (SOR 
¶ 1.l) for a course in electronic engineering. She was paying $100 monthly on the debt 
until it became delinquent in 2003. (Ex. 2) She was last contacted about this debt three 
years ago. (Tr. 51) She intends to pay the debt, but plans to pay those obligations 
appearing in her CBR first. (Tr. 52)  
 
 In 2006, Applicant obtained a $676 educational loan (SOR ¶ 1.p) for an online 
criminal justice course. (Ex. 2) She dropped the course before it started, but the creditor 
would not refund the money. At the time of her personal interview, Applicant stated she 
did not intend to pay this debt. (Ex. 2) In her answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted this 
debt is barred by the statute of limitation, but she intended to pay this debt within a year 
of May 2009. (Answer to SOR) At the hearing, she reasserted she intends to pay this 
debt. Applicant owes $716 on another student loan (SOR ¶ 1.q). She intends to pay this 
debt. (Tr. 60)  
 
 In 2001, Applicant incurred a $1,167 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.s). In October 
2008, the creditor offered a 50% settlement offer with three payments of $194 each. 
(Ex. 2) In her response to the SOR, Applicant asserted this debt was barred by the 
statute of limitation, but she intended to pay this debt within a year of May 2009. 
(Answer to SOR) At the hearing, she reasserted her intent to pay this debt. (Tr. 61)  
   
 Applicant asserts the multiple moves, periods of unemployment and 
underemployment, and periods of separation when she and her husband maintained 
separate household added to their financial problems. Some of the SOR accounts do 
not appear on Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR). (Ex. 2, Ex. C) 
 
 In March 2009, Applicant purchased a $123,000 home with monthly mortgage 
payments of $1,200. (Tr. 66) Applicant recently purchased a 2006 Honda with $313 
monthly car payments. (Tr. 67) She also has a $425 monthly car payment on her 1995 
Landrover. Applicant has five credit cards with a balance on each of under $600. (Tr. 
70) She is current on her credit cards, her mortgage, car payments, and utilities. (Ex. 2) 
Applicant’s monthly net income (gross income less monthly expenses and payment on 
debts) is $500 to $600. (Tr. 71) Applicant is willing to pay her remaining unpaid 
obligations by making small payments on them or by paying off one and then paying off 
the next one. (Tr. 73) Applicant has attended no financial counseling. (Tr. 74)  
 
 
5 
 
 
 A summary of Applicant’s accounts charged off, accounts placed for collection, 
and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Divorce attorney fees.  $1,265 Unpaid. Applicant intends to pay this 
debt. Creditor offered to accept $125 
monthly payments on the debt. (Tr. 
38)  
b Gas company utility account.  $335 Paid. (Answer to SOR, Ex. B)  
c Medical account.  $298 
 
In May 2009, Applicant made a $150 
payment on this debt. (Answer to 
SOR, Ex. C) 
d Power Company utility 
account. 
$265 Paid. (Answer to SOR, Ex. D) 
e Television service provider 
account.  
$240 Paid. (Answer to SOR, Ex. E) 
f Cellular phone account.  $442 Paid (Answer to SOR, Ex. A, Ex. B) 
g Telephone account.  $343 Paid. (Answer to SOR, Ex. B, Ex. 2) 
h Bank note on a repossessed 
Suburban. 
$3,485 Unpaid. Although barred by the 
statute of limitations, Applicant 
acknowledges she is responsible for 
the debt and plans on paying it. 
(Answer to SOR, Tr. 46) 
i Credit card debt.  $1,008 Unpaid. Creditor sent Applicant a 
settlement offer, which she intends 
to accept. (Tr. 47)  
j Medical debt. 
 
$155 Paid. Applicant paid $155 in May 
2009 and $75 interest in June 2009. 
(Answer to SOR, Ex. E) 
k Credit card account. $1,000 Unpaid. Creditor sent Applicant a 
settlement offer, which she intends 
to accept. (Tr. 50) 
l Correspondence course. 
 
$3,659 
 
Unpaid. Although barred by the 
statute of limitations, Applicant 
intends to pay this debt after she 
had paid those debts listed in her 
CBR. (Tr. 51) 
 
6 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
m Department store collection 
account.  
$1,097 
 
Applicant asserted she had paid this 
debt. (Tr. 53)  
n SOR does not list an n.   
o Vehicle repossession.  
 
 
 
$19,335 Unpaid. Applicant paid $150 per 
month for three months in 2008. The 
creditor is suing Applicant with a 
court date after the hearing. (Answer 
to SOR, Tr. 54)  
p Educational loan.  $676 
 
Unpaid. Applicant intends to pay this 
debt. (Answer to SOR, Tr. 59) 
q Educational loan.  
 
$716 
 
Unpaid. Applicant intends to pay this 
debt. (Tr. 60)  
r Medical account.  $202 
 
This debt is a duplication of the debt 
listed in c.  
s Credit card account.  $1,167 
 
Unpaid. Applicant intends to pay this 
debt. Creditor has made a 
settlement offer.  
t Home furnishings account.  $788 
 
Applicant asserts she has paid this 
debt. (Tr. 62)  
 Total debt listed in SOR $36,476.00  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
 
8 
 
 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had 19 accounts placed 
for collection, which totaled approximately $36,500. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Applicant paid seven debts totaling $2,056. She asserted, but provided no 
supporting documentation, that she has paid two debts of $1,097 (SOR ¶ 1.m) and 
$788 (SOR ¶ 1.t). Nine of the SOR debts totaling approximately $32,000 remain unpaid. 
She intends to pay some of these debts and has received settlement offers on some of 
them, but has yet to make payment on these debts. Applicant intends to pay her 
attorney fees (SOR ¶ 1.a), a credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.s), and three student loans (SOR 
¶¶ 1.l, 1.p and 1.q). A creditor was suing Applicant for a deficiency balance from a 
repossessed car (SOR ¶ 1.o). This debt ($19,335) represents more than 50 percent of 
the SOR debt ($36,476). 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
9 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence because she has nine delinquent debts totaling more than 
$32,000. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). The nine debts remain unpaid, which 
makes them recent and frequent. Therefore, AG & 20(a) does not apply. 
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies because Applicant=s financial problems were 
contributed to by her and her husband’s traveling to different locations in search of work 
and their marital problems. Applicant and her husband experienced periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. However, she has been employed with her 
current employer more than a year and a half.  
 
 Applicant has attended no financial counseling. She is current on her five credit 
cards, mortgage, car payments, and utilities. Applicant still owes more than $32,000. 
With so much owed, there is no clear indication the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. AG & 20(c) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has paid 7 of the 19 debts and wants to pay more of her debts. Paying 
the seven debts shows a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts. AG & 20(d) applies to these seven debts. Applicant asserted, but failed to 
document, that two additional debts were paid. Without documentation showing these 
debts have been paid, these debts are still of concern. If Applicant accepted the 
settlement offers presented by three of her creditors and made payment in accord with 
the settlement agreement, AG & 20(d) would also apply to those debts. However, 
Applicant has only a desire to pay the remaining debts, without any payment.  
 
Applicant asserted that a number of her debts are barred by the statute of 
limitations, but she acknowledges these debts and wants to pay them. Applicant was 
paying on one of the repossessions before a dispute resulted in her stopping additional 
payments. Applicant has not disputed the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem. Nor has she provided documented proof to substantiate the basis 
of the dispute or provided evidence of actions to resolve the issue. AG & 20(e) does not 
apply. The unpaid debts raise concerns about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s marital difficulties and 
travel searching for employment contributed to her financial problems. She has been 
employed in her current job for more than a year and a half and has started to address 
her past-due obligations. She has been able to pay more than $2,000 on seven of her 
delinquent accounts. There is no accepted settlement agreement or repayment plan for 
the nine remaining debts. Applicant’s one repossession ($19,335, SOR & 1.o) 
represents approximately 60 per cent of what remains unpaid. Applicant wants to pay 
her past-due obligations, but has yet to establish a repayment plan. The other eight 
debts total approximately $13,000.  
 
Three of the creditors have offered settlements, which Applicant has yet to 
accept and pay. Applicant needs to establish a good-faith effort to address or repay the 
nine remaining obligations. A systematic, concrete method of handling her debts is 
needed, which is not present here. With these unaddressed obligations her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. Should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
11 
 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b—1.g:  For Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.h—1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k—1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   The SOR contains no ¶ 1.n.  
  Subparagraph 1.o—1.t:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
