 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-06093 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn O. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations 
and personal conduct (falsification). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on November 26, 2007. On December 8, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal 
conduct) for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response, which DOHA 
received on January 7, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 
30, 2009. The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge on July 1, 
2009, but due to caseload considerations was reassigned to me on September 1, 
2009. DOHA had previously issued a notice of hearing on July 30, 2009, scheduling 
the hearing for August 25, 2009, which was canceled on August 24, 2009. DOHA 
issued a second notice of hearing on September 15, 2009, scheduling the hearing for 
October 28, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until November 17, 2009, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE E through M, which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on November 5, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a. to correct the date from 
“November 200” to November 2000.” Without objection, I granted Department 
Counsel’s request. Tr. 56. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations except SOR ¶ 
1.i., which he denied with explanation. His answers with explanations are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old electrician technician, who has worked for his 
defense contractor employer since April 2005. GE 1, Tr. 15-16. He is a first-time 
applicant for a security clearance. Tr. 15-16.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1992. GE 1, Tr. 17. He has never 
married and has no dependents. GE 1, Tr. 16-17. Applicant lives as a nuclear family 
with a woman and her two children, an 18-year-old boy, and a 15-year-old girl. 
Applicant provides support for his girlfriend and her two children. His girlfriend works 
as a waitress, and does not receive any support from the father of her children. Tr. 47-
48, 60-64. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his November 2007 e-QIP, his July 2008 Response to DOHA 
Financial Interrogatory, and his December 2007, September 2008, and April 2009 
credit reports. GE 1 – 5.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified nine separate debts -- one repossession, two 
judgments, two charged off accounts, and four collection accounts, approximating 
$23,000.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems stem from a live-in relationship he had with a 
former girlfriend in the approximate time frame of 1999 to 2002. At the time Applicant 
was involved with this woman, he was working offshore on oil rigs in the Gulf of 
Mexico. His job on the oil rigs required him to be absent for significant periods of time. 
During these absences, Applicant provided his former girlfriend with money to cover 
household expenses such as mobile home payments, utilities, food, and the like. 
Unfortunately, Applicant’s former girlfriend developed a substance abuse problem and 
diverted the money he gave her for household expenses to support her habit. By the 
time Applicant discovered that his finances were in chaos, it was too late. Applicant 
severed his relationship with that girlfriend in 2002. Tr. 18-21. 
 
The financial fallout from this experience has had lingering repercussions. After 
evaluating his options, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on 
November 29, 2000. He later voluntarily dismissed his petition on July 18, 2002.1 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.) Response to SOR, GE 6. Following dismissal, Applicant ratified his debts 
and “pulled them out of bankruptcy.” The debts in the SOR were primarily incurred 
during the time frame Applicant was involved in his former relationship. Tr. 64. Given 
Applicant’s financial resources and obligations to his family, it has taken time for him 
to recover. Since 2005, he has established a track record of paying his debts, with the 
exception of his older debts listed in the SOR. GE 2 – 4, Tr. 24.  
 
Applicant has paid, settled, initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors, or resolved all debts alleged. Applicant has paid debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c., and 1.e., and has made payment arrangements or is in the process of making 
payments for the debts alleged in ¶ 1.d., 1.g., and 1.j. He is engaged in good-faith 
disputes for debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f., 1.h., and 1.i. Applicant has written letters or 
made telephone calls, or both, with the creditors he has made payment arrangements 
with or with those creditors he is disputing. Tr. 22-38, 78, GE 5, GE 9, AE A – J. 
 
 
 
 
1 The SOR alleges Applicant’s Chapter 13 was dismissed in April 2002. However, GE 6 lists the 
dismissal date as July 18, 2002. GE 6 is an extract of Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceedings.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant submitted a budget with his monthly expenses that demonstrates that 
he is living within his means. AE K. 
 
Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to disclose events that occurred in the 
seven years preceding the completion of his November 2007 e-QIP: his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, his mobile home repossession, his two judgments filed against him, and 
debts over 180 days old. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. – 2.d.)  Applicant credibly testified that he 
believed all of the financial information sought was beyond the seven-year period. It 
was his belief that he had filed his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition before November 
2000 and the debts in question were included in that bankruptcy petition. In any event, 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition was filed on November 29, 2000, and his 
e-QIP was submitted on November 26, 2007, three days short of seven years. 
Response to SOR, Tr. 83-84. Applicant summarized his mistake, “But I just had my 
date wrong (bankruptcy filing date) when I filed it (e-QIP).” Tr. 85. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided a character reference letter from his team leader, who has 
known Applicant for four years. He described Applicant as a “tremendous worker,” 
whose “performance has been exemplary,” adding that he “has successfully 
demonstrated leadership and has been a great help to our customers.” AE L. 
Applicant also submitted his most recent performance evaluation covering January to 
December 2009, which reflects above average performance. AE M. 
 
Applicant leads a modest lifestyle, does not take vacations, and supports two 
children not his own. Tr. 47-49. In his spare time, he hunts in the winter and fishes in 
the summer. Applicant is actively involved in the lives of his girlfriend’s two teenage 
children. Tr. 86-88. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
6 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) provides, “Applicant’s credit report was sufficient to establish the 
Government’s prima facie case that Applicant had  . . .  delinquent [SOR] debts that 
are of security concern.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is also documented in 
his responses to DOHA interrogatories, his SOR response, and his oral statement at 
his hearing. He failed or was unable to ensure his creditors were paid as agreed. The 
government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Further 
inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct warrants full application of AG ¶ 20(a).  His debts were 
incurred during a previous failed relationship that ended in 2002. These debts were 
included in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filed in November 2000, which he voluntarily 
dismissed in July 2002. Applicant has been involved in a stable relationship for some 
time and has made substantial progress in resolving his lingering debts with his 
available means. Apart from these “old debts,” he remains current on all of his bills 
 
7 
 
 
(b). 
                                                          
and lives within his means. He continues to make progress and his delinquent debts 
are likely to be paid or resolved, and are unlikely to recur. They do not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant receives credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his financial problems 
resulted when his former girlfriend diverted household money to support her 
substance abuse habit. Applicant severed this relationship in 2002; however, the 
financial fallout from this experience lingers.2 He receives full mitigating credit 
because he established that he acted with sufficient initiative and resolve to address 
his delinquent debts. Applicant provided sufficient documentation about his income 
and expenditures to receive full credit under AG ¶ 20
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Although Applicant did not seek financial 
counseling, he has prepared a detailed budget. Moreover, he demonstrated a firm 
grasp of budgeting, payment plans, and expense reduction. He leads a modest 
lifestyle, lives within his means, and manages to remain current on his present 
obligations yet still managed to make payments to former creditors. He has the self-
discipline necessary to reduce and resolve his debts. There are “clear indications that 
the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has also established full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because he showed good faith3 in the resolution of his 
SOR debts.   
 
Applicant contested the validity of several of his debts. Applicant submitted 
documentation supporting the basis of his disputes with creditors. He receives credit 
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether the Applicant maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
under AG ¶ 20(e). I am further convinced if any of his creditors establish that Applicant 
owes them money, he will repay them.   
 
In sum, Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He is current 
on his payment plans. He took the honorable route of validating his debts and is in the 
process of repaying his creditors. While his journey to financial responsibility is not yet 
complete, I am confident he will keep his promise because of his continued progress 
on SOR debt resolution.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false 
security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or 
omitted required information on his November 2007 e-QIP. Applicant’s alleged 
falsification of Section 27 of his e-QIP is not substantiated. AG ¶ 17(f) provides a 
condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case, stating, “the information 
was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” AG ¶ 17(f) fully 
applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.a. – 2.d. Although he admitted preparing his e-QIP, and 
answering incorrectly, he honestly and reasonably believed that he was outside the 
seven-year window envisioned by the question.4  
4The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
 
9 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
    
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His debts have been 
ongoing for a number of years. His delinquent debts raise security concerns. However, 
the mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in his favor. There is no evidence of 
any security violation. Aside from the delinquent debt (which is a civil, non-criminal 
issue), he is a law-abiding citizen. The overall amount of debt is relatively low. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
10 
 
 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant is a high school 
graduate, who is an electrician technician. He is not sophisticated in the areas of 
finance. He made a poor choice in a previous relationship, and is still paying the 
consequences today. There is no reason not to trust his promise to pay his creditors. 
The record supports the fact that he has paid numerous debts over the years. He has 
established a “meaningful track record” of debt payment sufficient to trust his promise 
to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, 
and mitigation. Applicant has demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism and trustworthiness 
through his service as an employee of a defense contractor.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.j.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.d.:  For Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
