KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s daughter-in-law is also a citizen and resident of Russia.  Her father is a
retired official of the former Soviet Union who, participated in a Soviet intelligence organization
and worked to undermine U.S. security interests. A Judge is presumed to have considered all the
evidence in the record. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-04990.a1
DATE: 03/18/2010
DATE: March 18, 2010
In Re:
-----
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-04990
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John D. Altenburg, Jr., Esq.
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On December 8, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On November 9, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider
significant record evidence favorable to Applicant; whether the Judge’s application of the pertinent
mitigating conditions was erroneous; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a military retiree
seeking a security clearance as an employee of a Government contractor.  While in the military he
performed security and criminal investigations.
Applicant’s son is married to a citizen of Russia.  They met in a U.S. graduate school.  The
two were married in a civil ceremony in the U.S. and in a religious ceremony in Russia.  A
naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant’s daughter-in-law is also a citizen and resident of Russia.  Her
father is a retired official of the former Soviet Union who, during his government career, participated
in a Soviet intelligence organization and worked to undermine U.S. security interests.  
Applicant visited Russia to attend the wedding ceremony, and he stayed in an apartment and
in a vacation home of his son’s father-in-law.  He subsequently paid two other visits to Russia, in
the late 2000s.  In making these visits, Applicant complied with U.S. Government reporting
requirements.  Prominent individuals in the Defense community recommend Applicant for a security
clearance.  
Although the U.S. and Russia share strategic interests, the relationship between the two
countries has been strained by Russian involvement in Georgia, threats against Poland, killings of
Russian journalists, and the country’s use of oil as a means of political pressure against Ukraine,
Lithuania, and the Czech Republic.  Russia has targeted U.S. technologies and has sought protected
information through industrial espionage.  It has provided missile technology to China, Iran, Syria,
and Venezuela, which can be used in constructing weapons of mass destruction.  The Russian
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office monitor internet and e-mail traffic.  Russian
law enforcement agencies have access to personal information of telephone users.  
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider record evidence which he believes to be
favorable to his case for mitigation.  For example, he argues that the father-in-law’s notoriety
militates against his serving as a means through which Applicant might be pressured to compromise
U.S. security interests.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (App.
Bd. May 23, 2008).  Applicant’s presentation on appeal is not sufficient to rebut that presumption.
3
The decision reflects that the Judge considered the entire record and that she provided a reasonable
interpretation of the evidence.  Applicant points to his prior good security record as a factor that
mitigates the security concerns in his case.  Applicant’s security record is evidence that the Judge
was obliged to consider.  The Judge refers to that record several times in the Decision.  This is a
close case, and as such the Judge was obligated to resolve it in favor of national security rather than
in favor of Applicant.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-12088 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2007).  The
Government need not wait until an individual mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information
before it can make an unfavorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-00435
at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 22, 2009), citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D. C. Cir. 1969), cert.
denied 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).   
We have examined the Judge’s decision, both as to her application of the mitigating
conditions and the whole-person factors.  In light of Applicant’s son’s presence in Russia and his
family circumstances there, we conclude that the Judge articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
4
Member, Appeal Board
