 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
                  ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 08-07627 
                ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guidelines for sexual behavior, personal conduct, misuse of information technology 
systems, and financial considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions, which he 
signed on November 17, 2006. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
                                                          
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
On August 6, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct), D (Sexual Behavior), M (Use of Information 
Technology Systems), and F (Financial Considerations) of the revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant received the SOR on August 12, 2009. He signed his notarized Answer 
on August 24, 2009, in which he admitted the allegations under Guideline E, except for 
allegation 1.a(ii) and 1.b. He denied allegation 2.a. under Guideline D. Under Guideline 
M, he admitted allegation 3.a. He denied all the alleged debts listed under Guideline F. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 29, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on October 2, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 
9, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 10, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 11 exhibits, which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. The government also offered a 
demonstrative exhibit, which I marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered eight exhibits, which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H.3 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 19, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the 
SOR, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 46 years old, was an enlisted member of the U.S. Army from 1982 to 
1988. He earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering in 1989, and a law 
degree in 1994. He also married in 1994, and is the father of three sons aged 7, 9, and 
13 years. In 1995, in state A, he began operating a legal practice. Applicant worked for 
a defense contractor from 1996 to June 2006, when he was terminated. In November 
2006, he moved to state B, where he obtained his current position with another defense 
contractor as a test and certification engineer. He has held a security clearance since 
1982. (GE 1-5; Tr. 40, 161-162)  
 
In the early 1990s, Applicant started a property rental business in state A. At one 
point, he owned more than 50 rental properties. He did not incorporate his business. His 
wife worked as the office manager. Starting in about the mid-1990s, he was 
                                                          
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President 
on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and 
they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 Applicant offered eight exhibits. However, several exhibits contained subparts. For administrative 
convenience, the exhibits with subparts are identified as follows: AE B, parts (pt.) 1 through 28; AE C, 
parts 1 and 2; AE D, parts 1 and 2; AE E, parts 1 through 20; and AE F, parts 1 through 4. 
simultaneously operating the rental business, holding a full-time position with a defense 
contractor, and practicing law. Applicant traveled frequently for his job with the defense 
contractor. He and his wife had marital problems. Although they attended marital 
counseling in state A, they filed for divorce in 2004. Subsequently, in September 2005, 
his employer moved Applicant and his family to state C. After the move, they withdrew 
the divorce petition. In his current home state (B), he and his wife consulted a priest for 
counseling, but Applicant testified that, “…pretty quick he said look, I'm just a 
[clergyman] and, you know, you need -- you guys need to go find a real counselor.” 
Applicant provided a document dated October 2009 showing he has participated in 
counseling since April 2008. He attends once or twice per week. The document does 
not indicate that his wife attends. He testified that his current marital relationship is 
“growing,” (Tr. 164) but did not state his marital problems were resolved. (GE 6; AE C-
pt. 1; Tr. 40, 43, 81, 92-98, 213-214, 260)  
 
When Applicant and his wife moved in 2005 to state C, they continued to have 
marital problems. Applicant began to search social websites to determine if his wife was 
using them. In January 2006, he paid to join an adult dating website to monitor her 
activities. He discovered that she was accessing dating websites. He also began to 
access internet sites with pornographic videos, both at work and at home. He viewed 
pornographic material on the internet on his company computer. In January and 
February 2006, he downloaded hundreds of pornographic videos to his work computer. 
He viewed some of them while at work. He testified that he engaged in this activity 
because he felt angry and vengeful because of his wife’s actions. Applicant's company 
had a security system that flagged any access to denied (prohibited) internet sites. If the 
employee’s activities resulted in more than 100 such flags or “hits,” the company 
installed software on the computer to monitor the employee’s internet activity. In March 
2006, an investigation found that Applicant's computer has “28,938 url requests and 482 
A/D [access denied] hits.” The company’s investigator informed the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) agent that on average, Applicant accessed pornographic material 
for 30-45 minutes per day at work, and that Applicant stopped engaging in this activity 
at work after February 2006, but continued using his company computer at home to 
view pornography, which was against the employer’s policy. (GE 7; AE B-pt. 22; Tr. 95-
101, 118, 120, 130-132, 231) 
 
Applicant testified that he did not use his work computer to download or view 
pornographic material between February and May 2006. However, during a business 
trip in May 2006, he used his company laptop to access an adult social site, and met a 
woman4 in a chat room. They left the public room and went to a private chat room. They 
talked, but had no visual contact. The next day, he purchased a camera and installed it, 
along with the camera’s software, on his company laptop. That night, he again met with 
the woman and used the webcam. Applicant admitted in his SOR response that he 
                                                          
4 Applicant denied during the hearing that he interacted with more than one woman during his online 
encounters. However, his handwritten note in his interrogatory response state, “I also used my [company]  
laptop to login to the adult chat rooms and use Yahoo instant messenger, etc. and a webcam to have 
adult interaction with other women.” (GE 6; Tr. 276-277). 
 
viewed live video of adults performing sex acts, and also transmitted live video of 
himself, during which he exposed himself and masturbated. He testified that he did not 
show his face during the live video transmission because he thought he might be 
recognized and his actions would reflect badly on his company. He knew that accessing 
the adult websites and installing the software were against company rules. He also 
testified that, “Loading computer software on there to do what I was doing was definitely 
inappropriate, extremely inappropriate.” Applicant testified that his actions were selfish 
and immature, and resulted from his state of mind about his marital relationship. (AE B-
pt. 22; Tr. 101-105, 115, 126-127, 138-139, 156-160)   
 
On May 20, 2006, Applicant's company security officer confiscated his laptop and 
discovered the pornographic images and movies that he had downloaded, as well as his 
actions in the private chat room. A June 2006 Employee Corrective Action Memo 
reported that between January and May 2006, Applicant viewed numerous 
inappropriate and/or pornographic images from the internet; downloaded hundreds of 
pornographic movie videos to his work computer; connected a personal web camera to 
his work computer; joined a chat room on an adult social website; received live video of 
adults performing various sex acts; and “transmitted video of yourself exposing yourself 
while masturbating.” (GE 7; Tr. 104)  
 
Applicant denies the implication that this activity occurred continuously from 
January to May 2006. He testified that it took place from mid-January to February 18, 
2006, and then not again until early May 2006. He also testified that it was not a daily 
activity, but estimated that it occurred a few times per month. He did not deny the SOR 
allegation concerning his use of the webcam.5 In June 2006, the company found his 
conduct “unacceptable as an employee and a manager. Due to the extremely serious 
nature of your actions, the violation of company policies and procedures and the 
repetitious nature of your offenses, your employment with the [  ] company is being 
terminated, effective immediately.” Applicant is not eligible for rehire. He reported in his 
security interview that he is not susceptible to coercion based on his conduct because 
his family and numerous people at the company are aware of his conduct. (GE 6, 7; AE 
B-pt. 5 and pt. 21; Tr. 105, 135-136, 238-240). 
 
While Applicant was working for the same defense contractor in 1997, his 
coworkers complained that he was operating his rental property business during duty 
hours. Applicant denies the charge. The company investigated and coded the 
                                                          
5 Applicant wrote a response in the Corrective Action Memo noting that the company had not accurately 
stated information about how he used the webcam. However, he did not ask that it be changed, because 
he wanted to “save the investigators any further activity in what I felt was a very disagreeable task” and 
that he would leave it to their discretion. He noted that it was a mistake not to correct it because “It has 
portrayed me as being involved in activities which I was not, and has played a pivotal role in my being 
discharged.” However, during the hearing, when Department Counsel asked about this comment, Appeal 
stated that what he denied was the security officer’s statement that Appeal was attending counseling for 
his sexual activities, when his counseling was marital in nature. The memo does not discuss Applicant's 
counseling. However, the report of investigation could be interpreted in the way that Appeal describes, 
and it appears Appeal confused the Corrective Action Memo with the report of investigation. (GE 7; AE B-
pt. 21; Tr. 155-157). 
investigation as “violation of common sense business practices and unacceptable 
conduct.” The defense contractor’s report shows that the case was opened in 
November 1997 and closed in December 1997. It does not indicate that the charge was 
substantiated. The record evidence does not include a Corrective Action Memo or show 
that any action was taken against Applicant (GE 7; AE B, part 5; Tr. 46-48, 238). 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes more than $500,000 in delinquent debt. 
The debts comprise 1 medical debt; 12 credit card accounts amounting to $213,000, 
which Applicant used to cover operating expenses of his rental business (allegations 
4.b. through 4.l.); and 8 foreclosed mortgages on his rental properties amounting to 
$289,000 (allegations 4.m. through 4.t.). (GE 8-11; Tr. 87)  
 
 Applicant provided evidence that two debts are paid. He paid allegation 4.a., 
a medical debt of $80, on October 28, 2009. He also paid a judgment obtained by the 
creditor in allegation 4.c. for a credit card debt in the amount of $6,286 on October 27, 
2009. Applicant also testified that he paid the credit card debt of $14,328 alleged at 4.h., 
but the account number Applicant cites does not match the account number alleged at 
SOR subparagraph 4.h. The remaining credit card debts, which became delinquent in 
2003 and 2004, are unpaid. Applicant testified that he was willing to pay his credit card 
obligations, and made efforts to settle, but could not reach settlement agreements with 
most of the creditors. He provided no documentation to substantiate his efforts to settle 
with the companies. In January 2006, he ended his own efforts and delegated to his 
attorney the responsibility for any further contacts, with instructions to let the creditors 
make contact if they were interested in settling the accounts. When asked about his 
attorney’s contacts with the creditors, he testified, “I know that he -- he responds to calls 
and if he sees somebody that is doing something, he offers payment, but we -- I mean 
we went over and over extending.  I mean they know how to get a hold of us and how -- 
and that we want to settle.  I mean you can't –.“ (GE 8; AE E-pt. 2, pt. 3, and pt. 14, AE 
G; Tr. 85-88, 169) 
 
Applicant testified that his credit card accounts are resolved. He relies on the 
state A statute of limitations, under which such unpaid debts are no longer legally 
enforceable after three years.6 He states that he was not liable after October 2007. 
Although he denies that he owes any of these debts, he has not contacted the credit 
reporting agencies to dispute the fact that the debts continue to appear on his credit 
bureau reports. (AE C-pt. 2, AE D, AE E-pt. 14; Tr. 192, 229) 
 
For approximately ten years, Applicant operated his rental business without 
financial problems. The rental market in state A began to change in about 2001 when 
Applicant found that his tenants, who would not have qualified financially in the past, 
were able to secure home loans and pay less in mortgage payments than in rent. 
                                                          
6 Appeal cites 12 [state code] 2001 Ss 95 A(2). The statute states, in pertinent part, “A. Civil actions other 
than for the recovery of real property can only be brought within the following periods, after the cause of 
action shall have accrued, and not afterwards: …2. Within three (3) years: An action upon a contract 
express or implied not in writing;” 
 
Applicant began to sell his properties. He held a large auction in 2003 and sold 
numerous units. He held a second auction in early 2004, and sold several more 
properties. He contacted lenders to offer “short sales” or a deed in lieu of foreclosure, 
but his offers were not accepted. He was able to sell more than half of his properties, 
but approximately 20 properties remained unsold. He was unable to carry the mortgage 
payments, which totaled about $8,000 per month. Several of the lenders who did not 
agree to Applicant's offers took possession of the properties. Eight of these foreclosed 
mortgages are listed in the SOR at paragraphs 4.m. through 4.t. (AE B-pt. 23, AE C-pt. 
1; AE E-pt. 13; Tr. 61) 
 
Applicant testified that, under controlling state A law,7 the lenders are not entitled 
to payment of the deficiency balance on these mortgage loans because they took 
possession of the properties. Applicant also provided ten 1099-A forms (Acquisition or 
Abandonment of Secured Property) forwarded by the creditors to the U.S. Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). Four of the submitted 1099-A forms relate to allegations 4.m., 
4.n., 4.p, and 4.q. The remaining 1099-A forms do not relate to properties listed in the 
SOR. (AE E-pt. 13, AE H; Tr. 203, 206) 
 
 With funds from the sale of two houses in state C, Applicant bought his current 
house in state B in 2007. He paid cash because he could not obtain a mortgage loan 
with his poor credit rating. However, he contends that he is now in good financial shape. 
He testified that the only loan he owes is one to his mother, who gave him $70,000 in 
2002 to help with his failing rental business. Applicant's net take-home pay of 
approximately $4,000 per month, along with his wife’s net income of about $800 
provides a joint net monthly income of $4,800. He estimated at the hearing that his 
monthly expenses were $2,000. Although these figures result in an approximate 
monthly remainder of $2,800, Applicant stated that he does not have that much left 
each month. However, he did not know what additional expenses might account for the 
difference. (Tr. 193, 222-228) 
 
 Applicant provided performance evaluations for 2007 through 2009 that described 
his performance as exceeding expectations in most of the numerous categories rated. 
He has led projects to completion with all goals achieved. A friend who was a coworker 
while Applicant worked at the company where he was terminated provided a reference 
letter stating that Applicant was ethical, provided excellent support, and is committed to 
the defense of the United States. His lead engineer at the same company was unaware 
that Applicant engaged in activities that raised security concerns, but attested to his 
trustworthiness in handling classified material. His engineering manager at the same 
company stated that he never saw any questionable conduct and found Applicant to be 
professional and ethical. (AE B-pt. 27, AE C-pt. 1)  
 
 Applicant also submitted a letter from a pastoral counselor, dated October 2009, 
attesting that Applicant participated in counseling from April 2008 to October 2009 
focusing on personal growth and healthier interactional dynamics and communication 
                                                          
7 Applicant cited 12 [state code] Sect. 2002 (2004); 12 [state code] Sect. 686; Mare Oil v Deep Blue, 65 P. 
3d 294 (2002). 
patterns. He recommends that Applicant continue with the therapy sessions. Applicant 
also submitted a letter from a bank loan officer stating that Applicant had obtained loans 
in 1999, 2000, and 2004 amounting to approximately $583,500, and that each of the 
notes was paid in full as agreed, with no delinquencies. (AE C-pt. 1) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the criteria in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).8 The 
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not determine a 
conclusion for or against an applicant. Instead, the Guidelines are applied along with an 
evaluation of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶2(a) of the Guidelines.  
 
A security clearance decision resolves only the question of whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest9 for an applicant to receive access to classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”10 A decision 
to deny a security clearance is not a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant; it is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
The government bears the burden of producing admissible information to support 
its decision to deny or revoke a security clearance. The government must also prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, then the 
applicant must refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. As no one has a 
“right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A 
person granted access has a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust 
and confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
  AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern under Guideline D: 
 
                                                          
8  Directive, 6.3 
 
9  See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988) 
 
10  See, Executive Order 10865, Sect. 7 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 includes the following relevant conditions that raise security concerns 
and may be disqualifying: 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to  coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of  discretion 
or judgment. 
 
 Applicant was vulnerable to coercion based on his sexual misconduct. When he 
engaged in this activity, Applicant’s supervisor and coworkers were unaware of his 
downloading and viewing pornography from the internet. He was involved in serious 
misconduct that could result in termination. Other people only became aware after it 
was discovered through his company’s security measures. Between January and May 
2006, before the company detected his activities, Applicant's actions made him 
vulnerable to exploitation.11 AG ¶13(c) applies. Disqualifying condition AG ¶13(d) also 
applies. Applicant downloaded hundreds of pornographic videos to his work computer, 
and viewed some of them during his duty hours. He engaged in graphic sexual 
discussions and activities with a stranger on the internet, during which he exposed 
himself on camera. His conduct showed a complete lack of discretion and judgment. 
 
Under Guideline D, AG ¶14 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.  
 
 Although Applicant’s sexual misconduct in 2006 is not recent, I cannot 
confidently conclude that he will not resort to inappropriate conduct when subjected to 
stress in the future. His behavior resulted from marriage problems; Applicant testified 
that his marriage is “growing,” but did not testify that it no longer causes stress. In 
                                                          
11 See, ISCR Case No. 91-0259 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1992). 
addition, Applicant knowingly and repeatedly violated his employer’s policies, even 
though he held a security clearance, conduct that casts serious doubt on his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. AG ¶ 14(b) does not apply. However, AG ¶ 
14(c) does apply. Applicant is no longer subject to exploitation based on this sexual 
misconduct, as his family, supervisor, and some coworkers are aware of his activities. 
As to AG ¶ 14(d), Applicant's behavior was not private, as he accessed pornography 
from his company computer, which was monitored by his employer. He also participated 
in adult social websites where he discussed sexual matters and engaged in sexual 
activity with strangers, behavior that is neither private nor discreet. AG ¶ 14 (d) cannot 
be applied. In light of the lack of mitigation under AG ¶ 14(b) and (d), the mitigation 
available under AG ¶ 14(c) is insufficient to find for Applicant on Guideline D.  
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
AG ¶ 40 includes the following relevant disqualifying conditions: 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and  
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
Applicant used his employer’s computer in an unauthorized manner to access 
pornography both at his job during duty hours and while on a company business trip. He 
also installed unauthorized hardware and software – the webcam and its associated 
software -- on his company computer to enhance his participation in prohibited sexual 
activity on adult websites. Both AG ¶ 40(e) and (f) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 41 provides two relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 41(a) does not apply. Applicant’s actions did not occur under 
unusual circumstances but at his work place, during the workday, and on a business 
trip. Even though it happened several years ago, the fact he indulged in such behavior 
when he was a mature adult casts serious doubt on his good judgment. AG ¶ 41(c) also 
cannot be applied. Applicant’s conduct was intentional. It was discovered not through 
his own admission, but only because his company installed detection software after his 
excessive use of denied internet sites. Applicant's misuse of his company’s information 
technology systems is unmitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The facts support application of two disqualifying conditions under AG 16:  
  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing,…; 
 
 Applicant’s viewing of adult pornography on his work computer demonstrates a 
willingness to disregard his company’s policies. Moreover, the fact that he engaged in 
such activities while he held a security clearance underscores his willingness to ignore 
the trust that the government placed in him when he was granted a security clearance. 
Applicant’s untrustworthy conduct demonstrated a lack of judgment that is incompatible 
in those who are entrusted with classified information. AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  
 
 Applicant denies the SOR allegation that he operated his rental business from his 
defense contractor worksite. The company’s report shows only the date the 
investigation was opened and closed and its code. It does not show that Applicant was 
admonished or suffered any disciplinary action. Therefore, the evidence does not 
support a conclusion that Applicant's employer found him to be misusing company time 
or resources for his rental business, and no mitigation is required as to the conduct 
alleged at subparagraph 1.b. 
 
 Concerning the possibility of coercion, disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(e)(1) 
applies because, until Applicant's sexual activities were detected by his employer, they 
were unknown to his coworkers and supervisor. Applicant’s personal and community 
standing would certainly have been affected by discovery of his conduct, as 
demonstrated by the fact that once his activities were discovered, Applicant was 
terminated. During the period that he engaged in these acts, and while they were 
unknown to his employer, Applicant was vulnerable to exploitation.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s sexual conduct is unmitigated by AG ¶ 17(c). Although his conduct 
was not recent, it was serious, untrustworthy, and demonstrated extremely poor 
judgment. AG ¶ 17(d) has limited applicability: Applicant attends therapy, but he did not 
testify that the marriage problems that caused negative conduct in the past no longer 
exist. The evidence does not show that the therapy is marital in nature, or that his wife 
attends. Questions remain whether marital stresses continue, and whether they might 
cause negative conduct in the future. As to vulnerability, AG ¶ 17(e) requires that an 
applicant take steps to eliminate vulnerability to coercion. Here, Applicant took no steps 
to inform his employer of his actions and thereby eliminate his vulnerability; His 
employer only learned of Applicant's compromising conduct when the security 
measures exposed him. AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. Applicant's sexual misconduct is 
unmitigated under Guideline E. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). In the mid-2000s, after he sold most of his rental properties, 
Applicant was unable to meet the mortgage payments on the remaining units and they 
were foreclosed. Applicant had delinquent credit card accounts associated with his 
failed business. He made efforts to settle with the creditors, but could not reach 
settlement agreements on many of them. In January 2006, he stopped any further 
efforts and delegated to his attorney the responsibility for any further contacts, with 
instructions to let the creditors contact him if they were interested in settling the 
accounts.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 It is unlikely that he will be involved in such ventures in the future because he 
no longer operates a real estate business, which was the source of his excessive debt. 
However, his debts are numerous—the SOR cites 20 debts—and total approximately 
$500,000. Moreover, Applicant's decision to end his efforts in 2006 to pay his credit card 
debts raises concerns that he was simply waiting for the statute of limitations to render 
the debts legally unenforceable the following year. His conduct casts doubt on his 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 The circumstances that resulted in the foreclosures and the associated credit 
card debts were largely beyond Applicant's control. Applicant’s delinquent debts arose 
from the unforeseeable market changes that caused him to lose renters. Applicant 
made substantial and reasonable efforts to resolve his mortgage delinquencies by 
holding real estate auctions in 2003 and 2004, and offering the lenders short sales or 
deeds in lieu of foreclosure. The lenders listed in the SOR recovered the properties, and 
under state law, cannot claim deficiency balances on these debts.  
 
 Applicant testified that he made efforts to arrange settlements with the credit 
card companies. However, in January 2006, he instructed his attorney to discuss 
settlement only if a creditor called. It appears that Applicant was simply waiting until the 
statute of limitations rendered the debts legally unenforceable in 2007. Under the 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence, this does not constitute a good-faith effort, and AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply.12 Although Applicant receives some mitigation based on AG ¶ 
20(b), it is insufficient to outweigh the disqualifying conditions under Guideline F.  
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I considered the 
                                                          
12 The Appeal Board has held that reliance on a state’s statute of limitations does not necessarily 
represent a “good-faith effort” under AG ¶ 20(d). See, ISCR Case No. 08-01122 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 
2009); ADP Case No. 06-14616 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 18, 2007); ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Jul 22, 2008); ADP Case No. 07-13041 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 2 
(App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2008). 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Between January and February 2006, Applicant used his employer’s computer to 
access and download hundreds of pornographic videos while at work. He also viewed 
some of them during duty hours. In May 2006, he viewed pornographic material on his 
company laptop while on a business trip. On the same trip, he installed a camera and 
camera software on the laptop, and viewed live pornographic videos. He transmitted live 
video of himself masturbating to an adult website. Applicant did not disclose his actions, 
and was terminated when his employer detected these activities. Applicant's sexual 
misconduct occurred when he was a mature adult 42 years old, married, and the father 
of three sons. 
 
 Although Applicant's conduct occurred four years ago, the nature of his acts 
raises serious concerns. Each time he accessed a pornographic site at work, he 
knowingly violated company policy, and placed his own interests foremost. He also 
betrayed the trust the government had placed in him as a holder of a security clearance. 
His actions made him vulnerable to exploitation for the period when his employer was 
unaware of his activities. 
 
 Applicant’s rental business suffered when the real estate market in state A 
changed. He made substantial efforts to sell his properties. The deficiency balances on 
his foreclosures are no longer owed under state law. However, Applicant ended his 
efforts to resolve more than $200,000 in credit card debt in 2006, and waited until the 
statute of limitations rendered the debts unenforceable the following year. The Appeal 
Board has held that such reliance on a statute of limitations does not constitute a good-
faith effort to resolve debt. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.     For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.     Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline M   AGAINST Applicant 
 
    Subparagraph 3.a.     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 4.a.     FOR Applicant 
 Subparagraph 4.b.     AGAINST Applicant 
 Subparagraph 4.c.     FOR Applicant 
 Subparagraph 4.d. – 4.l    AGAINST Applicant 
 Subparagraph 4.m. – 4.t.    FOR Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
