  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06915 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s parents and brother are citizens and residents of the Ukraine. 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under foreign 
influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 6, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
foreign influence. On March 24, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a 
hearing. On July 30, 2009, I was assigned the case. On August 17, 2009, DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on September 9, 2009.  
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1 
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted exhibits A through E, 
which were admitted into the record. On September 17, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the Ukraine. The request and the attached documents were 
not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (H Ex.) I 
(United States Department of State, Background Note: Ukraine), II (United States 
Department of State, 2008 Human Rights Reports: Ukraine), III (Ukraine Country 
Specific Information) and IV (Congressional Research Service, Ukraine: Current Issues 
and United States Policy). The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings 
of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations listed in the 
SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a 
thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old senior electrical engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since October 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 In 1965, Applicant was born in the Soviet Union in what is now the Ukraine. (Tr. 
26) Applicant does not speak Ukrainian. (Tr. 63) He grew up speaking Russian and 
studied English since the age of three. (Tr. 64) In 1989, Applicant left the Soviet Union 
and came to the United States. (Tr. 27) In 1992, he obtained his green card after 
marring a United States citizen. (Tr. 45) In January 1996, he became a United States 
citizen. (Ex. 1) Until he became a citizen, he had not returned to the Ukraine since 1991. 
(Tr. 41, 66) Applicant has a United States passport and maintains no foreign passports. 
He has no financial interests in the Ukraine.  
 
 In 1998, Applicant filed for his mother’s immigration to the United States. (Ex. B 
and C, Tr. 30) He also filed for his brother, but it took longer to have his brother’s 
paperwork finalized. (Tr. D, Tr. 30) From September 2003 to March 2005, Applicant 
attended university in the United States and obtained a Master of Science in Electrical 
Engineering.  
 
 In 1938, Applicant’s great-grandfather, an accountant, was declared an enemy of 
the people and was killed during one of Stalin’s purges. (Tr. 27) His great-grandfather 
was an officer in the czar’s White Army and taught at a military college. (Tr. 32) His 
great-grandfather’s status resulted in the termination of his great-grandmother’s job and 
his grandfather being denied admission to several universities and being unable to have 
a career in a managerial position. (Tr. 28)  
2 
 
 In 1982, Applicant enrolled at university taking civil construction engineering 
courses. In 1983, he was expelled and drafted into the military during the Afghanistan 
war. (Tr. 28) From 1983 through 1985, he was in tank repair before becoming a 
draftsman due to his education. (Tr. 35, 47) In 1989, the Soviet Union opened up and 
Applicant came to the United States as a student attending a U.S university. (Tr. 29) 
The American university paid for his initial education as part of the exchange program. 
(Tr. 46) Later, he paid for his education by working while attending school. (Tr. 46)  
 
 In 1990, he returned to the Ukraine and finished his education. (Tr. 36) In 1991, 
the Soviet Union broke up and Applicant left the country, but he went back in 1996, after 
he had become a United States citizen, to defend his thesis. (Tr. 44) He obtained a 
combined Master’s degree and Bachelor’s degree in Physics. (Tr. 36) While defending 
his thesis and obtaining his degrees in the Ukraine, he was still attending a university in 
the United States. (Tr. 44, 67) In 1997, he obtained a Bachelor’s degree in Mechanical 
Engineering from a U.S university. (Tr. 36)  
 
 In 2002, Applicant was laid off from his job when the company shifted production 
overseas. (Tr. 49) Applicant was unemployed for nine months before returning to an 
American university in the United States to work on his second Master’s degree. (Tr. 49) 
In 2005, he obtained his Master’s degree in Electrical Engineering. (Tr. 36) 
 
 After completing his education, Applicant decided to stay in the United States 
and not return to the Ukraine, because he liked living in a free society, free of tyranny 
and oppression. (Tr. 37) Applicant states the Ukraine is not a satellite of Russia. (Tr. 37) 
It is a market democracy. (Tr. 39) In the 1990’s, the Ukraine had the third largest 
nuclear arsenal in the world and chose to destroy it. (Tr. 38) The Ukraine was the most 
industrialized republic when part of the Soviet Union. (Tr. 40) In 2008, following Russia’s 
invasion of Georgia, the Ukraine openly supported Georgia. (Tr. 67) 
 
 Applicant visited the Ukraine in June 2001, July 2004, December 2006, January 
2007, August 2007, and Christmas time 2008. In 2001, he spent two to three weeks in 
the Ukraine. In 2004, he was there for two months. In late 2005 and early 2006, 
Applicant was in the Ukraine for two to three weeks. In late 2006 and early 2007, 
Applicant spent two to three weeks in the Ukraine. (Ex. 3) In August 2007, he was there 
three weeks. (Ex. 3) His last trip was for two weeks at Christmas time 2008. (Tr. 33) All 
of his trips were to visit his family. Applicant asserts that loyalty to his family does not 
translate into loyalty to the Ukrainian government. (Tr. 32)  
 
 Applicant’s mother, age 67, is a citizen and resident of the Ukraine. (Tr. 52) In 
1981 or 1982, his parents divorced. (Tr. 57) From 1981 until the summer of 2009, she 
was a college chemistry professor at a state-funded Ukrainian college. (Tr. 31, 52) 
Applicant’s mother was ineligible for a career above her teaching level because of her 
grandfather. (Tr. 28) Applicant has telephone communication with his mother from two 
or three times a week to everyday. (Ex. 3, Tr. 33) Applicant sees his mother when he 
visits the Ukraine. In July 2006, Applicant’s petition for his mother to obtain a United 
States visa was approved. (Ex. B)  
 
3 
 In March 2009, his mother was issued an immigrant visa by the United States 
(Ex. 2, D, Tr. 51, 58) She did not use it because of her deteriorating health. (Tr. 51) In 
July 2009, his mother had an operation and his brother remained to take care of her. 
(Tr. 30, 54) As of the time of the hearing, his mother had successfully undergone the 
operation, but was yet unable to travel. (33) Following the operation, Applicant talked to 
his mother several times a day. (Tr. 34) 
 
 Applicant has no relationship with his father, a retired science researcher, and 
has not had any contact with him for more than ten years. (Ex. 2, 3) Applicant’s brother, 
an insurance salesman, is a citizen and resident of the Ukraine. Applicant’s contact with 
his brother was between every two weeks to monthly contact and he saw him whenever 
he traveled to the Ukraine. (Tr. 34) He last saw his brother in 2008, and last talked to 
him six weeks before the hearing. (Tr. 55) In October 1998, Applicant’s petition for his 
brother to obtain a United States visa for was approved. (Ex. C)  
 
Ukraine 
 
 The Ukraine has a parliamentary–presidential system of government with 
separate executive, judicial, and legislative branches. It has been an independent state 
since August 1991.2 (H Ex. I, p.3) In December 1991, the United States officially 
recognized the independence of the Ukraine. The first post-Soviet constitution was 
adopted in June 1996. In March 2006, the Ukraine held parliamentary and local 
elections. (id., p.4) Following World War I, the Ukrainians declared independent 
statehood. However, part was incorporated into Poland and part incorporated into the 
Soviet Union in 1922 as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.  
 
 The Ukraine is undergoing a significant economic, political, and social 
transformation, and income disparities have grown sharply. (H. Ex. III, p.3) Freedom of 
religion is guaranteed by law. (id., p.4, H Ex. II, p.13) Minority rights are respected. 
Freedom of speech and press are guaranteed and these rights are generally respected. 
(id.) The Ukraine does not recognize dual nationality. (H. Ex. III, p.5) 
 
 The Ukraine maintains peaceful and constructive relations with all its neighbors 
and has sought to maintain good relations with Russia. (H Ex. I, p.8) The United States 
attaches great importance to the success of the Ukraine’s transition to a democratic 
state with a flourishing market economy. (id., p.9) Ukraine’s democratic “Orange 
Revolution” has led to closer cooperation and more open dialogue between the Ukraine 
and the United States. (id.) In March 2006, normal trade relation status was restored 
with the termination of the Jackson-Vanik amendments to the Trade Act of 1974. (id.) 
 
 United States policy remains centered on realizing and strengthening a 
democratic, prosperous, and secure Ukraine more closely integrated into Europe and 
Euro-Atlantic structures. In December 2008, the United States signed the United States 
—Ukraine Charter on Strategic Partnership, which highlights the importance of the 
bilateral relationship and outlines enhanced cooperation in the areas of defense, 
security, economics and trade, energy security, democracy, and cultural exchanges. 
                                                          
2 The dissolution of the Soviet Union occurred In December 1991. (H Ex. I) 
4 
(id.) The Charter also emphasizes the continued commitment of the United States to 
support enhanced engagement between NATO and the Ukraine. (id.) 
 
 The total United States assistance since independence has been more than $3.8 
billion. United States assistance is targeted to promote political, security, and economic 
reform and to address urgent social and humanitarian needs. The United States has 
consistently encouraged Ukraine’s transition to a democratic society with a prosperous 
market-based economy. (id.) 
 
 Fundamental civil and political rights are respected. (H Ex. II, p.1) The police and 
penal systems continue to be sources of some of the most serious human rights 
concerns. (H Ex. II, p.1) They include instances of torture by law enforcement 
personnel, harsh conditions in prisons, and arbitrary and lengthy pretrial detentions. (id.) 
The judiciary lacks independence and suffers from corruption. (id.) Police corruption 
remains a problem. (id. p.8) Serious corruption persists in all branches of the 
government. (id. p.1) 
 
 Lengthy pretrial detention remains a problem. Individuals often remain in 
detention for months or years before being brought to trial. (id. p.8) The constitution 
includes procedural provisions intended to ensure a fair trial, including the right of 
suspects or witnesses to refuse to testify against themselves or their relatives; however, 
these rights were limited by the absence of implementing legislation, which left a largely 
Soviet era criminal justice system in place. (H. Ex. II, p. 11) The constitution gives 
citizens the right to challenge in court any decisions, actions, or omissions of national 
and local government officials that violates human rights. (id.p.12) 
 
 The Ukraine seeks to join NATO. (Tr. 67) In April 2008, the Bush Administration 
strongly supported granting a Membership Action Plan to the Ukraine, a stepping-stone 
to NATO membership. (H. Ex. IV, summary, p.13) The effort was blocked. However, the 
Allies confirmed that the Ukraine will join NATO in the future. (id.) The Ukraine has also 
sought entry into the World Trade Organization and the European Union.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
  
AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in United States interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or 
coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The two conditions applicable to this case are: 
6 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s parents and brother are citizens and residents of the Ukraine. His 
parents are divorced and he has not had contact with his father in more than ten years. 
He has frequent contact with his mother and less frequent contacts with his brother. His 
connections to his family also create a potential conflict of interest because the 
relationships are sufficiently close in nature and could raise a security concern over his 
desire to help his mother and brother. Once Applicant became a United States citizen, 
he sought to obtain a United States visa so his mother and brother could come to the 
United States. 
 
The government presented sufficient evidence to support the factual allegations 
in the SOR. AG ¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
Four of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
Applicant has professed his total loyalty to the United States. He has no financial 
interest located in the Ukraine or in any other foreign country. It was Applicant’s 
7 
decision to stay in the United States and not return to the Ukraine, because he likes 
living in a free society, free of tyranny and oppression. 
 
Based on his relationship and depth of loyalty to the United States, Applicant can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of United States interests. He has 
lived in the United States since 1989, when he arrived to attend university. After earning 
an undergraduate and advanced degrees, he began working in the United States. In 
1996, he became a United States citizen. His ties to the Ukraine have become minimal 
over the years. He has no financial or property interests in the Ukraine. His 
communication with his brother is once every two to six weeks and with his father, non 
existent. His communication with his mother is more frequent.  
 
 I have considered the information of which I have taken administrative notice 
concerning the Ukraine. That information discloses that the Ukraine is a country that 
has experienced a degree of political and economic instability since it gained 
independence following the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. The Ukraine is not a 
satellite of Russia, but has a continuing complex relationship with Russia. The Ukraine 
has sought entry into NATO, the World Trade Organization, and the European Union. 
There is nothing to indicate the Ukraine has engaged in any espionage efforts, 
economic or otherwise, since obtaining its independence.  
 
As to the potential for coercion, available information shows that the Ukraine is 
an open, market society, governed through a democratically elected legislature and 
executive, checked by an independent judiciary. It is not a hostile, totalitarian state 
seeking to project its power worldwide through the brute intimidation or coercion of its 
citizens domestically and abroad. While there are notable problems regarding human 
rights abuses in the Ukraine, all of the available information shows Applicant=s mother 
and brother are not likely to be subject to coercive methods to obtain information from 
Applicant. I conclude there is little likelihood the Ukraine, a nation friendly toward the 
United States, will try to leverage Applicant=s relationship with his mother and brother to 
gain access to the information with which Applicant works.  
 
 Neither his mother, a retired university chemistry professor, nor his brother, an 
insurance salesman, are in positions connected with the Ukrainian government or 
engaged in activities that would likely cause Applicant to be exploited or placed in a 
position of having to choose between them and the United States. Considering all 
available information about the Ukraine, Applicant is entitled to substantial consideration 
under AG ¶ 8(a). 
 
 Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b) based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the United States. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of United States interests. He does not have any foreign financial or 
property interests. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. He has frequent communication with mother and 
less frequent communication with his brother. He last talked with his brother six weeks 
before the hearing. Since leaving the Ukraine in 1989—20 years ago—he has visited 
his mother and brother in the Ukraine seven times.  
 
8 
Applicant has not had contact with his father in more than ten years. AG ¶ 8(c) 
applies. Based on the foregoing, I conclude SOR & 1.a for the Applicant, and further 
conclude available information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised 
under Guideline B. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
United States relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within 
the United States; and many other [factors] raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). Substantial mitigating evidence weighs 
toward granting Applicant a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant is fully entrenched in the United States, has no foreign financial 
interests, and is unlikely to compromise his life here. Applicant is a mature person. He 
has lived in the United States for 20 years, most of his adulthood, and has been a 
naturalized citizen for the past 13 years. He earned an undergraduate degree and an 
advanced degree from United States institutions. He is a successful member of his 
business community, providing services to the United States government and private 
industry. His ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to the Ukraine. 
There is no evidence he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to 
the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, and he renounced 
his Ukrainian citizenship after taking his United States oath of citizenship. The Ukraine 
does not recognize dual citizenship. There is no derogatory information about him in the 
record. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the entire record before me shows the 
government=s doubts about Applicant=s suitability to have access to classified 
information are based solely on his mother and brother being citizens and residences of 
9 
10 
                                                          
the Ukraine. They both have United States visas and would be living in the United 
States now were it not for his mother’s surgery followed by a period of being unable to 
travel after the surgery. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and 
all facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.3 Available information is 
also sufficient to resolve those doubts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign 
influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
3 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
