                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05909
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Attorney At Law
March 31, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF-86) on October
7, 2007.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On March 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines J, E and H for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued
after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 30, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was originally assigned to
another Administrative Judge on October 2, 2009.  The matter was transferred to the
undersigned on October 19, 2009.  That same day, a notice of hearing was issued
scheduling the hearing for November 10, 2009.  At the hearing the Government
presented four exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 to 4.  The Applicant called
three witnesses and presented seventeen exhibits, referred to as Applicant's Exhibits A
2
through Q.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on November 19, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 49 years old and unmarried.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as an Engineering Manager, and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant denied each of the allegations set forth under these guidelines.
He has held a security clearance since 1982/83, and has never had a security violation. 
(Tr. p. 74).  
The Applicant explained that in 2002, he was going through a horrible divorce
and child custody battle.  During the process, his ex-wife engaged in many
unscrupulous tactics in an effort to malign his character and place him in a false light
before the court.  She wanted custody of the children and the child support that went
with it.  Among many false allegations, she accused him of being a drug addict.  The
results of the tribulations eventually brought about the divorce, and he was granted full
custody of their two children.  
In October 2002, the Applicant was arrested for (1) Driving Under the Influence of
a Controlled Substance and (2) Domestic Violence, Non-Criminal.  (Applicant's Exhibit
A).  The charges were dismissed.  Applicant explained that he and his wife had been
arguing about who their children should live with.  The Applicant did come home after
work, but was waiting until his wife left for work to do so.  He noticed a friend of his wife
following him.  When he came home, his wife had taken their two children to a friend’s
house.  She then called 911 reporting that the Applicant had pulled the telephones our
of the wall and was threatening her with a gun.  Applicant was upstairs getting ready for
bed when the telephone rang and the sheriff’s department ordered him to come out with
his hands up and guns were pointed at him. Applicant was then taken into custody and
arrested.   Applicant was given a drug test, it was determined that he was not under the
influence, and the charges were dismissed.  (Tr. p. 64-65).    
Three months later, in January 2003, the Applicant was arrested for violation of a
Protective Order for an incident the occurred in December 2002.  Applicant testified that
in December 2002, while at his son's basketball game, his wife came in and sat behind
him.  She then followed him to his car and called 911, reporting that he had violated the
ongoing Protective Order requiring that he remain at least 100 yards away from her.
3
The Applicant discovered that his car had been keyed and he suspected that his wife
had done it.  A month later, he was arrested.  The matter was subsequently dismissed.  
In June 2007, the Applicant was arrested for Possession of Marijuana.  He
explained that his brother had called him from a bar to come pick him.  Applicant went
into the bar and had a few beers.  He then drove his brother home.  On his way home,
he pulled over to use his cell phone and did not realize that he had pulled over at the
aqueduct entrance.  At that point, he noticed something floating around in his car that
had fallen to the floor.  He picked it up and realized that it was marijuana.  He then
tucked the bag in his pocket, with the intent of returning it to his brother.  A sheriff
quickly pulled up shining his light on the car and saw another bag of marijuana in the
seat.  Applicant was then arrested.  Applicant stated that none of the marijuana was not
his and he did not know it had been stashed in his car.  Applicant later learned that the
marijuana was his brothers.  Applicant hired an attorney to represent him in hopes of
getting the case dismissed.  For a first offender, he was required to attended 24
Narcotics Anonymous meetings and the charge was dismissed.  Applicant has satisfied
the courts requirement.  (Applicant's Exhibit E).  In hopes of getting the charge
dismissed, the Applicant did not immediately report the incident to his Facility Security
Officer.  Approximately a month after the incident, the Applicant reported the arrest to
his Facility Security Officer.  
Applicant's brother testified that on the evening in question in June 2007, he had
been consuming alcohol at a bar.  While at the bar, he purchased marijuana from a
friend.  He called his brother, the Applicant, to come pick him up to give him a ride
home.  Once in the Applicant's car, he stashed the marijuana down the side of the seat.
He did not tell the Applicant about it, and inadvertently left it in the Applicant's vehicle.
Applicant's brother further testified that the Applicant, to his knowledge, has never used
marijuana.  (Tr. pp. 42-45)    
Applicant presented a written statement of intent under penalty of perjury stating
that he has no intentions to ever use illegal drugs of any sort, and if he does his security
clearance will be subject to immediate revocation.  (Applicant's Exhibit Q).
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
his personal background during the clearance screening process.
In 1982, the Applicant completed a security clearance application, and did not
disclose his infrequent use of marijuana in college from 1978 to 1981 on the application.
Applicant admits that he answered the question falsely, but argues that he was young
and did not understand the seriousness of falsifying the document at the time.  He is
now much more mature and understands the implications of his actions.  He has not
used marijuana or any other drug since then.  He also more fully understands the
responsibility of being honest and candid with the Government at all times.    
Applicant's Program Manager and a past supervisor, who have both evaluated
his Applicant's work performance for several years between the period from 2001
4
through 2007, testified that Applicant is a wonderful worker, who has always received
good ratings at the "meets" or "exceeds" company standards.  They consider the
Applicant sufficiently trustworthy for access to classified information.  (Tr. pp. 32-34).
Applicant's  experience, great knowledge and technical expertise, have been the
reasons he was promoted from Flight Test to take the Lead position overseas.  (Tr. p.
55).  
Applicant's work performance evaluations for 2006 through 2008, overall reflect
that he "meets" or "exceeds requirements".  (Applicant's Exhibit H).  Applicant has also
received a number of achievement awards for his work performance.  (Applicant's
Exhibit I).
Four letters of recommendation from individuals who have worked with the
Applicant and/or know him well, attest to his hard working nature, dedication to his job
and reliability.  They describe him as professional, a good team leader, with excellent
technical abilities, integrity and loyalty, and a person of high ethics.  (Applicant's Exhibits
B, C, F and K). 
   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
32.(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
5
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
17.(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any illegal drugs in the future, such as:
6
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is "clearly consistent with the
national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, "The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person's life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination." The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record. 
The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is
speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in
Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order . . . shall be a
determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination
as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned."
7
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct, drug abuse and/or dishonesty that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government's case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct, (Guideline J) that he falsified his security
clearance application (Guideline E), and he engaged in drug abuse, (Guideline H).  The
totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on
the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I
conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case
under Guidelines J, E and H of the SOR.
The evidence shows that while going through a bad divorce and custody battle,
he  was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Domestic
Violence, violating a Protective Order, and Possession of a Controlled Substance.  All of
the charges were dismissed.  Two of the arrests occurred over seven years ago.  The
most recent occurred over three years ago.  Applicant fully explained the circumstances
concerning each incident and has provided persuasive evidence demonstrating that he
has put any such misconduct behind him.  He currently displays good judgment and
trustworthiness. 
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 32.(a) so much time has elapsed since
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 32.(d) there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement also apply.  Under the
particular facts of this case, the Applicant's criminal conduct is in the distant past.  The
8
instigators of the conduct have been removed from his life, and there is no chance that
he will engage in any such conduct in the future.  
With respect to the Applicant's failure to disclose his use of marijuana use on his
1982 security clearance application, I find that it was intentional.  At that time, he was
obviously too young and immature to meet security clearance eligibility.  However, given
the time that has passed, twenty-six years, without reoccurrence of the drug abuse or
incidents of dishonesty, I find that the falsification is no longer of security significance.
Applicant now understands the significance of holding a security clearance and the
responsibilities that come with it.  
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition, 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities applies.  However, Mitigating Condition, 17.(c) the offense is so minor,
or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment also applies.  Under Guideline
H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or
distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 26.(b) a demonstrated intent
not to abuse any illegal drugs in the future, such as: (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guidelines J, Criminal Conduct, and H, Drug Involvement. 
As stated above, I find that the Applicant deliberately falsified his security
clearance application by concealing his marijuana use.  However, he has not used
marijuana for over twenty six years and has no intentions of ever using it again.  Under
the particular circumstances of this case, his past conduct no longer has security
significance.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
I have also considered the "whole person concept" in evaluating the Applicant's
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of good judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, candor and a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating
that the person may properly safeguard classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and meets the eligibility
requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct),  H (Drug Involvement), and E (Personal
Conduct).  
9
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraphs 1,  2 and 3 of the SOR.               
                                                                                                                
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 3: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
