1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-08616
SSN: ----------------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties, which includes a federal tax
lien for back taxes of $9,851 for tax year 2002. He paid the back taxes along with
interest and penalty, and the lien was released in December 2009. Also, he has brought
his past-due mortgage loan current. A small medical collection account remains
unresolved, and he is disputing three other debts. Accordingly, as explained below, this
case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to
this case. They replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit 1. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on June 19, 2009,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether or not to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. His
responses to the SOR allegations were mixed. The case was assigned to me
September 2, 2009, The hearing took place October 28, 2009. The transcript (Tr.) was
received November 5, 2009. 
The record was held open until December 31, 2009, to allow Applicant to present
additional documentary evidence. Applicant made a timely submission on or about
December 17, 2009, and the post-hearing matters are admitted, without objections, as
follows: (1) Exhibit J–federal tax lien information; (2) Exhibit K–mortgage loan
statements; and (3) Exhibit L–household budget information.     
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 51-year-old senior graphic designer who is seeking to retain an
industrial security clearance he has held since the 1980s.  He earned a bachelor’s2
degree in 1981, and he has since worked as a graphic designer for various federal
contractors. He has worked for his current employer since 2006; his current annual
salary is about $89,000. His wife has worked as a contracts administrator since about
2002; her current annual salary is about $89,000 as well. 
Applicant married the same year he completed college. He and his wife have
lived at the same address since 1982. They have two children, a 23-year-old daughter
and a 21-year-old son. The daughter recently completed college and is working a part-
time job while looking for a full-time position. Applicant and his wife paid for their
 Tr. 60–61. 3
 Exhibit C. 4
 Exhibit F. 5
 Tr. 65. 6
 Exhibit J. 7
 Exhibits 3 and H. 8
 Exhibits 3, 4, A, and I.  9
3
daughter’s college expenses, and they are currently providing her with money for
monthly living expenses. The son is a college student, and Applicant is paying all
educational expenses, to include monthly living expenses. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties. The SOR alleged six
delinquent debts, to include the federal tax lien and a past-due mortgage loan. Each
debt is addressed below in sequence per the SOR. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a concerns the federal tax lien for $9,851. It stems from tax
year 2002, when Applicant took a premature withdrawal from a 401(k) retirement
account when his wife was required to repay approximately $9,000 for tuition assistance
provided by a former employer.  The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) placed the tax lien3
against Applicant in 2007. In early March 2008, Applicant learned that he owed the IRS
about $13,949 for the balance, interest, and penalty.  He and his wife then entered into4
a repayment installment agreement with the IRS agreeing to pay $1,000 monthly
beginning April 2008.  Applicant or the IRS or both failed to follow up on the installment5
agreement, and Applicant made no payments on the account as of October 2009.  After6
the hearing, Applicant made arrangements to resolve his account with the IRS. He and
his wife paid $11,583 on December 3, 2009, which satisfied the taxes owed and all
statutory additions, and the IRS released the lien the same day.  And although not7
alleged in the SOR, Applicant resolved a somewhat related state tax debt, and that lien
was released in July 2008.8
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b concerns a medical account placed for collection for $151.
Applicant denies the debt because he believes it was paid by his health insurance
provider. The debt (with account number 624361) does appear as unpaid in credit
reports from April 2008, May 2009, July 2009, and October 2009.  The credit reports9
also show that Applicant has paid numerous other medical collection accounts. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c concerns a department store account placed for collection
for $997. Applicant admits the original debt owed to the department store, but he
disputes that he now owes the full amount to the collection agency. In 2004, Applicant
made arrangements with the creditor to make $234 payments to resolve the debt with
the last $234 forgiven. He made the payments, but the account was subsequently sold
 Exhibit 4. 10
 Exhibit 3. 11
 Exhibit K. 12
 Exhibit 4. 13
 Exhibits 3, A, and I. 14
 Exhibit L. 15
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to16
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
to the current creditor in November 2005. All four credit reports show the account is
unpaid, and all four credit reports show that Applicant is disputing the account
information. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d concerns a past-due mortgage loan with an approximate
balance of $43,739. Applicant’s monthly mortgage payment is about $608. The account
was 120 days past due in the amount of $602 as of October 2008.  It was past due in10
the amount of $1,822 (about three payments) as of May 2009.  Applicant attributes11
falling behind on the mortgage loan to expenses he and his wife were paying for their
college-age children. Quarterly mortgage statements from October and December 2009
show that the mortgage loan is current and in good standing.12
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f concern collection accounts for $5,482 and
$1,811. Applicant denies liability for each. The debts appear in the April 2008 credit
report.  The $5,482 debt is described as an unknown loan account, and the $1,81113
debt is described as a credit card account. Neither debt appears in the more recent
credit reports.14
Applicant submitted written monthly and annual budgets.  The monthly budget15
shows substantial outlay for his adult children, but still results in a positive net remainder
of about $839. Of note, Applicant has no car loan payments or open credit card
accounts. The annual budget for 2010 shows an estimated positive net remainder of
about $10,000. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As16
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
 484 U.S. at 531.17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 24
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).25
5
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,17
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An18
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  19
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting20
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An21
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate22
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme23
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.24
The Agency’s appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.25
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.26
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating27
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  28
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  29
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 30
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 31
6
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the26
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant27
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  28
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems or difficulties as shown by the federal tax lien and the other matters.
This history raises concerns because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of29 30
Guideline F. The facts are more than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions, and they suggest financial irresponsibility or inattention or both.   
Under ¶ 20 of Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security
concerns.  The six conditions are as follows: 31
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
7
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Here, the most pertinent mitigating conditions are ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e), and each
is discussed below.
First, ¶ 20(c) applies in Applicant’s favor because his financial problems are
being resolved or are under control. The record shows he resolved the debt of most
concern by paying more than $11,000 to the IRS; his mortgage loan is no longer past
due; the $151 medical collection account is unresolved, but it is so minor to be of no
genuine concern; and he disputes the validity of three other debts, two of which no
longer appear in the more recent credit reports. Given these circumstances, it appears
Applicant is not financially overextended and he has enough positive cash flow to
resolve any unpaid debts should legitimate demands be made.
Second, ¶ 20(d) applies in Applicant’s favor as well. He made good-faith efforts
to resolve his financial problems by repaying his IRS debt and by bringing his past-due
mortgage loan current.
Third, ¶ 20(e) applies in Applicant’s favor for the three debts he disputes. He
provided adequate, although not the best, documentation of his disputes via the credit
reports, which show he is disputing one debt (SOR ¶ 1.c); the other two debts (SOR ¶¶
1.e and 1.f) do not appear in the more recent credit reports, which tends to support the
validity of Applicant’s claims.   
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).32
8
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s history of
financial problems or difficulties do not justify current doubts about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the concerns. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept.  Although Applicant did not present a perfect case in mitigation,32
based on the record evidence, along with his many years as a clearance holder, I
assess the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress as remote to nil.
Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.         
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
