1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-09092
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 9, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 22, 2009, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and requested
a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on August
26, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 17, 2009, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on October 15, 2009, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Government
offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through H, at the time of hearing, which
were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr)
on October 30, 2009. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
2
October 29, 2009, to submit additional documents. He timely submitted two additional
documents, which have been identified and entered into evidence collectively as Exhibit
I. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations: 1.a. through 1.g., and 1.i.
through 1.k. He denied 1.h. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings
of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 51 years old. He is currently unmarried, but he was previously
married, and he has one son. At the time of the hearing, Applicant was employed as a
Quality Analyst by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
The SOR lists 11 allegations (1.a. through 1.k.) regarding financial difficulties
under Adjudicative Guideline F, for overdue debts totaling $265,645. The debts will be
discussed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $229. Applicant
testified that he plans to contact this creditor and work out a payment arrangement.
However, at the time of the hearing, this debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr at 36-
37).
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $185,000. Applicant
testified that, as of three months before the hearing, he has become current on this debt
for the mortgage on his home (Tr at 37-39). Exhibit I includes the monthly mortgage
statement on this debt, which establishes that Applicant still owes $180,865, but he is
current on this debt, and he is paying $1,325.16 a month. Applicant testified that this
house had been in foreclosure on two previous occasions because of his failure to pay
the mortgage (Tr at 57). 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,157. Applicant
testified that he plans to contact the creditor for this credit card debt and work out a
payment arrangement. However, at this time, this debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr
at 39).
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $17,000. Applicant
testified that a judgement has been entered against him on this credit card debt.  At this
time, this debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr at 39-42).
3
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,553.  Applicant
testified that a judgement is in the process of being entered against him on this credit
card debt.  At this time, this debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr at 42).
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,014.  Applicant
testified that he plans to contact the creditor for this credit card debt for the purchase of
a computer and equipment to work out a payment arrangement. However, at the time of
the hearing, this debt had not been paid or reduced (Tr at 42-43).
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $13,000.  Applicant
testified that this debt is for a car that he purchased. He had allowed his former girlfriend
to use it, and although he now has possession of the vehicle, he has not returned it to
the creditor to potentially reduce the size of the debt. This debt has not been paid or
reduced (Tr at 43-46).
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $13,000. As stated
above, Applicant denied this allegation in his RSOR. At the hearing, he stated that he is
paying $100 a month on this debt for more than one year  (Tr at 46-47). Exhibit I
includes receipts showing that Applicant has made one payment of $75 and 10
payments of $100 on this debt, from October 2008 through September 2009. The
receipts do not show how much is still owed on this debt. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $692.  Applicant
testified that he plans to contact the creditor for this credit card debt and work out a
payment arrangement. However, at this time, this debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr
at 47).
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $11,000.  Applicant
testified that this credit card debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr at 48-50).
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $16,000.  Applicant
testified that this credit card debt has not been paid or reduced (Tr at 48-50).
Applicant testified that his financial difficulties occurred as a result of entering into
a business arrangement with his girlfriend at the time of the business arrangement, in
which he loaned her money as a business investment in five different business projects,
including purchasing and reselling houses, securing mortgage loans, advertising and
reestablishing credit. He alleged that she used the money for a number of purposes
other than the businesses. He continued to loan her money after they broke up and
despite the fact that the businesses did not seem to be successful. He stated that he
ultimately plans to pursue in court any assets that she may have, although he conceded
that he does not know what, if anything, he might recover (Tr at 51-54). 
Applicant also explained that much of his credit card debt was used to purchase
down payments on two houses that he purchased with his girlfriend, and to make
payments on them while she was refurbishing them (Tr at 60-61). Applicant did not have
4
an estimate as to the amount of money that he invested in the businesses with his
girlfriend. 
Mitigation
Applicant submitted two positive character letters in Exhibits B and C. The first
letter was from his supervisor, dated October 13, 2009, which stated that “I consider
[Applicant] a highly responsible co-worker who initiated several financial endeavors that
did not turn out well . . . But he has worked diligently to correct those siruations.”  The
second letter, from a Vice President of his employer stated, “I believe [Appellant] has
displayed sound integrity and ethical behavior in doing his job and protecting sensitive
information.”
Applicant also submitted Performance Appraisals for years 2003, 2004, 2005,
2008 and 2009 (Exhibits D through H). They were all quite positive, and in years 2008
and 2009, his overall score was a 4.0 out of 5.0.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
           The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations
is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.
Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations”
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and has
been unable to pay or resolve most of his obligations for several years. The evidence is
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties:
Under AG ¶  20 (b), “it may be mitigating where the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted above,
Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted from his investments in the
businesses with his former girlfriend. However, the evidence is clear that he made
extremely poor business choices by continuing to borrow on his credit cards to make
6
additional investments in the businesses. Also, since he has not repaid or resolved a
significant amount of his considerable overdue debt, I can not find that he has acted
responsibly.  Therefore, I do not find that this potentially mitigating condition is a factor
for consideration in this case. 
 Applicant has not resolved much of his overdue debt. I conclude that until he is
able to significantly reduce this overdue debt, and show that he can maintain a more
stable financial picture, he has not mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and why no Mitigating Condition
applies, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns. 
Formal Findings
           Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k.: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
          In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
