 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-08456 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Anthony C. Soviero, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an undated and unsigned Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On May 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
1Applicant previously submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) that was also 
unsigned, but dated June 30, 1997. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 4, 2009, which DOHA received 
on July 8, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 31, 2009. 
The case was assigned to me on September 2, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on September 4, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 2, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through P, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until October 17, 2009, and subsequently granted an 
extension until October 30, 2009, to afford the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE Q through RR, 
which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
October 9, 2009. The record closed on October 30, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.g., and 1.h. 
with explanations. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.e. with 
explanations. His answers with explanations are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old senior analyst, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since October 2004. GE 1, Tr.15-16, 85-86. He seeks to renew 
his security clearance, which is a requirement for his continued employment. Tr. 45-
46, 55, 89, AE L.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1981. Tr. 84-85, GE 1. He has 
completed numerous service schools while serving in the military. Tr. 85. Applicant 
married in March 1987. Two daughters were born during that marriage, ages 22 and 
18. GE 1, Tr. 86. Applicant and his wife have been separated since the summer of 
2002. Tr. 8, 86. 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from March 1983 to December 1987, and 
was honorably discharged as a sergeant (pay grade E-5). GE 2, AE Q. He served in 
the U.S. Army Reserve from December 1987 to March 1990, and was honorably 
discharged as a sergeant. GE 2, AE R. He served in the Army National Guard from 
March 1990 to March 1992, and was honorably discharged as a sergeant. GE 1, GE 
2, AE S. He served in the U.S. Air Force from April 1997 to April 2003, and was 
honorably discharged as a staff sergeant (pay grade E-5). GE 1, AE T. Applicant has 
continuously and successfully held a security clearance since he first entered the 
Army in 1983, a period of 27 years. Tr. 89, AE W. 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his undated e-QIP; his June 1997 SF-86; his December 2008 
Responses to DOHA Financial Interrogatories; his August 1997, August 2008, and 
May 2009 credit reports; a Lexis printout of his judgment; and court records from his 
1994 bankruptcy proceedings. GE 1 – 8.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified seven separate debts -- one judgment, and six 
collection accounts, approximating $27,000. Tr. 7. 
 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. documents a 1994 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. As 
noted supra, Applicant had been discharged from the Army National Guard in 1992. 
Applicant was laid off from his company and consequently was unable to remain 
current on his debts. He consulted with a bankruptcy attorney and was advised to file 
for bankruptcy protection. Appellant was awarded a discharge in September 1994. Tr. 
19-23, 57-58, 76-78, GE 8. 
 
Applicant has settled, paid or made a good-faith attempt to resolve the seven 
debts alleged. A brief summary of each debt follows. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. is 
a civil judgment in the amount of $15,372 in favor of a collection agency. That debt 
was satisfied by a Warrant to Satisfy Judgment filed in August 2007. Applicant paid 
“almost $14,000” to satisfy this judgment. Tr. 24-25, 58-62, 78-80, AE B. The debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. is a collection account on behalf of a cable company in the 
amount of $584. Although Applicant disputed this debt, he paid it in July 2009. Tr. 25-
26, 63, AE C. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. is a collection account on behalf of a 
credit card company in the amount of $646. Applicant successfully disputed this debt 
claiming it was a fraudulent transaction and the creditor accepted his explanation and 
ceased further collection activity in July 2009. Tr. 26-28, 63-65, 80-81, AE D. 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. is a collection account on behalf of a cable and 
internet service company in the amount of $626. Although Applicant disputed this 
debt, he paid it in June 2009. Tr. 28-29, AE E. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. is a 
collection account on behalf of a telephone company in the amount of $51. The record 
is replete with numerous good-faith attempts by Applicant’s attorney beginning in June 
2009 to resolve this account. As of the hearing, the telephone company had not 
responded to Applicant’s attorney. Tr. 30-31, 37-39, 64-66, 81-82, AE G-H, AE J-K, 
AE O. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. is a collection account on behalf of an 
automobile leasing company in the amount of $9,142. After Applicant and his wife 
separated, his wife took possession of the vehicle and failed to make the remaining 
three payments as promised. The vehicle was repossessed and sold at auction. This 
account was settled for a lesser amount and paid in October 2009. Tr. 31-36, 66-71, 
82-83, AE F, AE H-J, AE P, AE PP-RR, AE VV. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. is a 
collection account on behalf of a storage company in the amount of $162. This debt 
was paid in July 2009. Tr. 36-37, AE N. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his inability to remain current on 
his debts while deployed with the military. As noted supra, Applicant and his wife 
separated during the summer of 2002. Tr. 45-47, 89. Applicant’s wife is self-
supporting. Tr. 74. 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has paid, settled, made good-faith efforts to repay 
overdue creditors, or resolved all debts alleged. He submitted a budget with his 
monthly expenses, which reflects a net remainder of $1,384. His budget further 
demonstrates that he is living within his means. Tr. 51-53, 90-91, AE M.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided reference letters from his senior director, logistics 
manager/team lead, and training/fielding manager. These individuals are senior 
persons within Applicant’s company, who have known him for a lengthy period of time. 
They verified the importance of the work he is doing on behalf of the nation’s defense 
and his potential for future service. They all spoke of his professionalism, dedication to 
duty, value as an employee, and recommended him for a security clearance. AE L, AE 
X-Y. 
 
Applicant submitted performance evaluations for the years 2007 and 2008. 
These evaluations reflect above average performance and document Applicant’s 
value as an employee. AE U-V. Applicant also submitted copies of numerous awards 
and training certificates from his military service. AE Z-NN. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
 
5 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and evidence 
presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. to 1.h., he had seven delinquent debts totaling 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
about $27,000 that have been in various states of delinquency. The government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debt. Because there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not 
isolated. The debts were not paid until 2009, and therefore his debt is “a continuing 
course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-
11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 
16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s 1994 
bankruptcy lacks security significance because of the passage of time. Under AG ¶ 
20(b), he receives partial mitigation because of his inability to focus on his finances 
while in a deployment status and being separated from his wife. However, he did not 
provide sufficient information to establish that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.2  
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because there is no evidence of financial 
counseling. However, there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶¶ 20(d)3 and 20(e). Applicant retained counsel and successfully resolved his 
debts. Applicant has settled or paid all debts except the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Applicant presented substantial evidence documenting good-faith efforts to contact the 
creditor and for reasons unknown that creditor failed to respond to any of Applicant’s 
overtures.   
 
Furthermore, AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to mitigate the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
because the Applicant provided “documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
dispute.” The creditor closed the account and ceased all further collection efforts. He 
understands the security implications of delinquent debt and will scrupulously avoid 
future delinquent debt. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists seven 
debts totalling $27,000 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. He failed to keep his accounts current and negotiate lesser payments, 
showing some financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His lack of success 
resolving delinquent debt raises sufficient security concerns to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of military service and good employment weighs in his favor. There 
is no evidence of any security violation during the 27 years Applicant held a security 
clearance. He is a law-abiding citizen. His debts are current and his SOR debts are all 
paid. His monthly expenses are current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His supervisors 
fully support him and recommend him for a security clearance. He made mistakes, 
and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. 
He has paid his debts. Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track record” of 
debt payments. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
 
9 
 
 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.h.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
