 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09063 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and G (Alcohol Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 12, 2008. On July 
17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines J and G. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 23, 2009; answered it on September 
29, 2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on November 3, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on 
December 16, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2009, 
scheduling the hearing for January 6, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through O, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 8, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since September 2004. He has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant graduated from college in June 2002 with a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering graphics and design. He received a master’s degree in biomedical 
engineering in December 2006.  
 
 In September 1998, Applicant and several friends were stopped for speeding. 
Applicant was not the driver. All were administered breathalyzer tests, and all were cited 
for underage possession of alcohol. Applicant was released to his mother’s custody. He 
paid a $100 fine (GX 2 at 7). 
 
 In July 2000, Applicant held a party at his parents’ home while they were away. A 
neighbor called the police because of the noise. A local county sheriff observed alcohol 
in the home and charged Applicant with underage possession of alcohol. He paid a 
$100 fine (GX 2 at 6-7; GX 6). 
 
 In December 2000, shortly after his 21st birthday, Applicant was driving home 
after consuming alcohol at a Christmas party. A police officer stopped him for speeding 
and noticed a bottle of vodka in the back seat. Applicant failed several field sobriety 
tests as well as a breathalyzer test. He was charged with operating a motor vehicle 
while visibly impaired by liquor. He pleaded guilty to operating a motor vehicle under the 
influence of liquor, and he paid a fine and costs totaling $835 (GX 2 at 6; GX 5). He was 
required to attend a victims’ impact panel and attend a one-day class on the effects of 
alcohol. He testified he was advised to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings and 
he did so, but his testimony was vague on the extent of his AA participation (Tr. 70). 
 
 After his arrest in December 2000, Applicant continued to drink and drive “maybe 
a few times a year.” He testified he was heavily involved in working full-time and 
attending school, and he was more cautious about drinking and driving (Tr. 61-62). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In July 2001, Applicant was out drinking with college friends, and he decided to 
steal an advertising banner hanging outside a bar and put it in his house (Tr. 63-65). 
The record does not reflect the extent of his alcohol consumption. He was arrested, 
convicted of larceny, and fined $100. After one year with no further criminal charges, the 
larceny charges were dismissed (GX 4). He wrote a letter of apology to the bar owner 
(GX 2 at 7).  
 
 In August 2007, Applicant was driving home from a party at which he had been 
consuming alcohol steadily for about eight hours (Tr. 44). He was driving at a speed 
well in excess of the speed limit when he swerved to avoid a car that was stopped (Tr. 
63). He struck another car that was making a left turn, seriously injuring two passengers 
in the car he struck. The police administered a blood-alcohol test that registered .26%. 
A second test at the scene registered .24% (GX 3 at 2-3). A third test at the police 
station registered .20% (GX 3 at 4). Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated 
and causing serious injury, a felony. Pursuant to a plea agreement, he pleaded no 
contest. In June 2008, he was placed on supervised probation for four years, sentenced 
to 30 days in jail (deferred, conditioned on successfully completing probation), ordered 
to perform 60 hours of community service, required to pay $6,680 in court costs, and 
required to pay restitution of about $13,700 (GX 3 at 8). His insurance company paid 
the restitution (GX 2 at 6).  
 
As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had complied with all the terms and 
conditions of his probation (AX D). Although his four years on probation will not be 
completed until June 2012, he testified he expects to be released from probation in 
June 2010, based on his conversations with his probation officer (Tr. 51-52).  
 
 As a result of the August 2007 accident, Applicant sought treatment for his 
excessive alcohol consumption. He received counseling three times a week in August 
and September 2007 and monthly counseling from September 2007 to April 2008 (GX 2 
at 7). Upon discharge from the program, he was diagnosed by a medical doctor and a 
licensed clinical social worker as alcohol dependent in remission. According to the 
discharge summary, he met all the goals of the program, maintained his sobriety, and 
made appropriate lifestyle changes. His relapse potential was evaluated as low (GX 2 at 
R-2). He attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings once or twice a week until April 
2008 (Tr. 57). No aftercare was prescribed.  
 
Applicant married in October 2009 (Tr. 39). He has fully disclosed his previous 
alcohol involvement to his wife, his parents, and his sister (Tr. 80, 82).  
 
Applicant has not consumed alcohol since August 2007. He moved to another 
state after his last conviction to accept a new position with the same employer. He has 
not attended AA meetings or received additional counseling after April 2008. He has a 
new circle of friends, and they are focused on work and family rather than partying. He 
testified his “support mechanism” is his work and church involvement, his wife, his 
friends, and his colleagues (Tr. 76). He is active in his church. He performed his 
community service with a church-based charitable organization, and he continued to 
 
4 
 
 
donate his time to that organization after his community service obligation was 
completed (AX E; Tr. 77. 83-84). He and his wife have become involved in physical 
fitness, and he is training to run a marathon (Tr. 87).  
 
 A former supervisor described Applicant as dependable, reliable, and trustworthy 
(AX A). A friend who has known him since 1985 considers him dedicated and loyal (AX 
B). A coworker for three years considers him reliable, dedicated, and responsible (AX 
C). Numerous supervisors have recognized him as a technically proficient and creative 
designer and a dedicated, hardworking employee (AX F, I, J, M, N, L, and O). He has 
twice received monetary awards for his achievements (AX G and H).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges four alcohol-related convictions (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e) 
and a larceny conviction (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant has admitted all the allegations under 
this guideline. The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: 
“Criminal conduct creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
 
 Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include 
“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant’s record of arrests and 
convictions are sufficient to raise these two disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden 
to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). Applicant’s 
criminal conduct did not occur under unusual circumstances making it unlikely to recur. 
Thus, the key element in determining whether this mitigating condition applies is the first 
the first prong of AG ¶ 32(a) (“so much time has elapsed”). This prong focuses on 
 
6 
 
 
whether the criminal conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining 
when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of 
the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has 
passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 
(App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
Applicant’s last criminal conduct was in August 2007, more than two years before 
the hearing. He stopped consuming alcohol in August 2007, successfully completed an 
alcohol treatment program in April 2008, moved to another state, made a new circle of 
friends, married in October 2009, and has shifted his focus from heavy social drinking to 
physical fitness and exercise. He has abstained from alcohol and further misconduct for 
“a significant period of time.” On the other hand, his two-plus years of responsible 
conduct are less significant in the context of his serious misconduct in August 2007 after 
about six years of responsible behavior following his larceny conviction. He is still on 
probation and knows he is under scrutiny. Although he is alcohol dependent, he relies 
on his own self-designed support system rather than an external system such as AA or 
a counselor. I conclude it is too soon to conclude that he is rehabilitated, because he 
has not had sufficient time to convincingly demonstrate that he can maintain sobriety 
and responsible behavior without the inhibiting influence of a probation officer and a 
formal support structure such as AA or periodic counseling. I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns arising from criminal behavior also may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). For the reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 32(a), I am not satisfied 
that he has demonstrated successful rehabilitation.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication, from 1998 to 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.a). It also cross-alleges the alcohol-
related criminal conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e (SOR ¶ 2.b). Finally, it 
alleges Applicant received treatment for alcohol dependency from August 2007 to April 
2008 (SOR ¶ 2.c). Applicant has admitted these allegations. 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The following disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence: 
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence. . . , regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program.  
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). For the reasons set 
out above in my discussion of AG ¶ 32(a), I conclude this mitigating condition is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). This mitigating 
condition is established, although, as noted above, I am not satisfied that the 
circumstances of his abstinence are sufficient to warrant a finding of rehabilitation.  
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated under AG ¶ 
23(d) if — 
 
[T]he individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s treatment program had any “required aftercare,” 
but he has designed his own informal aftercare program. He has satisfied all the other 
requirements of this mitigating condition. Because he successfully completed his 
alcohol treatment program, I have resolved SOR ¶ 2.c, alleging the treatment program, 
in his favor. 
 
 Notwithstanding Appellant’s significant period of abstinence and successful 
completion of his alcohol treatment program, he is still under the scrutiny of a probation 
 
8 
 
 
officer. The persuasive value of his two-plus years of sobriety is diminished by the fact 
that he relapsed in August 2007 after almost seven years of responsible alcohol 
consumption. He has chosen to control his alcohol dependence without a formal 
support structure such as AA or routine, periodic counseling. Under these 
circumstances, he needs more time to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
alcohol consumption.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and G in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He is a talented, creative engineer, 
and he has earned the respect of his supervisors, colleagues, and friends. He has made 
major lifestyle changes since his alcohol-related conviction in August 2007. He has 
married, moved to a new state and a new job, made new friends, abstained from 
alcohol, become involved in his church and his community, and shifted his off-duty 
focus from social drinking to physical fitness. He was candid, sincere, and remorseful at 
the hearing.  
 
 Most of the conduct raising security concerns occurred while Applicant was either 
underage or in a college environment. The serious car accident in August 2007 was his 
first alcohol-related misconduct after leaving the college environment, and it apparently 
was a wake-up call. He voluntarily sought and completed treatment, stopped consuming 
alcohol, and made major lifestyle changes. 
 
 On the other hand, all his lifestyle changes have occurred while he has been on 
probation. Although he was optimistic that his probation will be terminated early, the 
 
9 
 
 
record reflects that he will be on probation until June 2012. He has completed less than 
half of his term of probation. Given his diagnosis of alcohol dependence and his history 
of alcohol-related misconduct, I am concerned about his lack of a formal support system 
such as AA or a continuing relationship with a counselor.  
 
 Applicant has not had sufficient time to demonstrate that he will continue to 
abstain from alcohol when he is no longer under the scrutiny of a probation officer. 
Although he needs more time to demonstrate his rehabilitation, an administrative judge 
does not have the authority to grant a conditional clearance. ISCR Case No. 99-0901, 
2000 WL 288429 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000).   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
G, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on his criminal conduct and alcohol 
consumption. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. If he successfully completes his probation, continues to abstain from 
alcohol, and is sponsored by his employer for a clearance, he may be worthy of 
reconsideration in the future. See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.37-E3.1.40 (reconsideration 
authorized after one year). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
