 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
   ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 08-11882 
                                                            )                                                            
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Adjudicative Guideline (AG) G, Alcohol Consumption and AG J, Criminal 
Conduct.  Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on August 26, 2008. On November 2, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under AG G, Alcohol Involvement and AG J, Criminal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 12, 2009, DOHA received Applicant’s answer to the SOR and his 
request for a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
 
January 4, 2010. I convened a hearing on February 26, 2010, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf, introduced no exhibits, and called no witnesses. I left the record open 
until March 5, 2010, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information 
for the record. On March 4, 2010, Applicant filed one exhibit, which was marked as his 
Ex. A and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 5, 2010. 
 
     Procedural Matters 
 
 Applicant’s hearing was originally scheduled for February 10, 2010. A Notice of 
Hearing, dated January 14, 2010, was sent to Applicant notifying him of the February 
10, 2010 hearing date. On February 10, 2010, federal agencies in the vicinity of 
Washington, D.C. were closed for public safety reasons as the result of two 
snowstorms, and it was necessary to cancel Applicant’s hearing. When federal offices 
reopened on February 12, 2010, Applicant and Department Counsel agreed that his 
hearing would be rescheduled for February 26, 2010, and a Notice of Hearing reciting 
the change was issued on February 17, 2010. On February 24, 2010, Applicant notified 
Department Counsel that he had not yet received the Notice of Hearing for the February 
26, 2010 hearing. Department Counsel then sent Applicant an e-mail copy of the Notice 
of Hearing. 
 
 At issue, then, is whether Applicant received notice 15 days in advance of his 
hearing, as required under ¶ E3.1.8. of the Directive. At his hearing, Applicant, after a 
thorough discussion of the 15-day notice provision, stated that he was prepared to go 
forward with his hearing and believed he had adequate time to prepare for the hearing 
on February 26, 2010. He affirmatively waived his right to assert that, because he had 
not received his Notice of Hearing 15 days in advance of his hearing, he had insufficient 
time to prepare. (Tr. 10-13.)  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant amended the allegation at ¶ 1.f. by striking 
“2009” after “July” and writing “2008” instead. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
moved to amend the allegation at ¶ 1.f. to conform to Applicant’s handwritten change 
and the record evidence as found in Ex. 6. Applicant did not object to the amendment, 
and it was granted. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 26-27.)       
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG G, Alcohol 
Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.), and four allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under AG J, Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.d.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the six AG G allegations and the four AG J allegations. Applicant’s 
admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant is 30 years old, never married, and employed as a senior consultant  
by a federal contractor. In 2003, he received a Bachelor of Science degree in Marketing. 
He has worked for his current employer since June 2008. He has not previously held a 
security clearance.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 33-37.) 
 
 In 1998, when he was about 18 years old, Applicant was at a party at the home 
of a girl he knew. He joined with a group of other young people at the party who decided 
to steal the television set and radio from the girl’s parent’s home. Applicant helped to 
carry off the speakers to the family’s radio. Applicant was arrested and charged with 
Theft, Under $300. He cooperated with police, provided evidence against his 
accomplices, and was not prosecuted. (Tr. 40-41.) 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol in about 1998, when he was approximately 17 
or 18 years of age. In January 1999, he was cited for Possession of Alcohol Under 21. 
He pleaded guilty, was sentenced to community service, and fined. Before he was 21 
and able to consume alcohol legally, he drank alcohol to intoxication once or twice a 
month. (Ex. 3; Tr. 42-45.) 
 
 In 2002, when he was 22 years old, Applicant went to a bar, where he drank 
about six to eight beers. On the way home, he was arrested and charged with (1) 
Driving or Attempting to Drive under the Influence,1 (2) Driving or Attempting to Drive a 
Vehicle While Impaired by Alcohol, and (3) Exceeding Posted Speed Limit. Applicant 
pleaded guilty to Count (1).2 He was sentenced to two years of supervised probation3 
and fined. As a condition of his probation, Applicant was required to abstain from using 
alcohol and to attend a six-week outpatient alcohol-treatment program. He attended the 
alcohol-treatment program and also resumed drinking alcohol weekly about six months 
after he began his probation.  After Applicant’s first year of supervised probation, his 
probation officer placed him on unsupervised probation, beginning in June 2003. He 
continued to drink a six-pack of beer weekly. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2 at 2; Tr. 46-54.) 
 
 Applicant also used marijuana. He estimated that, during his college years, he 
used marijuana about 15 times. In June 2003, he was arrested and charged with (1) 
CDS Possession with Intent to Distribute and (2) Possession of Marijuana. He was 
found guilty of Count (2) and it was placed on the Stet Docket. Count (1) was dismissed. 
Applicant was ordered by the court to complete a 26-week substance-abuse treatment 
program. He attended and completed such a program.  (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Ex. 4; Tr. 54-59, 
79-80.) 
 
 
1 Applicant stated that the charge was Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) and not Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI). (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
2Counts (2) and (3) were placed on the Stet Docket for one year. 
  
   
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant’s drug possession conviction occurred while he was on probation for 
his 2002 conviction for Driving or Attempting to Drive Under the Influence. His probation 
officer put him back on supervised probation. Applicant stated that he has not used an 
illegal drug since June 2003. He further stated that he was last in the presence of 
individuals who were using illegal drugs “more than four years” ago.  (Tr. 59-62.) 
 
 Applicant became interested in playing poker. He went to a private home and 
played poker several times. He knew that those running the poker game were making a 
profit on the gambling proceeds and that the activity was illegal. In February 2005, the 
house where he was playing poker was raided by police, and he was arrested and 
charged with illegal gambling. He pleaded guilty to the offense and was sentenced to 
community service. Applicant now goes to Las Vegas on occasion, where he 
participates in legal gambling.  (Ex. 3 at 3-4; Tr. 62-66.) 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant and a friend went to a bar, where Applicant consumed 
approximately eight beers. On the way home, Applicant, who was driving, was arrested 
and taken to the police station. At the station, he was given a breathalyzer test which 
showed his blood alcohol content to be 0.13 %. Applicant was charged with (1) Driving 
While Impaired By Alcohol, (2) Driving, Attempting to Drive Vehicle While Under the 
Influence, Per Se (3) Driving, Attempting to Drive While Under the Influence,4 and (4) 
Failure to Drive Right of Center. On September 5, 2008, Applicant pleaded guilty to 
Count (1)5. Counts (2), (3), and (4) were nolle prossed.  (Ex. 3 at 3-4; Ex. 5; Tr. 67-69.) 
 
 Applicant was sentenced to 60 days in jail, with 50 days suspended, and three 
years of probation.6 His probation will end in September 2011. Under the terms of his 
probation, Applicant was not permitted to drink alcohol or to use any illegal drugs. His 
driver’s license was restricted for 45 days: his driving was limited to traveling to and 
from work and to and from alcohol-treatment class. Currently, under the terms of his 
driver’s license, he is prohibited from consuming alcohol and driving a vehicle. (Ex. 5; 
Tr. 70-72.) 
 
 On July 28, 2008, Applicant voluntarily sought substance-abuse treatment at an 
alcohol-treatment facility. With a counselor, he completed a questionnaire intended to 
measure substance abuse or dependence. Official records of the alcohol-treatment 
facility reveal that two of his answers were diagnostic of alcohol abuse. Clinical notes in 
the official records of the alcohol-treatment facility state: “Client meets criteria for 
 
4 Charges (2) and (3) were identified as separate traffic violations under the state statute. 
  
5 Applicant stated that the charge he pleaded guilty to was DUI, Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol. 
(Tr. 68-69.) 
 
6Applicant claimed that his probation officer told him his probation ran for only two years. If that is true, he 
is currently on probation, and his probation will end in September 2010. (Tr. 70-71.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
alcohol abuse . . . .”7  On February 17, 2009, Applicant completed the six-month 
outpatient treatment program, with the following prognosis: “Good prognosis based on 
client completing treatment goals, and [c]omplying with all treatment recommendations. 
Client was also one of the best [p]articipants in group discussions, and was seen as a 
leader in the group.”  (Ex. 6; Tr. 75-77.) 
 
 Since completing the program, Applicant has not participated in any aftercare 
treatment or counseling. He does not attend Alcoholics Anonymous or any other 
support program. (Tr. 77-78.) 
 
 Applicant continues to drink alcohol on holidays and special occasions. He last 
drank alcohol to intoxication on December 31, 2009.  Additionally, he drank alcohol to 
intoxication at weddings in November 2009 and December 2009. (Tr. 78-79.) 
 
 Under cross-examination by Department Counsel, Applicant also admitted the 
following: he has been late for work or missed work because of his consumption of 
alcohol; he has experienced hangovers: his last hangover was on January 1, 2010. He 
has experienced a blackout because of his consumption of alcohol. (Tr. 81-82.) 
 
 Applicant stated that the longest period that he has abstained from alcohol was 
about six to eight months.  He does not believe that he has a drinking problem. He 
drinks alcohol even though he acknowledges that he is forbidden from doing so under 
the terms of his probation. (Tr. 82-85.) 
 
 Applicant’s manager and supervisor, who has supervised Applicant since June 
2008, provided a letter of character reference. He praised Applicant’s strong work ethic, 
his positive attitude, and his dependability. He considers Applicant’s work quality to be 
excellent, and he considers Applicant to be a valued employee. (Ex. A.) 
  
            Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 
7Applicant stated he was not seen by a physician or social worker while at the facility. It is unclear from 
the record what the professional credentials were of the individuals who diagnosed Applicant’s condition 
as alcohol abuse. (Ex. 6; Tr. 77.)  
 
6 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
  
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 The following conditions could raise disqualifying security concerns under ¶ 22 
of the alcohol consumption adjudicative guideline: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22. I find that 
there is insufficient record evidence to conclude that a duly qualified medical 
professionaI or a licensed social worker diagnosed Applicant with the condition of 
alcohol abuse. Therefore, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 22(d), 22(e), and 22(f) do not apply in 
this case. However, I find that AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22 (b), 22(c), and 22(g) are applicable.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant was cited for underage possession of alcohol in 1999. In 2002 and 
2008, he was arrested for driving while intoxicated or while under the influence of 
alcohol. He has consumed alcohol, in excess and at times to intoxication, from 1998 to 
at least May of 2008, when he was arrested for his second DUI. At his hearing, he 
admitted that he had reported for work late or had missed work because of his 
consumption of alcohol. He also admitted that he continues to drink alcohol to 
intoxication, even though the terms of the probation which he is currently serving do not 
allow it. He also denies that he has an alcohol problem. These facts raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), and 22(g). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant is now 30 years old. He admitted alcohol-related conduct in high 
school, in college, and as a post-college professional. His most recent arrest for driving 
under the influence of alcohol occurred in May 2008 and is therefore recent. He has 
participated in alcohol awareness education. He continues to drink alcohol to 
intoxication, he intends to drink alcohol in the future, and he denies that he has an 
alcohol problem. He drinks alcohol even though the terms of his current probation 
proscribe it.  Accordingly, I conclude that none of the Guideline G mitigating conditions 
fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant, who is 30 years old, admits a criminal history that spans more a 
decade. In 1998, he was arrested and charged with theft, under $300. In 1999, he was 
charged with underage possession of alcohol. In 2002 and 2008, he pleaded guilty to 
driving while intoxicated or driving under the influence of alcohol. In 2003, he was found 
guilty of marijuana possession. In 2005, he pleaded guilty to illegal gambling. He is 
currently serving court-ordered probation for his second driving offense related to 
alcohol. He admits that the terms of his probation prohibit alcohol consumption, and yet 
he continues to consume alcohol. This behavior raises concerns under AG ¶¶ 31(a), 
31(c), 31(d), and 31(e). AG ¶ 31(a) provides: “a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses.” AG ¶ 31(c) provides: “allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless 
of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” AG ¶ 
31(d) provides: “individual is currently on parole or probation.” AG ¶ 31(e) provides: 
“violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated rehabilitation 
program.” 
 
  Two mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record demonstrates that Applicant’s criminal behavior, which began in 1998 
and has continued to the present, is, therefore, recent. A supervisor provided a letter of 
character reference indicating he valued Applicant as a good and reliable employee. 
However, Applicant has not yet established a record of sobriety to assure that his long-
standing criminal behavior and rule violations related to alcohol use are unlikely to 
recur. His inability or unwillingness to comply with his probation by abstaining from 
alcohol use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  I conclude that neither AG ¶ 32(a) nor AG ¶ 32 (d) applies. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young adult who is 
well educated and skilled. His employer considers him to be a dependable and an 
excellent worker. 
 
At the same time, Applicant has been arrested twice for driving a vehicle while 
under the influence of alcohol. He has also been convicted of marijuana possession, 
and he pleaded guilty to illegal gambling. After his first alcohol-related arrest in 2002, he 
was ordered to take a course in alcohol education. Even after being made aware of the 
dangers of drinking and driving, he was again arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol in 2008. After his second arrest for driving under the influence, Applicant 
voluntarily enrolled in a substance abuse program. However, despite completion of the 
program, he continues to drink alcohol, which violates the terms of his existing 
probation. He denies he has an alcohol problem and persists in drinking to intoxication. 
He has a history of violating rules, laws, and legal orders, raising security concerns 
about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
