 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ADP Case No. 08-11621 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust 
position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
September 15, 2008. On June 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary 
decision to deny her application, citing security concerns under Guideline F and E. 
DOHA acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on June 19, 2009, answered it on August 20, 2009, 
and requested a hearing. On October 9, 2009, she withdrew her request for a hearing 
and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on December 29, 2009. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant on the same day, and she 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the government’s evidence. She received the FORM on January 7, 2010, but 
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on March 19, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g and 1.i-1.m and offered explanations. She denied owing the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, and she denied falsifying her SF 85P as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since September 2006. Her SF 85P indicates that she has been 
continuously employed since September 1999. She married in June 1970 and has two 
children, ages 11 and 8. She has never been cleared for a public trust position.  
 
 Applicant answered “no” to question 22a on her SF 85P, asking if she had filed 
for bankruptcy, been declared bankrupt, been subject to a tax lien, or had a judgment 
rendered against her for a debt during the last seven years. She also answered “no” to 
question 22b, asking if she was then more than 180 days delinquent on any loan or 
financial obligation. (Government Exhibit (GX) 4 at 7.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) dated September 16, 2008, reflected an 
unsatisfied judgment for $1,515 entered against her in February 2003. (GX 8 at 3). The 
unsatisfied judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied falsifying her SF 85P and stated that she had forgotten about the unsatisfied 
judgment.  
 
The same CBR reflected the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e-
1.m. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g had all been delinquent for more than three 
years when Applicant submitted her SF 85P. The total of the 13 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR is about $18,295. Three are for less than $100 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 
1.k), and three are for less than $200 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.j). 
 
 In an affidavit executed on March 15, 2005, Applicant commented specifically on 
the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. She attributed her financial problems to her 
husband’s unemployment in 2001, her unemployment in 1998, and the burden of 
repaying student loans. (GX 6 at 1-2.) In a statement to a security investigator on 
October 9, 2008, Applicant stated that her student loans had been consolidated and 
were in good standing. (GX 5 at 3). In response to DOHA interrogatories on March 5, 
2009, Applicant stated she was currently on a medical leave of absence, and she stated 
 3
she would take care of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 1.d-1.g, and 1.j-1.l after she 
returned from medical leave. (GX 5 at 6-9.) She did not state when she expected to 
return to work. She has not submitted evidence showing resolution of any of the debts. 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she disputed the medical debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.h, stating she was unaware of it. She has submitted no evidence of efforts to contact 
the creditor or to have the data removed from her credit report. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction an evaluation of the whole 
person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 4
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts totaling about $18,295. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the alleged delinquent debts except the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, which she denies, is established by her 
CBR. Her admissions and her CBR are sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions in 
AG & 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG & 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations), shifting the burden to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s debts are numerous, unresolved, and did not occur 
under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns also may be mitigated if Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ AG & 
20(b). Applicant and her husband both experienced periods of unemployment, but her 
unemployment was in 1998 and her husband’s was in 2001. She has been employed 
continuously since 1999 and worked for her current employer since September 2006, 
but she has not resolved any of her delinquent debts, even though half of them are for 
less than $200. AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling and her financial problems are not under control. 
 
 5
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing 
that “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition 
is not established because Applicant has taken virtually no action to resolve her 
indebtedness. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing 
“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). 
Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h in her answer to the SOR, but she presented 
no documentary evidence of actions to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified her SF 85P by intentionally failing to disclose 
the judgment entered against her in February 2003 and numerous debts that were 
more than 180 days delinquent. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 
as follows:  
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 When Applicant was questioned about her delinquent debts in March 2005, she 
was specifically questioned about the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. In her answer to 
the SOR, she claimed she had forgotten about it when she submitted her SF 85P. 
Although my ability to judge her credibility is limited because she withdrew her request 
for a hearing, I find her explanation for not disclosing the judgment implausible and 
unconvincing on its face. When she responded to DOHA interrogatories in March 2009, 
she was able to provide details about several of the debts that were more than 180 days 
 6
delinquent when she submitted her SF 85P, but she has offered no explanation for not 
disclosing any of them on her SF 85P. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security 
clearance application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, 
good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being 
confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant made no effort to correct her omissions before she was confronted 
with the evidence. No other enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
applicable.   
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for an 
assignment to a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and J in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some 
warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, but she has had financial problems for many years 
and has done little to resolve them. She withdrew her request for a hearing, limiting my 
ability to assess her sincerity and credibility. She presented no evidence of the quality of 
her work or her reputation among her supervisors and peers.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant her eligibility 
for assignment to a public trust position.  
 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
