                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-12162 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric S. Montalvo, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists 18 debts totaling $29,075. Three 
student loans and his child support are in established payment plans. Three debts are 
disputed. Eleven debts are paid. Applicant disclosed one delinquent debt on his security 
clearance application, and he was not aware of his other delinquent accounts. Financial 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (GE 1). On 
August 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked (HE 2). 
 
On September 11, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR (HE 3). On October 
21, 2009, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on his case. On 
November 3, 2009, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On December 3, 2009, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice (HE 1). On January 4, 2010, Applicant’s hearing was 
held. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered seven exhibits (GE 1-7) (Tr. 13-14), 
and Applicant offered 17 exhibits (Tr. 14-17; AE A-Q). There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-7 (Tr. 14) and AE A-Q (Tr. 17). Additionally, I admitted the hearing 
notice, SOR, and response to the SOR as hearing exhibits (HE 1-3). On January 7, 
2010, I received the transcript. I held the record open until January 25, 2010, to permit 
Applicant to provide additional documentation (Tr. 66). I granted an extension until 
February 18, 2010 (HE 4, 5). After the hearing, I received two exhibits from Applicant 
(AE R (32 pages) and AE S (108 pages). Department Counsel did not object (HE 6), 
and AE R and S were admitted into evidence that same day.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted that he owed the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.p, and 1.q (HE 3). He said some the debts he admitted were settled 
(HE 3). He denied some of the other SOR debts because they were paid, and denied 
other debts without explanation (HE 3). His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 36 years old (Tr. 35). He is not married (Tr. 35). He has an eight-
year-old child (Tr. 35). He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from February 1993 to 
August 1995 (Tr. 26, 60). He left the Army early because of the drawdown (Tr. 60). He 
received an honorable discharge under reduction-in-force criteria (Tr. 26; AE E). When 
he was discharged from the Army, he was an E-4 (Tr. 26). He has also served in the 
Army Reserve (Tr. 26). He attended college from 2000 to 2005, with a brief break in 
2001 (Tr. 37). He is currently working for a contractor in Afghanistan (Tr. 37).   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant fell behind on his debts while he was attending college (Tr. 19). His 
debts resulted from brief periods of unemployment and underemployment. In 2007, 
Applicant attempted to purchase a vehicle and discovered that he had some delinquent 
debt (Tr. 20). He used his credit report to contact the creditors holding his delinquent 
debts (Tr. 54-55). Some of the creditors on his credit report had transferred his accounts 
to different creditors (Tr. 55). Once he learned the creditor holding the account and the 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
amount owed, he began paying his debts (Tr. 54-55). On February 5, 2008, he paid a 
law firm that specializes in clearing delinquent debts and correcting credit reports 
$2,500 to assist with his financial issues (Tr. 55-56; AE R at 9). 
 
Applicant’s monthly gross income is $14,166, and his net income is $12,200 (Tr. 
24; AE D). His monthly expenses total about $3,200 and his monthly debt payments 
total about $1,400 (AE D). His net remainder is about $7,600 (AE D). He currently has 
$10,000 in his checking account and $5,000 in his saving account (Tr. 23). He does not 
have any credit cards, and his vehicle is in storage (Tr. 39). He does not have any 
utilities because the government provides utilities and many other expenses while he is 
deployed overseas (Tr. 39).  
 
The SOR lists 18 debts totaling $29,075 with the following status: 
 
a. $65—DISPUTED; Applicant was aware that this debt was owed on a medical 
account (Tr. 27). He thought it was held by the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b (Tr. 27). He was 
unable to locate the creditor and the credit reporting company was not able to give him 
any additional information on the creditor (Tr. 28, 40).  
 
b. $1,123—PAID. A December 24, 2009, letter from the creditor indicates this 
medical account has been paid in full (AE H). 
    
c. $3,157; d. $1,759; and e. $5,373—PAYMENT PLAN. The creditor for three of 
his student loan debts agreed on September 10, 2009, to accept a $9,310 lump sum 
payment to resolve these three debts (Tr. 28-29, 40-41; AE I). His checking account 
statement showed a $5,000 student loan payment on January 21, 2010 (AE R at 4) and 
a $3,000 payment on February 4, 2010 (AE S at 11). I was unable to locate 
documentation showing the remaining $1,310 was paid in the post-hearing 
documentation Applicant submitted. On December 23, 2009, Applicant sent a letter 
disputing the continued listing of his student loans as delinquent accounts on his credit 
report (AE S at 12). Applicant also has some non-SOR student loans totaling about 
$30,000, which are current (Tr. 41; AE D).     
 
f. $823—DISPUTED. Applicant disputed this debt and it was removed from his 
credit report (Tr. 42; AE F).  
 
g. $6,037—PAID. On September 30, 2009, Applicant paid the creditor $3,938.90 
to resolve this debt (Tr. 27, 42-43; AE G).  
 
h. $650; and q. $1,820—PAID. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h resulted from a late rent 
payment on his apartment (Tr. 51). The debt in SOR ¶ 1.q resulted when Applicant 
broke his lease on the same apartment (Tr. 52). In March 2004, the creditor in SOR ¶¶ 
1.h and 1.q obtained two judgments (Tr. 51-52). On November 9, 2009, Applicant paid 
$2,000, and on November 16, 2009, Applicant paid $800, resolving these two debts (Tr. 
43; AE J).  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
i. $1,158—PAID. At his hearing, Applicant said the debt was paid (Tr. 43-44). 
The debt was removed from his credit report (Tr. 43).  
 
j. $365; and l. $614—PAID. A February 14, 2009, letter from the creditor 
indicates the creditor was paid in full (Tr. 44-46; AE L). The debt has been removed 
from his credit report (Tr. 46). 
 
k. $236—PAID. Applicant said he paid the debt (Tr. 45). A July 3, 2008, letter 
from TransUnion indicates the disputed debt does not appear on a current TransUnion 
credit report (Tr. 44-45; AE M).   
 
m. $255—PAID. Applicant said the debt was paid, and it does not appear on his 
current credit report (Tr. 46-47). 
 
n. $266—DISPUTED. Applicant disputed the debt, and it was removed from his 
credit report (Tr. 47). 
 
o. $610—PAID. An April 2, 2008, letter from the creditor indicates the debt was 
settled in full and paid on March 31, 2008 (Tr. 47-48; AE P). 
 
p. $764—PAID. Applicant said the debt was paid; however, he did not have 
corroborating documentation showing payment (Tr. 48). 
 
r. $4,000—CURRENT. A court ordered Applicant to pay child support while he 
was overseas, and he was unaware of the requirement (Tr. 35-36). His monthly child 
support payments are $385 (Tr. 36). Applicant’s child support is current (Tr. 23, 35-37; 
AE Q).  
 
From February 2008 to December 2009, Applicant sent numerous letters to his 
creditors (AE S at 12-108). On some accounts he sent similar letters month after month 
asking for more information on accounts or objecting to continued listing of the negative 
credit information in his credit reports (AE S at 12-108). 
 
In sum, the government’s most recent credit report was dated July 13, 2009 (GE 
6). It shows two delinquent medical accounts (SOR ¶ 1.a ($65) and 1.b ($1,123)) (GE 
6). It also lists the three delinquent student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($3,157), 1.d ($1,759), 
and 1.e ($5,373)). He disputed SOR ¶ 1.a, and established that SOR ¶ 1.b was paid. He 
provided corroboration that he paid $5,000 and $3,000, in January and February 2010, 
respectively, to address his student loan account. Applicant paid 11 debts. Four debts 
(student loans and child support) are in an established payment plan, and he disputed 
three debts.   
 
Failure to disclose delinquent debts on his security clearance application 
 
On July 24, 2007, Applicant completed his security clearance application and 
indicated he did not have any unpaid judgments in the last seven years (SOR ¶ 2.a; GE 
1). However, he disclosed he did have a debt currently over 90 days delinquent, and a 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
debt delinquent over 180 days in the last seven years (SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c; GE 1). He 
listed his child support obligation in the comments section of his security clearance 
application (SOR ¶ 1.r; GE 1).  
 
Applicant explained that he did not list several delinquent debts and two unpaid 
judgments when he completed his security clearance application because the creditors 
did not notify him about the debts (Tr. 51-52). From January 2000 to September 2005, 
Applicant moved eight times (AE R at 1-2). From September 2005 to January 2007, 
Applicant was deployed to Iraq (Tr. 56; GE 1; AE R at 2). From August 2007 to 
November 2007, Applicant was deployed to Egypt (AE R at 2). From November 2007 to 
present, Applicant was deployed to Afghanistan (AE R at 2).  
 
Applicant did not receive notice of the two judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.q (Tr. 
51-52). In 2004, Applicant was late on his rent, and broke his lease, and the two 
judgments were served on the apartment he had vacated (Tr. 57-58; GE 7).  
 
On January 11, 2008, Applicant ran his credit report because he was purchasing 
a vehicle and learned about his delinquent debts and the two judgments (Tr. 49-56, 66; 
GE 2 at 7). On January 31, 2008, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator interviewed Applicant, and Applicant discussed his credit report and 
delinquent debt (Tr. 49-56, 66). He believes he brought the credit report to his OPM 
interview (Tr. 66).  
  
Whole person evidence 
 
The vice president of Applicant’s company described Applicant’s performance in 
a combat zone as excellent (AE B). He is a lead supervisor on a highly demanding 
program in Afghanistan (AE B). He is diligent, has integrity, and is very responsible (AE 
B).  
 
Applicant’s general operations manager described Applicant’s performance as 
spectacular (AE C). He has very strong attributes of integrity and honesty (AE C). He is 
a highly valued employee with superb judgment, and dedication (AE C). 
 
Applicant has served in Iraq and Afghanistan as a contractor for more than four 
years (AE R at 3). He often served in the field with troops and was exposed to enemy 
improvised explosive devices (IED) and mines (AE R at 3). He provided force protection 
and support to troops in a combat zone (AE R at 3). He risked injury or death on behalf 
of the United States (AE R at 3).  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his SOR response, and his statement at his hearing.  
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 18 debts totaling $29,075. His landlord obtained two 
judgments against Applicant in 2004. Three student loans and his child support became 
delinquent several years ago. The government established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a). His 
delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He did not pay some of his delinquent 
debts until recently, and his student loans were not brought to current status until 
February 2010. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by brief periods 
of unemployment and underemployment before he obtained his current employment. 
He has established that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has been 
employed for the last four years overseas with a government contractor. Three student 
loans and his child support are in established payment plans. Three debts are disputed. 
Eleven debts are paid. When Applicant became aware of his delinquent debts, he hired 
a law firm to take care of them because he was deployed. He has gradually resolved his 
delinquent debts. He maintained contact with his creditors as indicated by the numerous 
letters he sent to the creditors.2 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Although Applicant did not receive financial 
counseling, he has otherwise learned about financial issues. Applicant cannot receive 
full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) because he has not received financial counseling. He does 
receive some credit because there are some initial, positive “indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has admitted his responsibility for his 
 
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
debts, and he has resolved them.3 He also established some mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(d) because he showed some good faith4 in the resolution of his debts by settling and 
paying 11 debts. Three student loans and his child support are in established payment 
plans. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the three disputed debts. He wrote numerous letters to the 
creditors and credit reporting companies to verify and then dispute debts. Two of the 
three disputed debts were removed from his credit reports. He is unable to locate the 
third creditor, a medical debt for $65. I am confident that if there was a basis for the 
three disputed debts, Applicant would have paid them.  
 
In sum, Applicant started paying his delinquent debts as soon as he could verify 
them. He paid 11 debts, and established payment plans on four debts. He promised to 
pay his debts and show financial responsibility.5 He has met his burden of mitigating his 
delinquent debts.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
3 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
5Of course, the government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation and/or additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. A security clearance hearing premised on 
delinquent debts highlights to Applicant the security concerns raised by delinquent debts. Violation of a 
promise made in a security context to pay legitimate debts and maintain financial responsibility also 
raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a security clearance. 
An administrative judge does not have authority to grant a conditional clearance or to order additional 
investigation. ISCR Case No. 08-07540 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2010); ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary 
security clearance to allow [him or] her the opportunity to have a security clearance while [he or she] 
works on [his or] her financial problems.” and citing ISCR Case No. 03-07418 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 13, 
2004)). Applicant’s clearance is not conditional and this footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s 
clearance is conditional. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process the 
adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.6 
 
On July 24, 2007, Applicant completed his security clearance application. He 
indicated he did not have any unpaid judgments in the last seven years. However, he 
disclosed he did have a debt currently over 90 days delinquent, and a debt delinquent 
over 180 days in the last seven years. He listed his child support obligation in the 
comments section of his security clearance application. 
 
In 2004, Applicant had two judgments against him which were not paid. He also 
had 11 debts over 90 days delinquent listed on his August 30, 2007, credit report. AG 
¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
 
6The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶ 17(f) applies. Applicant disclosed his delinquent child support debt on his 
security clearance application. He was not aware of the two judgments. The two 
judgments were served on an address he had already vacated. From 2000 to his 
deployment to Iraq in 2005, Applicant changed addresses eight times, and letters from 
creditors were not forwarded to him. He did not disclose his other delinquent debts 
because he was not aware of them. The allegation that he deliberately and intentionally 
failed to disclose his delinquent debts and two judgments to the Department of Defense 
is not substantiated.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
significant; however, they do not warrant revocation of his security clearance. 
Applicant’s failure to pay or resolve his just debts in accordance with contracts he 
signed was not prudent or responsible. He has a history of financial problems. His credit 
reports listed 18 delinquent debts including two judgments.  
      
The rationale for granting or reinstating Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. 
He was forthright and candid during the investigative and adjudicative process, 
including completion of his security clearance application, his responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, his responses to an OPM investigator, and at his hearing about his 
financial problems. Several problems beyond his control adversely affected his financial 
status including unemployment and underemployment. He paid 11 debts. Three of the 
SOR debts related to student loans and one SOR debt related to his child support, 
which are now in current payment plans. Three debts are disputed. I am confident he 
will keep his promise to pay his delinquent debts and maintain his financial 
responsibility. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He has achieved some important educational and 
employment goals, demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and dedication. His 
financial problems were caused by unemployment or underemployment, rather than by 
misconduct or irresponsible spending. Applicant is an intelligent person, and he 
understands how to budget and what he needs to do to establish and maintain a stable 
financial situation. Clearly, he could have acted more aggressively to resolve his debts 
after receiving employment with a government contractor in September 2007. There is, 
however, simply no reason not to trust him. Moreover, he has established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism and trustworthiness through 
his service to the Department of Defense as a contractor and when he was on active 
duty in the Army. He has served more than four years in combat zones in Iraq and 
Afghanistan as a contractor. He has risked his own life to support Department of 
Defense missions in those countries. Character witnesses described Applicant as highly 
professional and diligent. Their evaluations document his solid work performance and 
good character. He is an important asset to his corporation. His security clearance 
application does not list any other reportable incidents involving illegal drugs, alcohol, 
the police, or courts.    
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. I take this position 
based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my 
careful consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my 
application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has mitigated or 
overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.r:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
