                                                              
                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------ )      ISCR Case No. 08-12058  
SSN: ------------ ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dan Wilkins, Personal Representative 
 
                                                                             
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) dated January 24, 2008. On September 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
On September 25, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. He admitted the sole 
allegation raised under each guideline. He also requested a hearing before a DOHA 
Administrative Judge. I was assigned the case on November 3, 2009. The parties proposed 
a December 18, 2009, hearing. A Notice of Hearing was issued to that effect on November 
13, 2009. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                
The hearing took place as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony and introduced  nine 
documents accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A-I.  Three 
witnesses and Applicant’s personal representative gave testimony on his behalf. Also 
accepted into the record without objection were five documents from Department Counsel, 
marked and accepted as Exs. 1-5. Applicant was given through January 7, 2010, to submit 
any additional materials. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 28, 2009.  
Applicant timely submitted seven additional documents. They were forwarded without 
objection by Department Counsel and accepted into the record as Exs. J-P. The record was 
closed on January 12, 2010. Based upon a thorough review of the case file, exhibits, and 
testimony, security clearance is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old engineering technician who has twice worked for his 
present employer, his most recent tenure having started in 2005. He has a high school 
diploma and an associate’s degree in science. He is the father of one adult child. 
 
 Applicant was born in 1968. In 1987, he and his girlfriend had a baby. In about 1991, 
he started working for his present employer and was eventually granted a security 
clearance.1 His relationship with his girlfriend, the mother of his child, became strained, but 
he continued to be an important part of his daughter’s life. They began living apart, taking 
turns caring for their child and working on their relationship.2 One day in June 1994, when 
Applicant was about 25 years old, he heard that his girlfriend was seeing another man. The 
discovery was devastating. He learned that the man was a friend of his who had gone to 
school with his brother. He told the friend to stay away from his girlfriend.3 After that, he 
continued working on his relationship, but things did not improve.  
 
 On July 29, 1994, Applicant picked up some beer and his gun. He contemplated 
driving to a reservoir, getting drunk, and killing himself. He saw his mother, however, and 
she told him to get his daughter’s swimming gear from his girlfriend’s home. He stopped by 
his girlfriend’s apartment that evening. He found his girlfriend with the same friend he had 
told to stop interfering with his relationship.4 The discovery upset him and a verbal 
altercation ensued: “I just got really angry basically because the whole time – the whole 
time I was trying to work things out with her, [his friend] was just kind of telling [her] to leave 
me and that I’m not a good father, stuff like that.”5   
 
 Applicant and his girlfriend tried to talk about their relationship, but the male friend 
interrupted. His friend’s interference and derogatory comments regarding Applicant made 
 
1  Tr. 20. As a result of Applicant’s July 1994 criminal conduct, discussed below, he later lost his security 
clearance. 
 
2  Tr. 55, 61. 
 
3  Ex. 2 (Police report) at 28. 
 
4  Tr. 59. 
 
5  Tr. 62. 
 
3 
 
                                                
Applicant, an otherwise shy and unassuming man, more upset. Applicant left his girlfriend’s 
apartment bereft and got in his car. His girlfriend, the male friend, and two other friends 
headed toward another car, where the male friend took the driver’s seat. Words were 
exchanged between the Applicant and his girlfriend, but her companion prepared to drive 
away. Applicant drove his vehicle into their car. He then got out of his car and fired his gun 
toward the driver’s tinted side window.6  Frightened by his outburst, he dropped the gun and 
fled. Applicant’s male friend was shot in the arm and abdomen. No other passengers were 
injured. After the police arrived, Applicant called his girlfriend to ask how the friend was. “He 
said he couldn’t believe he had done it and he said it was because [her date/his friend] had 
lied to him.”7 Applicant told his girlfriend that he was suicidal over what he had done, but 
she told him to turn himself in.8 He was arrested shortly thereafter.  
 
 The incident and Applicant’s arrest were publicized by the press. He was charged 
with 1) felony Attempted Murder, 2) two counts Wearing or Carrying  a Handgun, 3) two 
counts Assault with Intent to Maim, 4) four counts Assault, 5) four counts Battery, 6) 
Concealed Deadly Weapon, 7) two counts Reckless Endangerment, 8) two counts 
Malicious Destruction of Property, 9) Failure to Stop After Accident, and 10) Reckless 
Driving. He was found guilty of 1) felony Attempted Murder and 2) one count of Wear/Carry 
Handgun. The remaining charges, noted as 3-10 above, were nolle prosequi. Applicant was 
sentenced to 30 years imprisonment, but the sentence was reduced to a 15- year term. He 
was released in June 2005 after 10 years for good behavior. He was ordered to remain on 
supervised probation until February 15, 2010, but it was changed to unsupervised probation 
in early 2009.9   He was on probation at the time of the hearing. 
 
 While incarcerated, Applicant served his time without incident. He underwent 
mandatory therapy and was administered a psychiatric evaluation by a medical doctor. It 
was determined that he did not have a condition that could impair his judgment or reliability, 
particularly in the context of safeguarding classified national security information.”10 The 
examining physician later confirmed this assessment.11 In the interim, Applicant enrolled in 
a course of study through the state college system. As a result, he earned an associate’s 
degree in mechanical engineering and received certification in that field. He completed a 
community re-entry program after his release. Now that he has reentered society, he is 
determined to adjust well.12 
 
 
6  Id. at 3. 
 
7  Id. at 22. 
 
8  Id. at 22-23. 
 
9  The government argues that more time is needed beyond Applicant’s probation to demonstrate his 
rehabilitation.  
 
10  Tr. 20-21; Ex. A (Medical/Psychiatric). 
 
11  Id. 
 
12  Id. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                
 Today, Applicant is on cordial terms with both his ex-girlfriend and his friend, to 
whom she is now married. Since his release from prison, he has become especially close 
with his daughter, who is now 22 years old and resides with her mother and her mother’s 
husband. Applicant and his daughter visit at least once a week and speak on the telephone 
several times a week.13 She notes, “Talking to him always makes me feel so much better 
when something is bothering me. Whenever I need advice about something or I’m just plain 
worried about something he is one of the first people I call.”14 Regarding Applicant’s 
relationship with her mother and her mother’s husband, the daughter writes, “The situation 
between my dad and mom and her family has been really good too. He and my mom have 
been on friendly terms, which I am so grateful for. I don’t feel like there’s a lot of tension 
despite what happened and I really get the sense of things being in the past with them.”15 
She concludes by writing, “I don’t feel like mom, or [her husband, Applicant’s intended 
victim], or anyone is threatened at all. My dad has really turned his life around. He is a hard 
worker and very responsible and from what I’ve seen he is respected and loved by all of his 
friends, family, and coworkers.”16 Similarly, the child’s mother, Applicant’s ex-girlfriend, 
notes, “I have never felt threatened by [Applicant] in any way. . . He has been a 
responsible, loving father since being released.  . . . I have no ill will to him and believe he 
has none to me. . . . I believe [Applicant] poses no threat to [her husband] as well.. . . I 
believe all is in the past.”17 
 
At work, co-workers and associates who knew Applicant were “shocked” to learn 
from Applicant or the press that he had been involved in the incident.18 He did not conceal 
the truth about the incident. Instead, he was open to questioning about the accuracy of 
news stories and various rumors regarding the incident, although he kept the details to a 
minimum while he faced trial and sentencing. His peers’ shock and his reticence were 
consistent with his reputation, which was for being a hard worker who is a “shy young man, 
but very personable.”19 Some of his co-workers maintained contact with Applicant after he 
was incarcerated, helping him with his studies and writing him letters. Confidence in 
Applicant remained solid and he was invited back to his former place of employment as 
soon as practicable after his release from prison.20  He returned to his employer in July 
2005 as a computer-aided drafting (CAD) operator/draftsman a month after his release. 
 
13  Tr. 71. 
 
14  Ex. L (Letter, undated). 
 
15  Id.  
 
16  Id. 
 
17  Ex. M (Letter, undated). 
 
18  See, e.g., Tr. 29, 42, 76. Regarding his co-workers’ feeling of shock, one witness noted that he had 
“never seen him angry”, upset, or out of control. Tr. 76. 
 
19  Tr. 73-74. 
 
20  Tr. 21-22, 30, 35, 42. 
 
 
5 
 
hired Applicant’s brother.  
curity clearance].”26 Applicant spends most of his free time with his 
family and friends. 
    Policies 
idered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.”  
                                                
Today, he is “very well accepted with everyone, very well liked, very well respected.”21 
Since returning to work, there have been no concerns regarding Applicant or his 
performance.22 His representative, who has known him socially and professionally for many 
years, stated that he would trust Applicant with both his family’s life and with the security of 
this country.23 Applicant’s last appraisal was at the highest level that merited a wage 
increase.24 Within the past few years, he was promoted from draftsman to engineering 
technician. Based on the company’s confidence  in Applicant and his qualities, it recently 
 
In his community, Applicant is well regarded and active. He states, “I guess any 
neighbor needs help, I’m more than happy to help them.”25  A retired law enforcement 
officer who knows Applicant socially and is fully aware of Applicant’s criminal past writes 
that Applicant is impressive through “his self-motivating skills, continually distinguishing 
himself by achieving new things that sets him apart from others. . . . Based on my personal 
observations, conversations, and knowledge, I recommend without reservation or hesitation 
[Applicant] for a [se
 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative 
judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG lists potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is 
the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being cons
 
 
21  Tr. 30. 
 
22  Tr. 38. 
 
23  Tr. 44. 
 
24  Ex. C (Appraisal, Dec. 2008). 
 
25  Tr. 49. 
 
26  Ex. O (Letter, dated Jan. 2, 2010). 
 
 
6 
 
”  The burden 
of proof is something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of 
persua
rd classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather 
 applicant.  It is merely an indication that an applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing
alysis 
In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided 
drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. The government must 
present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . 27
sion to obtain a favorable clearance decision is on an applicant.28  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safegua
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” EO 12968, Section 3.1(b), lists multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information. The Appeal Board has stated that “(t)he clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”29 Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive information.30  
The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination 
as to the loyalty of an 31
 a clearance. 
 
 An
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to 
32comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  Here, in 1994, Applicant was charged with 
                                                 
27 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995). 
28 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
29 Id. 
30 Id. 
31 Executive Order 10865 § 7. 
32 AG ¶ 30. 
 
7 
 
ng 
conditions raised, consideration must be given to the mitigating conditions enumerated 
under 
cietal re-
entry program. In the interim, he has not only maintained the admiration and trust of his 
employ
r it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliabil
his crime, obviating 
applica ion of CC MC AG ¶ 32(b) (the person was pressured or coerced into committing the 
act and
felony Attempted Murder and nine related crimes. He was convicted of Attempted Murder 
and one count of Wear/Carry Handgun. Ordered to serve a probationary period, his 
probation was set to expire on February 15, 2010. Consequently, Criminal Conduct 
Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses”) and CC DC AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless 
of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted), and CC 
DC AG ¶ 31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probation) apply. With disqualifyi
AG ¶ 32. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his child’s mother began to fade as she started a liaison 
with one of his friends. Despite attempts to work on the relationship, the liaison persisted. 
Applicant was infuriated by his friend’s betrayal and the friend’s belittling treatment of him 
as both a man and as a father. When he discovered them together one night in the summer 
of 1994, Applicant, a bereft and near-suicidal young man, shot and wounded his rival in a 
crime of passion. The incident frightened and repelled him to the extent he contemplated 
taking his own life. He was arrested, found guilty of Attempted Murder and Wear/Carry 
Handgun, and sentenced to 15 years in prison. Released for good behavior after serving 10 
years, he successfully completed mandatory therapy, a psychiatric exam, and a so
er and peers, but earned the trust of his daughter and his ex-girlfriend.  
 
Moreover, it is notable that Applicant is a draftsman turned engineer. The availability 
of a firearm at the time was a matter of happenstance and there is no evidence that its 
availability was planned as part of an antisocial crime spree. Neither his profession, 
lifestyle, nor his inclination, is that of one given to the random or regular discharge of 
firearms. His crimes represent an isolated incident related to a failing romance in his mid-
20s. Unlike larceny, extortion, molestation, or drug-related crimes, for example, his crimes 
are not the result of a compulsion, an inherent disregard of the law, or a fundamental 
difficulty appreciating the distinction between right and wrong. It was an isolated, 
aberrational incident, the grievous nature of which he instantly appreciated, continues to 
lament, and regarding which he has endeavored to make amends to society, his family, and 
his victim. His life was devoid of violent behavior before the incident and has remained 
violence-free in the intervening 16 years. Today, both his family and professional peers 
complement Applicant for his personal, judgment, reliability, and affability. Given these 
unique circumstances, his general reputation, and his rehabilitative strides in the 
intervening 16 years, Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) AG ¶ 32(a) (so much 
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, o
ity, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.  
 
Applicant admits and has taken responsibility for his actions. Therefore, CC MC AG 
¶ 32(c) (evidence the person did not commit the act) does not apply. Further, there is no 
evidence that a third party or any force but passion was involved in 
t
 those pressures are no longer present in the person’s life).  
 
 
8 
 
f 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
educat
 probation’s expiration should eliminate any 
remaining doubts regarding his ability to maintain a security clearance. At present, 
howev
Today, Applicant is in his 40s. His only criminal act occurred when he was 25. For 
that act, he completed his term of incarceration early for good behavior. While in prison, he 
completed a college degree, therapy, and a psychological examination. Shortly after his 
release, he successfully completed a community re-entry program and is now considered a 
reliable neighbor and friend. He was quickly rehired by his employer, peers from which had 
encouraged him throughout his confinement. Since returning to work, he has been 
promoted and appraised as an excellent employee. Applicant’s probation was set to expire 
in February 2010 and, at the time of the hearing, he had completed the vast majority of his 
probationary period without incident. Significantly, he has regained the trust of his daughter, 
and made peace with both his ex-girlfriend and his friend, the victim of his crime. As well, 
Applicant fully acknowledges his criminal behavior and expresses his remorse through both 
his words and his demeanor.  Under these unique circumstances, CC MC AG ¶ 32(d) 
(there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage o
ion, good employment record, or constructive community involvement) applies. 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct demands heightened scrutiny. The crimes for which 
Applicant was found guilty were exceptionally grave and were committed while he had a 
security clearance. Few crimes are on the level of severity of attempted murder and the 
trust breached by that crime goes to the core of this process. The government argues that 
Applicant requires additional time to demonstrate his rehabilitation. I agree to the extent 
that additional time is warranted to mitigate all criminal conduct security concerns. The 
timing of this process has worked against Applicant. The hearing was on December 18, 
2009, the record closed on January 12, 2010, and Applicant’s probation was poised to 
expire on February 15, 2010. Consequently, there is no documentary evidence that he has 
successfully completed his probationary period and any other requirements related to that 
period. In light of Applicant’s impressive efforts, this may seem to be a ceremonial 
technicality, but the security clearance process requires that any reasonable doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved  
in favor of protecting such sensitive information. Moreover, a demonstration by Applicant 
that he is continuing his efforts after his
er, such security concerns remain. 
 
 Guideline E - Personal Conduct   
 
Under AG ¶ 15, conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. At 
issue here are the crimes for which Applicant was found guilty and related charges. They 
do not involve conduct regarding the security clearance process, an area not already 
covered by another adjudicative guideline, not involving a violation of a condition of 
employment, or regarding association with others involved in criminal activity. Other than 
general security concerns regarding Applicant’s personal conduct in terms of his criminal 
past, which were duly considered under the preceding section regarding Guideline J, only 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct or 
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
 
9 
 
rofessional, or community standing. . . .) applies, due to his criminal act 
and incarceration.  
riately 
considered under, Guideline J. This makes consideration under AG ¶ 17 difficult.  
sitive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).  
ility, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur) applies.  
g 
Applicant’s conduct remaining that are unrelated to Guideline J scrutiny are mitigated. 
Whole-Person Concept  
 
istrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, p
 
Like the disqualifying conditions enumerated under this guideline, the available 
mitigating conditions are not easily amenable to these facts. This is especially true since 
the security concerns giving rise to Guideline E are similar to, and more approp
 
Here, there is no evidence that Applicant omitted, concealed, or falsified the truth 
regarding his part in the shooting. Rather, there is evidence that sufficient press coverage 
and personal disclosure existed to permit the story to spread on its own. The evidence also 
shows that when questioned by acquaintances regarding what they had heard or read, he 
readily corroborated stories regarding the incident. Since that time, his story has been 
further publicized, he has been open about his crime, and he has made overt attempts to 
rehabilitate himself. Such facts raise AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken po
 
Applicant fully admits that he committed his crime. Among Applicant’s rehabilitative 
measures are psychological therapy and a psychological evaluation, which concluded that 
he did not have a condition that could impair his judgment or reliability, particularly in the 
context of safeguarding classified national security information. Moreover, anecdotally, 
Applicant’s ex-girlfriend states that her family and Applicant are on amicable terms and that 
he does not pose a threat to her family. Therefore, PC MC AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other 
positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthiness, unreliab
 
Criminal conduct security concerns arise because of questions regarding one’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and one’s ability to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Personal Conduct security concerns arise for the same reasons, plus issues 
involving candor and honesty. There is no evidence that candor or honesty are an issue. 
Credible testimony and demeanor demonstrated candor and honesty which was bolstered 
by witness testimony. In light of these considerations, any security concerns regardin
 
 
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An admin
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
 
10 
 
ploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
currence. 
circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person” factors noted above.  
regarding his psychiatric state. For good 
behavior, he was released after only 10 years. 
cant devotes his time to his work, being a good friend, and 
spending time with his child.  
ied information must 
be resolved in favor of national security. Security clearance denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, ex
re
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In reviewing the complete record, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
 
In light of the factors enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a), it must be noted that Applicant is a 
highly credible, optimistic, and soft spoken man who, 16 years ago and in his early to mid- 
20s, committed a serious crime of passion against a suitor to the mother of his child. He 
held a security clearance at the time. Although the crime was committed in the heat of the 
moment, it was exceptionally heinous and resulted in physical injury. At the same time, it 
was an isolated incident totally inconsistent with his natural character. Since that time, he 
has been tried and sentenced for Attempted Murder and for Wearing or Carrying a 
Handgun. While in prison, he underwent therapy to address his conduct and he was 
successfully examined by a qualified physician 
 
In prison and since his release, he has successfully worked to rehabilitate himself. 
He completed a college degree and quickly resumed employment, where he has since 
been promoted and shown himself to be a valued, well-regarded, and well-rated employee. 
He has maintained the trust in peers who knew him before the incident and has won the 
trust of those he has since met. In much the same manner that the criminal justice system 
released him from prison five years early for good behavior, it also determined that he 
could be entrusted to complete his probation unsupervised. He completed a societal re-
entry program and has reintegrated into his community without difficulty. He built a very 
close bond to his daughter. Neither she, his ex-girlfriend, nor their family considers him to 
be a threat. He has faced the consequences of his actions resolutely, paid for his crime,  is 
open about his criminal past,  and is endeavoring to move on with his life without further 
incident. Now in his 40s, Appli
 
But for the lack of evidence that Applicant completed all probation-related 
requirements and is still continuing to comport his behavior appropriately, criminal conduct 
security concerns would be adequately addressed. Without such a showing, security 
concerns regarding his criminal conduct, both in terms of its severity and the fact it took 
place while he had a security clearance, remain. In light of the clearly-consistent standard, 
any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classif
 
 
11 
 
set forth in the SOR, as 
quired by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
ubparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
ubparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
ith the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
learance denied. 
 
__________________________ 
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations 
re
S
 
S
 
 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent w
C
 
 
 
