                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11306 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James B. Norman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 16, 2008, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On September 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 21, 2009. She 
answered the SOR in writing on October 1, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 9, 
2009, and I received the case assignment on November 16, 2009. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on December 2, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
December 14, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received 
 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
2
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 28, 2009. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until January 4, 2010, to submit 
additional matters.  On January 4, 2010, she submitted Exhibit D, without objection. The 
record closed on January 4, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel stated the Notice of Hearing and the hearing 
date are less than 15 days apart. I advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the 
Directive to have 15 days notice before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived her 
right to 15 days notice and elected to proceed with the hearing. (Tr. at 8, 9)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, 
with explanations. She also provided additional information to support her request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 40, divorced and has five children. The three daughters live with her. 
One son lives with her former husband, and the oldest son is a college student. She 
was married to her husband from 1989 until divorcing him in 2001. She remarried him in 
2004 and divorced him in 2009. She works for a defense contractor as a material 
handler and has done so for the past five years.  (Tr. 22-26, 35, 51; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant has 21 delinquent debts totaling $15,684.74 listed in the SOR. She 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 1999, and it was discharged in May 1999. She 
again filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2009, and it was discharged in November 2009. 
In her latest bankruptcy, the unsecured debts total $14,221.32 on the Schedule F. Her 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR, and in the Chapter 7 petition, include medical debts 
not covered by her employer’s health insurance plan, credit card debts, telephone 
debts, and a utility company debt. Applicant did not pay any of the debts listed in the 
SOR. She did not demonstrate at the hearing, or by January 4, 2010, that the SOR 
debts were all included in her latest bankruptcy. My examination of the bankruptcy 
Schedule F and the SOR showed 14 of the SOR-listed debts were included in the 
bankruptcy, based on creditor name and amount owed (SOR Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 
1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.q, 1.r, 1.t). As part of the bankruptcy, Applicant 
attended and completed a personal financial management course in September 2009, 
and received credit counseling by telephone in July 2009. (Tr. 27-29, 42-44, 58; Exhibits 
2-4, A-C) 
 
Applicant has 12 delinquent debts listed in the SOR that are under $200 each. 
These debts total $1,212. The SOR next lists five debts under $1,000 each. Finally, the 
 
 
 
 
3
SOR lists four debts between $1,000 and $4,000. Applicant received a $5,500 income 
tax refund in 2008. She used that money to buy a car. She did not use any of it to repay 
any debts. Her current automobile is a 2001 vehicle she received as a gift. Applicant 
has no credit cards. She uses a debit card or checks to pay her bills. She overdraws her 
checking account on a monthly basis. Between July and December 2009, Applicant 
paid overdraft fees that in some months were $250. Applicant admitted she used credit 
cards to make purchases when she did not have the cash to spend on those items. (Tr. 
33, 37, 38, 46, 47, 66) 
 
Applicant completed answers to two DOHA interrogatories on February 9, 2009. 
She told the investigator in one set of answers she could not recall the delinquent 
accounts he listed for her. In the second set of answers she either stated she intended 
to file bankruptcy or “will call to pay off ASAP.” She took no action on the bankruptcy 
filing until July 2009, and did not resolve any of the delinquent debts by payment. 
(Exhibits 2-4) 
 
Applicant testified her former husband started paying child support only recently. 
He was frequently unemployed during their marriages, quitting jobs at his whim, and 
leaving the burden of supporting the family to her. Applicant’s brother submitted a 
written character statement that supported Applicant’s statements about the lack of 
support from her former husband. His statement added information that their mother 
was helping Applicant financially. He concluded by stating Applicant works hard to be 
the sole provider for her children and herself. (Tr. 36; Exhibits 4, D)  
 
Applicant could not coordinate the SOR debts with those listed in her 2009 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy to show which debts were discharged in that legal proceeding. 
Applicant did not explain persuasively why she could not have used her 2008 income 
tax refund to pay the 12 delinquent debts totaling $1,212 instead of buying a car. (Tr. 
42-44) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
4
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
5
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Of these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
During the past decade, Applicant accumulated 21 delinquent debts for a total of 
$15,684.74 that were unpaid or unresolved. She has a history of not meeting her 
financial obligations. She filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy twice in 10 years. She overdrew 
her checking account regularly during the last five months of 2009, thereby obligating 
herself to pay fees totaling $250 in some months. Applicant demonstrated persuasively 
she cannot manage her personal finances. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three mitigating conditions may be 
potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) might apply because of her former husband’s unemployment 
situations and lack of his financial support to their family. They married and divorced 
twice. His behavior did not change during those marriages, and the two bankruptcies 
show the situation continued over a decade. Applicant continued to spend money she 
could not repay, however, showing she did not act responsibly under the circumstances. 
This mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (c) imposes a two-part requirement for its applicability. Applicant must 
receive financial counseling and/or there must be clear evidence the situation is under 
control. Applicant received counseling, but only as part of the requirement under the 
U.S. Bankruptcy Code for filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. Applicant introduced no 
evidence that she voluntarily sought counseling before she filed bankruptcy. Her 
testimony that she overdrew her checking account between July and December 2009 
while the bankruptcy petition was being considered by the bankruptcy court shows 
 
 
 
 
6
Applicant has not resolved her financial problems and continues to repeat her financial 
mismanagement. Based on the facts, this mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
The last potentially applicable mitigating condition pertains to the initiation of a 
good-faith effort to pay debts or otherwise resolve them. Applicant used a legal method 
to rid herself of at least14 of her debts through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The U.S. 
Bankruptcy Code discharges all debts at the time the court order is entered, regardless 
of whether or not it is listed in the petition and schedules. Applicant’s debts were 
discharged. However, she had previously used that process in February 1999. She 
learned nothing in the past decade about management of her personal finances. She 
did not make any effort to pay any of the creditors listed in the SOR. These actions are 
not good-faith efforts to resolve her debts. This mitigating condition is not applicable 
under the facts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been an adult during 
all of her financial difficulties. She filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy twice in 10 years, 
demonstrating she cannot manage her personal finances. She is likely to continue this 
type of mismanagement into the future, having established a pattern of it. There is no 
permanent behavior change because she continues to overspend her income as shown 
by the overdrafts on her checking account in 2009. Her conduct is frequent and recent. 
Nothing has changed for Applicant over the past decade financially. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
 
 
 
7
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.v:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
