 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ADP Case No. 08-11708 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer J. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust 
position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his application for a public trust position (SF 85P) on 
November 15, 2007 (Government Exhibit (GX) 4). On August 28, 2009, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, citing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guidelines F and J. The action was taken under Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005.  
 
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on September 10, 2009 (GX 2); answered it on 
September 27, 2009; and requested determination on the record without a hearing (GX 
3). DOHA received his response on October 6, 2009. Department Counsel submitted 
the government’s written case on November 24, 2009. On December 1, 2009, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on December 28, 
2009, and he submitted an undated response that was received by DOHA on February 
11, 2010, which was included in the record without objection from Department Counsel. 
The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the Guideline F allegation in SOR 
¶ 1.f, but he denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. He admitted the Guideline J 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old certified pharmacy technician employed by a defense 
contractor. He is a high school graduate who attended college for three years but did 
not obtain a degree. He has never married. He has worked for his current employer 
since February 2007. He has worked for various employers as a certified pharmacy 
technician since December 2002. He has not previously applied for a public trust 
position.   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant used credit cards for living expenses while in college (GX 6 at 3-5), and 
he accumulated six delinquent credit card accounts totaling about $28,516. All the debts 
except the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) 
dated December 28, 2007 (GX 7), July 15, 2009 (GX 8), and November 24, 2009 (GX 
9). The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is reflected in GX 8 and GX 9. Although Applicant 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, he admitted lesser amounts that did not 
include interest and penalties on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e (GX 
3; Response to FORM at 4). He indicated in response to DOHA interrogatories that he 
was negotiating with his creditors to settle the accounts for the amount due minus 
penalties and interest (GX 5 at 1-4).  
 
 Applicant told a security investigator he was unemployed for two months after he 
dropped out of college (GX 6 at 3). However, he reported no periods of unemployment 
on his SF 85P (GX 4 at 3). 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant accepted an offer of settlement from the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and he made a monthly payment in January 2010 (Response to 
FORM at 8-9). He received a settlement offer from the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, but 
there is no evidence of any payments on this debt (Response to FORM at 4, 10). 
 3
Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but there is no evidence he has 
contacted the creditor or disputed the entry with the credit reporting agencies. There is 
also no evidence that he has filed disputes with the credit reporting agencies 
challenging the amounts of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e). His credit 
reports reflect only one disputed account, and it is not with any of the creditors alleged 
in the SOR (GX 7 at 6; GX 8 at 2; GX 9 at 2). 
 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in response to DOHA 
interrogatories in March 2009. He reported net monthly income of $1,621, expenses of 
$953, debt payments of $375, and a net remainder of $293. His monthly debt payments 
were for a credit card account, student loans, and installment payments to the court in 
connection with his DUI conviction. He also reported $2,334 in bank savings and $300 
in stocks and bonds (GX 5 at 6). 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with shoplifting in November 2005. He 
completed a diversion program in May 2006 and the charges were dismissed (GX 6 at 
12). The government exhibits do not reflect the underlying facts of the incident. 
According to Applicant, he was with a friend who stole a jacket. In his answer to the 
SOR, he stated he accepted an opportunity to enter a diversion program “to get the 
issue over,” even though he was unaware of his friend’s theft (GX 3 at 2). 
 
 Applicant began consuming beer in 2002, during his senior year of high school, 
but not to the point of intoxication. During his first year of college, he consumed beer 
and hard liquor to the point of intoxication every weekend. During his next two years of 
college, he consumed about four beers twice a month at social events. Starting in 
November 2006, he increased his consumption to six beers every Friday and Saturday 
(GX 6 at 7-8). In November 2007, he was arrested for driving under the influence. Under 
a plea agreement, he pleaded guilty to “extreme DUI” and having a blood-alcohol level 
of .15% or more. In February 2008, he was sentenced to ten days in jail, ordered to pay 
fines and costs totaling $3,566, and placed on probation for five years (GX 6 at 14). He 
was ordered to complete ten weeks of alcohol and drug classes and to install an 
interlock device on his vehicle for one year, and he received a restricted driver’s license 
that authorized him to drive only to and from work (GX 6 at 6).  
 
As of the date of an interview with a security investigator in October 2008, 
Applicant had not completed the alcohol and drug classes because he was waiting to be 
contacted. He had not installed an interlock device because his car was impounded, he 
could not afford the fees to retrieve it, he had not obtained another car, and he was 
riding to and from work on the bus (GX 6 at 7). In December 2008, a warrant was 
issued for his failure to comply with the terms of his probation (GX 6 at 14). The warrant 
was quashed in February 2009 (GX 6 at 13). 
 
 Applicant completed the alcohol and drug classes in June 2009 (Response to 
FORM at 7). As of March 1, 2009, he was paying $150 per month on his fines and costs 
 4
for the DUI (GX 5 at 5). As of May 15, 2009, he had paid a total of $2,190, leaving a 
balance due of $1,441 (GX 6 at 15-16). 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction an evaluation of the whole 
person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or him or her 
eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position.  
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $28,516. The trustworthiness 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s financial history is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG 
& 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG & 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations), shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s debts are numerous, not yet fully resolved, and did not 
occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns also may be mitigated if Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ AG & 
20(b). Applicant claimed to have had a short period of unemployment, a circumstance 
beyond his control, but he did not list it on his SF 85P. Even if he was unemployed, he 
has not acted responsibly, because he took no significant action to resolve his 
delinquent debts until he learned that they might adversely affect his eligibility for a 
public trust position. He made his first payment on a delinquent debt in January 2010, 
even though he has been employed at his current job for three years. He has admitted 
the $748 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, but he has not paid it even though he has adequate 
savings and a steady income. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not received financial 
counseling and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
 6
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past irresponsibility is not 
mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. 
 
 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of each 
and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 
2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. Id. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c-1.f, because Applicant has not acted in good faith, for the reasons 
set out above in my discussion of AG ¶ 20(b), and he has taken no significant actions to 
resolve the debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). 
Applicant has expressed his disagreement with the interest and penalties assessed on 
his delinquent credit card accounts, but he has not documented the basis of his 
disagreement, nor has he presented documentary evidence that he notified any of the 
credit reporting agencies or any of the creditors alleged in the SOR that he disputes the 
existence of the debts or the amounts claimed to be due. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: 
“Criminal conduct creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include 
“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant’s shoplifting charge in 
November 2005 and his conviction of DUI in February 2008 raise these two 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
Applicant is still on probation for his DUI conviction. Thus, AG ¶ 31(d) (individual 
is currently on parole or probation) also is raised.  
 
 7
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The first prong of 
this mitigating condition (“so much time has elapsed”) focuses on whether the criminal 
conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is 
Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
Applicant’s shoplifting arrest was more than four years ago, which is “a significant 
period of time.” On the other hand, his track record since the shoplifting arrest is one of 
excessive alcohol consumption, financial irresponsibility, and a serious DUI conviction, 
for which he is still on probation. I conclude the first prong of AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
established. The arrest did not occur under unusual circumstances. Combined with 
Applicant’s overall behavior, it casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Thus, I conclude AG ¶32(a) is not established. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns may be mitigated by “evidence that the person did not 
commit the offense.” AG ¶ 32(c). The record is sparse regarding the circumstances of 
Applicant’s shoplifting arrest in November 2005. His own explanation tends to negate 
guilt, but his decision not to contest the charges undermines his protestation of 
innocence. I am satisfied that there is “substantial evidence” of his culpability. Thus, I 
conclude AG ¶ 32(c) is not established. However, because of the sparse record, I have 
given this incident little weight in my evaluation of his trustworthiness.  
 
Finally, trustworthiness concerns may be mitigated if “there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant recited his accomplishments in his current job, but he 
presented no evidence from his supervisors, no copies of performance appraisals, and 
no copies of the numerous awards he says he has received. For these reasons, as well 
as the reasons set out above in my discussion of AG ¶ 32(a), I conclude this mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 8
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for an 
assignment to a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and J in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline(s), but some 
warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant did not request a hearing, limiting my ability to assess his sincerity, 
credibility, candor, and remorse. He has considerable technical expertise and 
experience as a certified pharmacy technician, but he does not have a track record of 
responsible behavior. He consumed alcohol to excess and accumulated heavy credit 
card debt in college. He dropped out of college, increased his alcohol consumption, and 
was arrested for shoplifting. He continued to drink heavily and was convicted of a 
serious DUI offense. He did not significantly address his delinquent debts until he 
realized his job depended on a favorable trustworthiness determination.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on financial 
considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with national security to grant him eligibility for assignment to a 
public trust position.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 9
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
