 Under E3.1.15. of the Directive, Subparagraph 2.a. of the SOR is amended by changing the date to1
November 14, 2006 to conform the allegation to the date Applicant signed the SCA (GE 1 at 7).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-11420
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(SCA, GE 1) on December 8, 2006.  On September 30, 2008, Applicant was1
interviewed by an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
concerning drug involvement. In his interrogatory answers dated January 8, 2009,
Applicant checked “Yes,” that he agreed with and adopted the investigator’s summary of
the September 30, 2008, interview, and that it could be used in evidence (GE 2). On
April 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under drug involvement (Guideline H),
and personal conduct (Guideline E). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order
2
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006.
Applicant furnished his answer to the SOR on June 9, 2009. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on August 31, 2009, for a hearing on September 16, 2009. The
hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, two exhibits (GE I and GE 2) were
admitted in evidence without objection to support the government's case. Applicant
testified. The record remained open until September 30, 2009 (Tr. 47), to allow
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. No evidence was submitted.
DOHA received the transcript on September 24, 2009. The record closed on September
30, 2009.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges drug involvement (Guideline H) and personal conduct
(Guideline E). Applicant admitted subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d., but denied
subparagraph 1.e., alleging that he still associates with individuals that used drugs with
him in the past. He admitted both allegations under personal conduct (Guideline E) in
Paragraph 2. 
Applicant is 22 years old. It is not clear from the record when he was married. In
his SCA (GE 1) he was single on December 8, 2006, the day he signed the SCA. His
daughter was born on February 1, 2006 (GE 1 at 2). Applicant has been employed by a
defense contractor since November 2006. Currently, he is an installation technician
hoping to become an electronics technician, then an engineering technician (Tr. 27). 
Drug Involvement 
Applicant was nervous when he began his testimony. He had some difficulty
providing a history of his drug use (Tr. 13-17). He told the OPM investigator in
September 2008, that he smoked an average of one marijuana cigarette a day between
ages 15 and 17 (GE 2). Applicant told the investigator he stopped using marijuana in
2004 (Id.). He testified he quit using marijuana in 2005 after beginning a relationship
with his former wife (Tr. 13-14). 
Marital discord developed between Applicant and his former wife in April 2008.
He resumed using marijuana two or three times a week, and after being granted a
security clearance on March 31, 2007. He took a random drug test and registered
positive for marijuana in June 2008. His employer referred him to outpatient counseling
(Tr. 16). 
3
The counseling, which began in June 2008, consisted of individual therapy with a
counselor for at least seven or eight sessions (GE 2, interview). Applicant completed the
counseling in November 2008 (Tr. 16). Applicant’s counselor wrote a report indicating
that Applicant was a high risk for marijuana use but not drug dependent (GE 2,
interview). Applicant testified that he no longer associates with friends who used
marijuana with him in the past (Tr. 25). 
Applicant finally told his wife to leave in April 2008 and she departed with his car
and their child (Tr. 18-20). Applicant obtained a divorce on August 3, 2009 (Id.). 
Personal Conduct
On December 8, 2006, Applicant completed a SCA. In response to question 24a.
(use of drugs since 16 or in the last seven years), Applicant answered “no.” In his
answer to the SOR, he admitted he intentionally concealed his marijuana use. At the
hearing, he confirmed his deliberate concealment of his drug use to get a job (Tr. 26).  
Whole Person Information
During the course of his testimony, Applicant referred to documentation that he
indicated he could obtain (Tr. 11, 23-25, 29, 30-33). Though he was provided two weeks
to submit documentation regarding his job performance, negative drug test results, and
his drug counselor’s post therapy report, Applicant did not submit additional
documentation. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). Each
guideline lists potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
used in evaluating an applicant's eligibility for access to classified information. These
guidelines are flexible rules of law that must take into consideration the complexities of
human behavior. 
The administrative judge's ultimate adjudicative goal is to reach a fair and
impartial decision that is based on common sense. The decision should also include a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the "whole person
concept." Finally, the administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are sensible, logical, and based on the evidence
4
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶E3.l.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶E3.l.l5., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in demonstrating it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him security clearance access. 
Analysis
Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules or regulations.
Applicant’s drug involvement falls within the scope of AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug
abuse); AG ¶ 25(b) (testing positive for illegal drug use); AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia); and AG ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use
after being granted a security clearance). Marijuana, an illegal drug, is defined by the
guideline as a mood and behavior altering substance. In June 2008, Applicant tested
positive for marijuana. He used the drug with varying frequency from 2002 to June
2008. The most bothersome aspect of Applicant’s marijuana use is that he used the
drug while holding a security clearance. The government has established a case of drug
abuse under the drug involvement guideline. 
Applicant has the burden of presenting evidence in explanation, mitigation, and
extenuation, that meets his ultimate burden of persuasion. AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply because his drug use did not stop
until June 2008, less than two years ago. Applicant was using the drug two or three
times a week for several months. His decision not to furnish probative documentation in
support of his good job performance, negative drug tests, and written drug report
verifying he completed drug therapy, continues to have a negative impact on his current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs are used, (3) an appropriate period of abstinence, and a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation)
provides four actions an applicant may take to demonstrate he intends to maintain drug
5
abstinence in the future. While Applicant stresses that he no longer associates with drug
users as set forth in AG ¶ 26(b)(1), he provided insufficient evidence to support his
position. He provided insufficient evidence to substantiate his claim that he abstains
from environments where drugs are used (AG ¶ 26(b)(2)). 
Whether an appropriate period of abstinence from illegal drug use AG 26 (b)(3) is
sufficient depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. Applicant did not stop
using marijuana until he was caught in June 2008, less than two years ago. He used the
drug while holding a security clearance. A longer period of abstinence is necessary
under these circumstances. Without a written declaration of intent to forego future drug
use (AG 26(b)(4)), Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence under any of the four
avenues of demonstrating an intent to refrain from all drug use in the future. The drug
involvement guideline is resolved against Applicant. 
Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
This guideline applies to intentional attempts to conceal or omit information from
an SCA. Applicant’s admission of both subparagraphs of paragraph 2 of the SOR
establishes that he deliberately concealed drug information because he needed the job.
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire to determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness)
applies to Applicant’s deliberate concealment of his drug history.
Applicant’s decision to resume marijuana use in April 2008 brings his conduct
within AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is
not limited to: . . . (3) a pattern of rule violations); . . . .). Applicant’s resumption of
marijuana use constitutes a violation of not only the law, but also the Department of
Defense policy against illegal drug use. 
There are three mitigating conditions (MC) that are potentially applicable to the
circumstances in this case. Those conditions are: AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment or falsification, before
being confronted with the facts); AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense was so minor, or so much time
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
6
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur).
Applicant receives no mitigation under AG ¶ 17(a) or AG ¶ 17(c). While his
marijuana use stopped two years before his deliberate concealment of that information
in December 2006, he demonstrated poor judgment in April 2008 by resuming use of
the drug while holding a security clearance. The fact that his wife and child suddenly left
him in April 2008, was clearly a traumatic event. However, her departure does not
excuse him from breaking the law while holding a security clearance. 
Applicant receives limited mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d) because he acknowledges
he used marijuana and he had drug counseling. But his admission of drug use and
counseling is insufficient to overcome his deliberate falsification of his earlier drug use,
and his drug use between April and June 2008. The personal conduct guideline is found
against Applicant. 
Whole Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence with the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate findings against Applicant under the drug and personal conduct guidelines. I
have also weighed the circumstances within the context of nine variables known as the
whole person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the
administrative judge should consider the following factors:
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant used marijuana daily between ages 15 and 17. He claims he stopped
using the drug in 2005. During a period of marital discord in April 2008, Applicant
resumed using the drug about two or three times a week. By resuming marijuana use,
Applicant violated the drug laws and the zero tolerance policy of the Department of
Defense against drug use while holding a security clearance. The credit Applicant
receives for stopping his marijuana use in June 2008 is tempered by the fact he was
caught using marijuana by a random drug test. 
7
Applicant has the burden of proving his security worthiness. He testified he had
favorable job performance evidence, a favorable drug report, and negative test results.
His decision not to reinforce his testimonial claims with independent evidence raises a
reasonable inference that the evidence does not exist. Applicant has not demonstrated
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to restore his security clearance.
Accordingly, the drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines are found against
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Drug Involvement, Guideline H): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.             Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
