                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10204 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Remand Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from financial considerations. Security clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On December 30, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within DoD on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
 
1  FORM Item 5. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
On January 25, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 19, 2009, was provided to 
him by letter dated February 23, 2009. Applicant signed the receipt for the DOHA 
transmittal letter on March 11, 2009. He was afforded a period of 30 days to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He timely 
submitted a response to the FORM that included mitigating evidence.2 The case was 
assigned to me on May 15, 2009. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM was received by DOHA on April 7, 2009, but 
not forwarded to Department Counsel. I did not receive or consider Applicant’s 
response to the FORM before issuing the July 23, 2009, denial Decision.  
 
Applicant appealed the Decision. In his Reply Brief, Department Counsel 
conceded Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM, which was not provided 
to me before issuing the Decision. The DOHA Appeal Board remanded the Decision 
stating (in its pertinent part): “in the interest of administrative economy, the case is 
hereby remanded to the Judge for further processing.” ISCR Case No. 08-10204 at 2 
(App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2009).  
 
On February 16, 2010, I issued an Order asking Applicant to submit “any 
additional information he would like for me to consider prior to issuing a decision.”3 
Applicant’s counsel timely provided a “Submission of Additional Evidence” (including 
Tabs A-L), dated March 1, 2010, which was marked Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex. 2), and 
made part of the record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s Response to 
App. Ex. 2 on March 3, 2010, which was marked App. Ex. 3, and made part of the 
record.  
 
In his response, Department Counsel objected to any documents submitted by 
Applicant in App. Ex. 2, except for three documents Applicant had attached to his 
September 1, 2009, Appeal Brief (included in App. Ex. 3). The three documents are: 
Applicant’s written statement4 (undated); Applicant’s divorce decree,5 dated February 6, 
 
2 Applicant’s response to the FORM was not provided to me and it was not considered in my original 
decision (Decision). See the section entitled “Procedural Issue” on this Remand Decision. 
 
3 The Order and a copy of the delivering e-mail to Applicant’s counsel and Department Counsel was 
marked as Appellate Exhibit (AE) 1, and made part of the record. 
 
4 Included in App. Ex. 2 as Exhibit C, and in App. Ex. 3 as Exhibit D. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
2009; and a letter from Applicant’s credit counseling services company,6 dated March 
12, 2009. The Government argued, inter alia, that consideration of any documents not 
included in Applicant’s appeal would be the same as re-opening the record to consider 
new evidence. The remaining objections are hearsay objections and objections to the 
weight of the evidence.  
 
After evaluating all of the Government’s objections, I admitted and considered all 
the documents submitted by Applicant in App. Ex. 2. The documents were admitted 
based on equity and fairness considerations,7 as well as in the interest of developing a 
full and complete record.8 The Government’s objections were considered when deciding 
what weight, if any, was to be awarded to the evidence in light of the record evidence as 
a whole.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.h, 1.j, 1.n, 
and 1.r. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k-m, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.s. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, including all the evidence submitted in App. Ex. 2, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old video teleconference coordinator working for a defense 
contractor.9 He graduated from high school in June 2000, and shortly thereafter he 
joined the U.S. Army. He served on active duty from August 2000 to June 2002, and 
achieved the rank of private first class. His service was characterized as General, under 
honorable conditions. While on active duty, Applicant had access to classified 
information at the secret level. There is no evidence that he ever compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
Applicant married his wife in January 2002. They separated in February 2007, 
and divorced in February 2009. He has a six-year-old child of this marriage.10 In 
October 2002, Applicant was charged with a felony offense (menacing with a knife). He 
pled guilty to harassment, and was sentenced to two years probation. After six months 
of good behavior, the probation was terminated.  
 
 
 
5 Included in App. Ex. 3 as Exhibit E. 
 
6 Included in App. Ex. 2 as Exhibit I, and in App. Ex. 3 as Exhibit F. 
 
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.10. 
 
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.19. 
 
9 Item 5 (2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this decision, unless stated otherwise. 
 
10 Applicant’s divorce and child is new information acquired from App. Ex. 2 (L) and App. Ex. 3 (E).  
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Applicant’s work history is summarized as follows (Item 5): From December 2002 
to June 2003, he was unemployed. He has been employed from July 2003 to the 
present. During this period, he worked for nine different employers, most of them for 
short periods of time. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, 
since June 2008. 
 
In his 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed having no debts 
over 180 days delinquent over the last seven years, and having no debts over 90 days 
delinquent when he submitted his security clearance application. He stated, however: 
“I’m currently going through a divorce and I’m waiting that to be completed before I 
know what exactly I have to pay back . . . I don’t have all the details of my past.” His 
background investigation included the review of his security clearance applications and 
two credit bureau reports (CBR) from July (Item 6), and November 2008 (Item 7).  
 
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent and/or charged off accounts totaling 
approximately $29,069, which are listed in the two credit reports. He admitted seven 
debts totaling approximately $10,379. After a review of the record evidence,11 I make 
the following findings about Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
a. All the alleged delinquent accounts are identified as Applicant’s individual 
accounts, except for SOR ¶ 1.f, in which he is identified as an authorized user;  
 
b. SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.m, and 1.o were deleted from Applicant’s CBR without any 
explanation;12  
 
c. SOR ¶ 1.i was identified as a fraudulent account and deleted (App. Ex. 2 (J));  
 
d. SOR ¶ 1.k concerns a check, apparently issued by Applicant that was returned 
for lack of sufficient funds; and 
 
e. All of the alleged debs are Applicant’s unresolved debts, and have been 
delinquent for a number of years, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i.  
 
Applicant failed to present evidence of any payments made towards any the 
alleged delinquent debts since he acquired them, or of any efforts to contact creditors or 
resolve his debts. Around March 2009, Applicant contracted the services of a credit 
counseling company (App. Ex 2 (I)). Through this service, he disputed and removed 
from his CBR some of his delinquent debts. Applicant receives credit for his recent effort 
to clean up his credit report.  
 
 
11 The review included, in part, the two CBRs offered by the Government’s (Items 6 and 7), Applicant’s 
CBR (dated February 2010, App. Ex 2 (H)), the Equifax credit file (dated December 2008, App. Ex. 2 (J)), 
and the TransUnion dispute results (dated December 2009, App. Ex. 2 (L)). 
 
12 See Equifax credit file (App. Ex. 2 (J)) and the TransUnion dispute results (App. Ex. 2 (L)). 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Applicant explained his financial problems started in December 2002, when he 
was administratively discharged from the U.S. Army because he was pending felony 
charges. In general, he attributed his financial problems to numerous factors: losing his 
military job; the payment of extensive legal fees for his criminal defense (from 
November 2002 until June 2003); his inability to obtain a job while pending a felony 
prosecution; the expenses associated with being involved in a bad marriage and the 
consequent divorce; his wife’s financial mismanagement; identity theft and fraud 
committed by his wife; and his inability to find a stable, well-paying job. 
 
Applicant claimed that after he found out about his financial problems, he took 
corrective action by placing a fraud alert on his CBR to prevent his wife from engaging 
in additional fraud against him;13 separating from his wife in February 2007, and 
divorcing her in February 2009; retaining the services of a credit counseling company to 
assist him disputing and removing fraudulent entries from his CBR;14 and engaging in 
efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. Except for disputing some of his debts, Applicant 
presented no evidence of debt payments, negotiations with creditors, or of any other 
efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant provided no explanation about the debts he admitted or denied. He 
failed to explain how he acquired the admitted debts or what he has done to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He also failed to identify which of the denied debts were incurred by 
his wife. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
13 Applicant’s February 2010 CBR indicates he asked to be considered as a fraud victim and that an 
extended alert to be placed on his CBR. The CBR does no indicate when he requested such actions. 
App. Ex. 2 (H). 
 
14 There is no evidence as to when Applicant retained the services of the credit counseling agency. Based 
on App. Ex 2 (I), I presumed it was sometime between January and March 2009. 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”15 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).16 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
15 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
16 “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, 
evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and 
decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within his or her means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate 
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all 
of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability 
to protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has accumulated 19 delinquent accounts totaling approximately 
$29,000, many of which have been outstanding for a number of years. He admitted 
seven debts totaling approximately $10,379. All the alleged delinquent accounts are 
identified as Applicant’s individual accounts, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i. SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.f, 1.m, and 1.o were deleted from Applicant’s CBR without any explanation.  
 
The CBRs establish the rebuttable inference that debts identified in Applicant’s 
CBR are his debs. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s evidence 
is insufficient to rebut this inference. I also find that all of the alleged debs (except for 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.i, 1.m, and 1.o) are Applicant’s unresolved debts, which have been 
delinquent for a number of years. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, 
and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any mitigating 
condition. Except for disputing the debts, he presented no evidence of efforts to pay, 
settle, or resolve his financial obligations. He also failed to present evidence of his 
current financial situation. His favorable information is not sufficient to support the 
conclusion that his financial problems are over, or under control, or that they occurred 
under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial situation continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s divorce constitutes some evidence of a circumstance beyond his 
control contributing to his inability to pay his debts.17 AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but only 
partially. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He presented no evidence of efforts to contact creditors or to resolve 
his debts by entering into settlement agreements or payment plans with any creditors. 
Other than the above-mentioned period of unemployment, he has been consistently 
employed since July 2003. He presented no evidence of efforts to resolve any of his 
admitted delinquent debts from 2003 to the day he received the FORM. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
 
17 I do not consider Applicant’s losing his military job, his inability to secure employment, and the payment 
of legal fees because of his criminal misconduct as “circumstances beyond Applicant’s control.”  
 
9 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his two 
years of service on active duty in the U.S. Army. He has been successful working for a 
defense contractor since June 2008. There is no evidence of any security violation or 
that he ever compromised classified information. These factors show some 
responsibility and mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. His favorable evidence fails to convince me of 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e, 1.g,    Against Applicant 
    1.h, and 1.j – 1.s: 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.f, 1.i,    For Applicant 
    1.m, and 1.o: 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
