 
 
 
 
1
                                                             
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-11250 
  ) 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
  HISTORY OF CASE 
 
On October 17, 2006, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP #1).1 On June 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
                                            
 1 On May 21, 2007, Applicant completed another e-QIP (e-QIP #2). On December 30, 2008, she 
completed a Standard Form 86 Security Clearance Application (SF 86).  
 
 
 
 
 
2
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 23, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to another 
administrative judge on October 6, 2009, and re-assigned it to me on October 13, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 10, 2009. The hearing convened as 
scheduled on January 7, 2010.2 Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 6 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through F into the record without objection. The record remained open 
until January 22, 2010, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit any additional relevant 
information. Applicant did not submit additional evidence and the record closed as 
previously ordered.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 19, 
2010. 
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Lebanon. (Tr.11; 25.) The request and the attached documents are included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 with attachments I through XX. Applicant did not object 
to consideration of those exhibits. (Tr. 11; 25.) Hence, the facts administratively noticed 
are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable 
dispute. The facts administratively noticed (incorporated from those documents) are set 
out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1. a, 1.b, and 
2.a through 2.g. She denied the allegations contained in ¶ 2.h. Her admissions are 
included herein as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and divorced. She was born in Lebanon and earned a 
bachelor’s degree from a university there in July 1991. After graduation, she worked for 
an international not-for-profit for two years. (Tr. 28.) In 1993, she reconnected with an 
American man she previously met in Lebanon. They became engaged and she came to 
the United States in August 1993 on a fiancée visa. They married in September 1993 
and divorced in March 1998.  (GE1.) They have a 13-year-old daughter, who was born 
in the United States. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 1998. (GE 
2.) She relinquished her Lebanese passport in 1998 and uses her U.S. passport for 
travel. (Tr. 32.) 
                                            
2The scheduling of this hearing was delayed for a period of time due to Applicant’s illness. 
 
 
 
 
3
 From January 1996 until May 1997, Applicant worked as a teaching assistant for 
a professor at a U.S. university. Subsequently, she worked in private industry in the field 
of information technology until August 2004, when she decided to return to Lebanon to 
live and raise her daughter with the help of her family. (Tr. 46.) While there, she worked 
in her oldest brother’s business. (Tr. 66.) In July 2006, she left Lebanon and returned to 
the United States with her daughter because of the conflict between Lebanon and 
Israel. Her mother’s home was almost destroyed in that war. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born in Lebanon.  Her father is deceased. He 
was a member of the legislature. (GE 2; Tr. 51.) Her mother is a dual citizen of Lebanon 
and the United States. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2009. She 
primarily resides in Lebanon, but spends time with Applicant in the United States. (Tr. 
51.) She intends to immigrate here with Applicant’s younger, disabled brother. (Tr. 70.)  
 
 Applicant is one of seven children, all born in Lebanon. Her six siblings are 
citizens of, and reside in, Lebanon. Her oldest brother owns a business. He obtained an 
advanced degree from a U.S. university. He started an institute in Lebanon in 2004. 
Applicant and her oldest brother communicate frequently. He visits her in the United 
States. (GE 6 at 3, 5; Tr. 59-60.) Applicant made a one-time donation of $100 to the 
institute November 2007. She did not make regular contributions. (GE 6 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant’s second oldest brother is employed by a Lebanese university. They 
have some contact. (GE 6 at 7.) The third oldest brother is a self-employed civil 
engineer. This brother visited her in the United States in December 2007 while she was 
ill. (GE 6 at 7.) The fourth oldest brother is 42 years old and unemployed. He lives with 
Applicant’s mother in Lebanon. (Tr. 58.) Applicant has frequent contact with him. (GE 6 
at 7.) Applicant’s oldest sister is a housewife with four children. Her brother-in-law is 
deceased. She speaks to this sister every couple months. (Tr. 58; GE 6 at 9.) The 
youngest sister is a homemaker and works for her brother’. She has some contact with 
her. (Tr. 59; GE 6 at 9.) Applicant also has two close friends that live in Lebanon, both 
of whom she regularly contacts. (Tr. 63, 66, 81.)  
 
 The weight of the evidence supports a finding that the incident involving 
Applicant being involuntarily contacted by a person suspected of terrorist affiliation did 
occur, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.h.3 (Tr. 50; GE 3 at 3.) 
 
 Three months after returning to the United States from her two-year stay in 
Lebanon, Applicant applied for a linguist position with a defense contractor. In October 
2006, she was hired to work with the U.S. Army. In that capacity, she worked in Iraq for 
two periods of time: from January 2007 to October 2007, and January 2009 to July 
2009.  In October 2007, she was diagnosed with cancer and returned to the United 
States for treatment. She completed medical therapy in May 2008. She remained in the 
United States until January 2009, when she resumed her work in Iraq. (Tr. 41.) In July 
                                            
3The details surrounding this incident that are contained in the record were not recited in the 
decision in order to protect Applicant’s privacy interests. 
 
 
 
 
4
2009, she returned to the United States after receiving the SOR. (Tr. 42.) Currently, she 
is on medical leave due to the possible recurrence of cancer.  (Tr. 79.)  
 
 Since arriving in the United States in 1993, Applicant has traveled to Lebanon 
twice a year to see her family, except during the time she was working in Iraq. (Tr. 45.) 
She enters Lebanon on her U.S. passport and uses a Lebanese Identification Card (ID), 
issued in 2002, as a visa, making travel in and out of the country easier.4 (GE 6 at 7.) 
The last time she used the ID card was in October 2009. She is willing to relinquish the 
ID card, if necessary. (Tr. 34; 67.)  She intends to continue visiting Lebanon in the 
future, but not while she works in Iraq. (Tr. 69.) She always registers with the American 
embassy in Lebanon before traveling there. (Tr. 54.) 
 
 In 2009, Applicant traveled to Lebanon twice. She and her daughter went in July 
and stayed until September 2009. She returned in October and came home in 
December 2009. She stayed with her mother both times, while she was recovering from 
cancer treatment. (Tr. 53.) During one of these visits, the State Department issued a 
travel warning for Americans in Lebanon, unbeknownst to her. (Tr. 56.) She would 
consider any similar warnings in the future before returning. (Tr. 57.) She acknowledged 
that there are dangerous areas in Lebanon that she does not visit because of the 
presence of terrorists. (Tr. 65.)  
 
 None of Applicant’s family members work for the Lebanese government. None of 
them belong to terrorist organizations or has been approached by terrorists. (Tr. 69.) All 
of them support U.S. policies and goals. (GE 6 at 12.) Her family knows that she works 
for the U.S. Government, but does not know that she works in Iraq. (Tr. 67; 84.) Such 
knowledge could jeopardize their safety in Lebanon because her family resides in a 
terrorist stronghold. (GE 6 at 12.)  
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States. She does not own property in 
Lebanon. (Tr. 67.) She does not have any foreign investments. (Tr. 68.) She does not 
provide financial assistance to her family in Lebanon. (Tr. 68.) She donated $50 to her 
university alma mater one time more than 15 years ago, but not annually as alleged in 
the SOR. (Tr. 32; GE 7.) 
  
 Applicant speaks French, Arabic, and English. (Tr. 39.) She uses those language 
and computer skills in her linguist position. (Tr. 43.) She held an Interim Secret 
clearance until it was revoked pending this proceeding. (Tr. 79) There is no evidence 
that she has been disciplined for violating security rules or procedures.  
 
 Applicant submitted five letters of recommendation from her supervisors and 
colleagues, who have known her over the past three years. All of them provided 
extremely and exclusively positive comments concerning her professionalism, integrity, 
and performance. Her direct supervisor most strongly recommended her for positions of 
                                            
4 Lebanon requires passports and visas to enter and exit the country. American citizens traveling 
there for tourism are able to purchase a short-term visa at the country’s border. (HE II.)   
 
 
 
 
5
responsibility, trust, and importance. (AE A, B.) Three other linguist colleagues attest to 
her exceptional skills and work ethic. (AE D, E, F.) 
  
 Throughout the hearing, Applicant credibly asserted her pride of U.S. citizenship 
and loyalty to the United States.  She has no allegiance to Lebanon. (Tr. 82.) Her 
command is aware of her Lebanese family and that she emails them while working in 
Iraq. (Tr. 84.) 
 
Lebanon 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy in which people have the constitutional 
right to change their government. It has a unicameral legislature, and a president 
elected by the legislature.  Its major elected officials have been allocated among the 
various religious and ethnic groups for many years, according to the Constitution and a 
long-ago negotiated agreement among all the parties. Lebanon is located at the eastern 
end of the Mediterranean Sea in the Middle East area. It operated under a French 
mandate between World War I and II.  It was peaceful until a civil war erupted in 1975 
between various religious factions. Due to this civil war the full exercise of political rights 
was precluded from 1975 until 1991. Lebanon has a free-market economy and a strong 
laissez-faire commercial tradition. Historically, the Lebanese have been traders 
throughout the Mediterranean. The economy is service-oriented. The U.S. enjoys a 
strong export position with Lebanon and is its fifth largest source of imported goods. 
More than 160 offices representing U.S. businesses operate in Lebanon. Since the 
lifting of passport restrictions in 1997, a number of large U.S. companies have opened 
branch or regional offices in Lebanon.  
 
The foreign policy of Lebanon reflects its geographic location, the composition of 
its population, and its reliance on commerce and trade. Its foreign policy is heavily 
influenced by neighboring Syria, which has also long influenced Lebanon’s internal 
policies. For over 10 years, Syrian troops occupied part of Lebanon, and controlled its 
internal politics and policies.  About three years ago, Syria was forced to withdraw its 
troops because of Lebanese opposition expressed in a popular uprising against the 
Syrian presence. Syria maintains some influence in Lebanon. The U.S. State 
Department has declared Syria to be a supporter of terrorism. Lebanon, like most Arab 
states, does not recognize Israel, with which it has been technically at war since Israel’s 
establishment. Lebanon has had some human rights problems, including the arbitrary 
arrest and detainment of individuals and instances of arbitrary and unlawful deprivation 
of life, torture, and other abuses. 
 
The terrorist group Hezbollah is a Lebanese-based radical Shi’a group and is 
designated by the U.S. as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” It is allied to and 
supported by the Iranian Government. The Lebanese government recognizes Hezbollah 
as a “legitimate resistance group and political party,” and until recently it was 
represented by elected officials in the Lebanese parliament. Hezbollah also provides 
support to several Palestinian terrorist organizations and is known to be involved in 
 
 
 
 
6
numerous anti-U.S. and anti-Israeli terrorist attacks. Americans have been the targets of 
numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon.  
 
 The United States seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon and 
to help preserve its independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. 
The U.S. provides more than $400 million in aid to Lebanon and pledged $1 billion in 
additional aid. The aid reflects the importance the U.S. attaches to Lebanon’s 
development as a unified, independent, and sovereign country. 
 
 U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that 
impose special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. Presently there is a travel 
warning for U.S. citizens traveling to Lebanon due to the threat against westerners. 
 
POLICIES 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
 
 
 
7
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
ANALYSIS 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business 
interests in another country; 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
 
 
 
8
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and, 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
Applicant’s actions in obtaining and maintaining a valid Lebanese ID card raise 
security concerns under ¶ 10(a) and ¶ 10(b).  She was born a Lebanese citizen, but 
became a U.S. citizen in 1998. Obtaining a Lebanese ID card in 2002 and maintaining it 
for the past seven years is an action to acquire recognition of her continuing Lebanese 
citizenship by the Lebanese government and an exercise of a foreign right after 
receiving U.S. citizenship.  
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority;  
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
Applicant clearly asserted that she would willingly renounce or surrender her 
Lebanese ID card. AG ¶ 11(b) applies. 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the government’s concern about foreign 
influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
 
 
 
9
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 5  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Since 1993, Applicant has had frequent personal and telephonic contact with her 
mother and six siblings, who are residents and citizens of Lebanon. Although Lebanon 
has had a close relationship with the United States for many years, it also continues to 
have human rights issues and has been victimized by terrorist organizations and 
attacks. Applicant’s family resides in an area that is controlled by a terrorist 
organization. These facts create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion, and a potential conflict of interest between her 
obligation to protect sensitive information and desire to help her native country and 
family members there.  Legitimate security concerns are raised under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b). 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Those with 
potential application to the disqualifying conditions are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
                                            
5 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
10
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
None of Applicant’s family members work for the Lebanese Government. In their 
employment positions, it is improbable that any of them would have any interest in 
acquiring protected information. However, their physical presence in a terrorist-
controlled section of Lebanon creates a substantial potential that their interests could be 
threatened to the point that Applicant would confront a choice between her family’s 
interests and those of the United States, particularly if her employment became known 
to the terrorists. Based on that fact, and Applicant’s strong familial relationships and 
frequent visits, Applicant could foreseeably be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of her family and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
have application.  
 
Applicant produced evidence warranting a partial application of AG ¶ 8(b).  She 
acknowledged her loyalty and allegiance to the United States and could be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. She moved to the United 
States in 1993 and became a naturalized citizen in 1998. She has held various jobs 
over the years. Her daughter is a U.S. citizen and resident.  Her mother is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen, periodically residing in the United States. Applicant owns a home in the 
United States. She receives medical care in the United States, which is important, given 
her recent medical issues. For two years she performed with excellence as a translator 
for the U.S. Army.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply because Applicant has consistently visited and 
communicated with her mother and siblings since 1993, such that her communication 
and contacts cannot be construed to be casual or infrequent, as required under this 
condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
11
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
 Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, 
there is a significant risk of terrorism and various human rights abuses in Lebanon, 
despite its ally status with the United States. More importantly for security purposes, 
Applicant’s family lives in an area controlled by terrorists, who are hostile to the United 
States and may seek classified information. Such terrorists could attempt to use 
Applicant’s siblings or mother to obtain classified information if they became aware of 
her employment with the U.S. Army. Second, she personally encountered the presence 
of suspected terrorists. Third, she had numerous connections to Lebanon before leaving 
it in 1993. Following her birth, she spent her formative years there, along with her 
family. She graduated from a university located there. Fourth, her siblings and mother 
are residents and citizens of Lebanon. Fifth, she has frequent contact with her family 
and two close friends there, including yearly visits and a previous extended stay from 
2004 to 2006. She, understandably, relies on them for support during her unfortunate 
medical problems.   
 
Some mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. First, she is a mature person, who came to the United States in 1993 to start 
a family. She has been a naturalized citizen for almost twelve years. She has worked for 
a university and private companies while in the United States.  Second, her daughter 
was born in the United States and resides here. Her mother is a recently naturalized 
U.S. citizen. Third, she has a strong sense of patriotism toward the United States and 
decided to support the United States in its efforts in Iraq. Her co-workers praise her as 
loyal and honest, and consider her work important. Those are commendable and 
noteworthy accomplishments in her life. However, in balancing both sets of factors, her 
ties and connections to Lebanon remain strong and deep. Her decision to frequently 
return to Lebanon, despite valid concerns for the safety of her family given her 
employment in Iraq, heightens the potential for risk and causes further security concern.    
 
 
 
 
 
12
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference, but not those arising under foreign 
influence and the whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.h:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
