 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-11159
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
On August 12, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew a security clearance required for his work as
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant two sets of interrogatories  to obtain clarification of and/or additional1
information about potentially disqualifying information in his background. After reviewing
the results of the background investigation, as well as Applicant’s responses to the
interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised adjudicative guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the revised adjudicative guidelines take precedence over the guidelines listed
in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow him access to2
classified information. On May 13, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if established, raise security concerns addressed
in the revised adjudicative guidelines  under Guideline F (financial considerations).3
On June 10, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 21, 2009, and I convened a hearing on
November 19, 2009. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented
four exhibits, which were admitted without objection as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4,
and the Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record remained open after the
hearing to give Applicant time to provide additional relevant information; however,
nothing further was submitted. The record closed on December 4, 2009, and DOHA
received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) the same day.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged under Guideline F that Applicant owes approximately
$40,815 for seven delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.g) that, as of April 24, 2009,
remained unpaid. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted with explanation the
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, but denied with explanation the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.g.
In addition to the facts established through the pleadings, I have made the following
findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 58 years old, and has worked for the same defense contractor since
June 1998. Applicant has been married three times. He and his first wife divorced in
March 1971 after only three months of marriage. His second marriage began in May
1973, produced three children (one is deceased and the other two are in their 30s), and
ended in May 1982 through divorce. Applicant and his current wife have been married
since March 2008. Applicant is a Vietnam veteran who served in the Navy from 1970 -
1974, and he has held an industrial security clearance without incident for at least 11
years. (Gx. 1; Tr. 53 - 54)
Between 1999 and 2006, Applicant lived with a woman who, without his
knowledge or permission, ran up the balances on his credit cards and forged his name
on checks for cash. He would have lost his house and car had he not been making
those payments automatically from his checking account. He was unaware of her
conduct until sometime in 2003, when his pay was garnished to satisfy a delinquent
debt. Thereafter, he was also arrested and charged with uttering checks with insufficient
funds. The charges were dismissed after he convinced the court that his girlfriend had
forged the checks. Until then, because he worked long days at both his contractor job
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
and extra jobs on the side (Tr. 28, 55), Applicant relied on his girlfriend to take care of
their finances. After he learned of her actions, he took possession of his credit cards
and hid them. After a long period of inactivity, however, the cards were reissued and his
girlfriend was again able to intercept them and continue her spending at his expense.
Applicant tried to evict his girlfriend in 2003, but she attempted suicide in response to
gain emotional leverage. He was eventually able to get her to leave in 2006. (Answer to
SOR; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 36 - 37)
Applicant testified that his ex-girlfriend is currently in jail for having shot someone
over money. (Tr. 58) He also averred that she has a history of financial crimes. This
claim is supported by the information he submitted in response to DOHA interrogatories.
(Gx. 2) 
Applicant has repaid all but two of the debts listed in the SOR, and he has been
working since 2006 to resolve the debts his girlfriend caused. (Gx. 2; Tr. 41 - 52) There
were several other debts he satisfied after his girlfriend left that were not examined
during his background investigation. (Tr. 56) Applicant disputes the actual amounts
owed on the two unpaid debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e). As to SOR ¶ 1.d, Applicant
averred that the debt is actually $12,000, which he is willing to pay, but that it is being
reported as $32,000 because of fees and interest charged by collection agencies. He
was trying to work with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.e, but has not heard anything from that
creditor for several years. At one point he sent them $700, but the creditor began taking
money from his bank account without his permission. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 27 - 29)
Applicant’s current finances are sound, as reflected in a personal financial
statement he submitted in January 2009. (Gx. 2) A review of the statement at hearing
showed that little has changed and that he has about $1,200 remaining each month
after expenses. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c arose when he was injured on the job in
2007, and was a combination of a shortfall in his medical insurance coverage and his
reduced income while he was on short-term disability. He is currently awaiting word on
a request to be placed on long-term disability due to recurring back and lung problems.
However, his house is paid for and he has incurred no new debts that he cannot pay.
He has no excessive credit card debt and he has never missed a car payment. (Tr. 61 -
66)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18, Guideline F (financial considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary6
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶ 1.a - 1.g; that is, that Applicant owed $40,815 for seven delinquent debts.
Available information, including his response to interrogatories and his response to the
SOR, showed that, despite having resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - c, 1.f and 1.g, he
still owed about $38,000 for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. Accordingly, the
record supports those allegations and requires application of the disqualifying conditions
listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). 
By contrast, available information, which was supplied largely through Gx. 2,
shows that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his ex-girlfriend. Applicant
also established that he has been working since 2006 to pay or resolve all of the debts
attributable to him by the government’s information, whether he incurred them or not.
The record supports his claims that his ex-girlfriend had a history of relieving others of
their money through deception. Finally, Applicant established that his finances are
sound, that he is meeting his current obligations, and that he is not likely to resort to
illegal means to resolve his remaining debts. Thus, available information supports
consideration of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20 (a) (the behavior happened so long
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances); and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). On balance, I
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a mature,
responsible 57-year-old defense contractor with a history of stability in the workplace as
a long-term employee. His current financial health is sound despite the adverse
information in the record, and he has held a clearance without incident since 1998.
While he acknowledges that his decision making in response to his girlfriend’s conduct
was not initially sound, in the past three years he has accepted responsibility for the
debts attributable to him even though they arose largely through the malfeasance of
another. The circumstances that caused his financial problems are not likely to recur
and, because Applicant has acted to resolve his debts, do not pose an unacceptable
 See footnote 5, supra.8
6
risk relative to his access to classified information. A fair, commonsense  evaluation of8
this record shows that Applicant has satisfactorily addressed the doubts raised by the
government’s information about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s
interests as his own.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                            
                                               
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
