                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-12148
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 31, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
on July 23. 2008.  (Government Exhibit 4).  On August 31, 2009, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued
after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on September 10, 2009, in which
he elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on October 7, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on October 22, 2009, and he submitted no reply within the 30 days allowed.  The
case was assigned to the undersigned for resolution on January 11, 2010.  Based upon
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of
certain facts concerning the current political conditions in the Peoples Republic of China
(PRC).  Applicant made no objection.  The request and the attached documents were
not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.  The facts administratively
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, and
the exhibits.  The Applicant is 46 years of age.  He seeks a security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant admits to each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
The Applicant was born in the PRC in 1963.  He emigrated to the United States and
immediately applied for citizenship.  He became a naturalized United States citizen in
April 2008.  His father, mother, two brothers, sister and mother-in-law are citizens and
residents of the PRC.  (Government Exhibits 3,4 and 5).  The Applicant maintains
contact with his parents via telephone several times a month.  (Government Exhibit 5).
At least one of the Applicant’s brothers and a sister work for the county-level
government entities in the PRC.  Applicant states that he has never told anyone in the
PRC about his job duties in the United States.  He further states that his parents,
brothers and sister do no know which company he works for.     
The Applicant has traveled to the PRC in 2002, 2006, 2007 and 2008.  During his
trips to the PRC, in addition to visiting his family he had dinner with former classmates
and neighbors that he has maintained contact with who are citizens and residents of the
PRC.  He states that when he travels to the PRC in the future, he will not meet with his
former classmates and neighbors anymore.  Applicant has surrendered his foreign
passport to his company security officer who has destroyed it.  (Government Exhibit 6).
Applicant is married to a woman of Chinese heritage who has also become a
naturalized United States citizen.  They have a native born American child.  The
Applicant enjoys the freedoms and opportunities afforded him in the United States and
appreciates being a citizen of this country.    
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the country of China. 
China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a billion
people and an economy growing at about 10% per year.  China is an authoritarian
government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party.  In its 2007 annual report to
Congress, the United Sates-China Economic and Security Review Commission noted
the following about China’s intelligence gathering:
3
In some cases, access to restricted technology is obtained by China through
industrial espionage; China operates an aggressive clandestine effort to acquire
additional technologies.
In recent years, this has become such a problem in the United
States that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials have
rated China’s espionage and industrial theft activities as the leading threat
to the security of U. S. technology.
Moreover, the FBI stepped up counter-intelligence efforts against
Chinese Intelligence operations in the United States in July 2007, because
of what FBI Director Robert Muller called a “substantial concern” about
those operations.  As Chinese espionage against the U.S. military and
American business continues to outpace the overwhelmed U.S.
counterintelligence community, critical American secrets and proprietary
technologies are being transferred to the People’s Liberation Army and
Chinese state-owned companies.  
The report also concludes that “Chinese espionage activities in the United States
are so extensive that they comprise the single greatest risk to the security of United
States technologies.”
The National Counterintelligence Executive has made similar findings, including
the fact that China continues to target United States military technologies.  Specifically,
in its 2007 annual report to Congress, the National Counterintelligence Executive
included the following passage in its findings:
Businessmen, scientists engineers, and academics as well as
state-run security services from a large number of countries continue to
target US information and technology, according to information compiled
during the FY 2007 reporting period.  The bulk of the collection activity,
however, comes from citizens of a core group of fewer than 10 countries,
which include China. 
According to the Department of Defenses’s Annual Report to Congress: Military
Power of the People’s Republic of China 2009: (1) China uses “state-sponsored
industrial espionage to increase the level of technologies available to support military
research, development, and acquisition”, (2) “China continues a systematic effort to
obtain dual-use and military technologies from abroad through legal and illegal
commercial transactions”, (3) China seeks to “obtain sensitive U.S. technologies (e.g.
missile, imaging, semiconductor and submarine) illegally by targeting well-placed
scientists and businessmen”, and (4) China poses a “threat to national security due to
China’s sustained efforts to obtain U.S. technology illegally.” 
Furthermore, according to the State Department, China has a poor record with
respect to human rights, which includes: arbitrary or unlawful killings by security forces,
physical abuse and torture of prisoners, arbitrary arrest and detention, denial of fair
public trials, searches of premises without warrants, monitoring of communications
(including telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging,
4
and internet communications) and opening domestic and international mail, failure to
respect freedom of speech and press, failure to respect academic and artistic freedom,
severe restrictions on peaceful assembly and associations, restrictions on freedom of
association, restriction on the freedom of religion, and citizens lack the right to change
their government peaceably, or change the laws and officials that govern them. 
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7. (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct;
5
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which the participation is voluntary;
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, that demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
6
An individual who demonstrates a foreign influence and has foreign connections
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate
questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the
United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must be able to
place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security
rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
The evidence shows that the Applicant has close and continuing foreign family
ties in the PRC.  The Applicant’s father, mother, brothers, sister, and mother-in-law are
citizens and residents of the PRC.  She communicates with her parents in the PRC
several times a month by telephone.  A brother and a sister are employed for the county
government in the PRC.  The risk of this strong foreign family tie is heightened by the
fact that the Applicant’s siblings have connections to the Chinese government by virtue
of their employment.  Furthermore, Applicant’s recent frequent travel to the PRC, and
future travel to the PRC, places her in a vulnerable position and subject to coercion,
exploitation and/or pressure by the Chinese government.  It is also noted that the
current political situation in the PRC elevates the cause for concern in this case. China
is the most active collector of sensitive and protected United States information and
technology.  In this case, the possibilities are great that the Applicant may at some point
be placed in a position to be forced to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group organization, or government and the interests of the United States.       
 
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the Mitigating Conditions apply.  In this case, Applicant’s relationships and regular
contact with her immediate family in the PRC, and her former classmates and
neighbors, and the fact that her two siblings are employed for the county government in
the PRC, creates a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
Furthermore, there is no evidence in support of mitigation under the whole
person analysis.  The Applicant has submitted no favorable recommendations or
sufficient documentation to support security clearance eligibility.  I have considered the
“whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth
under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person assessment of
poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack a candor, and an unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard classified information.
7
  The evidence shows that the Applicant has a strong bond and affection with his
foreign parents, siblings, former classmates and neighbors in the PRC, and that could
potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, there is a possibility of foreign influence
that exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise of
classified information.  Thus, I find that the Applicant is vulnerable to foreign influence.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, she has failed to meet his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline
B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.c.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.e.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.f.: Against the Applicant
Subpara. 1.g.: Against the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
