                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02546 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 10, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 7, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on January 27, 2010. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
offered Exhibits (AE) A through C. Department Counsel did not object and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 4, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He retired from the Air Force as a technical sergeant 
(E-6) in 2005, after 20 years of service. He married in 1980 and divorced in 1989. He 
has one child from the marriage, who is 28 years old. He married again in 1990 and 
divorced in 2005. He has two children from the marriage who are 21 and 13 years old. 
He married again in 2005 and has been separated from his wife since January 2008. 
His wife has two children from a previous marriage. He intends to file for a divorce. He 
has worked as an inspector for a federal contractor since September 2005.1  
 
In 1992, Applicant had approximately $20,000 discharged in bankruptcy. He 
admitted he lived beyond his means and bought things he could not afford. In 1995, he 
attended debt counseling and set up a budget. He has not had any additional or more 
recent financial counseling. Applicant has accrued more than $67,000 of delinquent 
debt, listed in the SOR. He admitted he was negligent and did not take care of his 
finances and again was living beyond his means.2 
 
Applicant explained that when he and his third wife separated, they agreed to 
split some debts. When he and his second wife divorced, he stated the divorce decree 
ordered her to assume responsibility for some of the joint debts. The debts she was to 
assume are in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($4,293) and 1.g. ($618). He stated his ex-wife agreed to 
make the payments on the debts, but she has not. He did not provide a copy of the 
divorce decree or other proof to show she was responsible for these debts. The debts 
remain unresolved. He attributes the beginning of his financial problem to his divorce 
from his second wife.3  
 
Applicant stated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($26,487) was for a new car that was 
purchased in 2005, and was repossessed about four months later because he and his 
third wife were unable to make the payments. He contacted the creditor and agreed to a 
settlement to pay his half of the debt. He agreed he would pay $4,700 to settle his 
portion of the debt. Applicant did not provide documented proof of the settlement 
1 Tr. 20-26. 
 
2 Tr. 74-78. 
 
3 Tr. 19, 54-56, 61-62. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
agreement. He does not have the money at this point to pay the debt, but is hoping to 
work out a monthly payment plan.4  
 
Applicant pays child support for his minor daughter. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h 
($6,840) is for child support arrearages. He stated he was unaware of the court order for 
a period of time. He has his child support payments and his payments toward arrearage 
deducted from his pay. He stated he presently owes $2,259 in arrears.5 
 
Applicant admitted he owes the remaining debts in the SOR. He has not 
contacted any of the creditors and has not made payments on any of the delinquent 
debts alleged. In his answer to the SOR he stated he would pay certain alleged debts 
prior to his hearing. At his hearing, he stated he did not make the promised payments 
because he did not have the money to do so. He is no longer paying his wife $1,000 for 
support and estimated he would have approximately $500 remaining each month to pay 
his delinquent debts. He plans to pay some of the small debts first before paying the 
larger debts.6  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($384) is for an amount owed for a lease that Applicant 
broke. It is unpaid.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($2,574) is to a jewelry store for a ring Applicant bought in 
2005. He has not paid the debt.8 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($25) and 1.e ($40) are medical debts that are not 
paid.9  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($489) is a credit card debt that is unpaid.10  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i (HSBC $690) and 1.j ($2,274) were for cash advances 
Applicant received from a tax service for his anticipated income tax refunds for 2006 
and 2007. Applicant’s tax refunds were garnished and applied to his child support 
arrearages. He did not return the money he received from the tax service.11  
 
4 Tr. 67-71. 
5 Tr. 42-46, 62-64. 
 
6 Tr. 52-53. 
 
7 Tr. 56-58. 
 
8 Tr. 58-59. 
 
9 Tr. 60-61. 
 
10 Tr. 61. 
 
11 Tr. 64-65. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($61) is for a telephone bill owed from approximately 2000 
or 2001. It is not paid.12 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($842) is for a car loan that Applicant’s estranged wife was 
supposed to pay when she sold the car. She did not. Applicant has not resolved the 
debt.13  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($10,808) is for a repossessed vehicle that was 
purchased in 2007. Applicant returned it after four months, but has not resolved the 
debt.14  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($10,708) is a credit card debt Applicant has owed since 
2003. It is not paid.15  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.p ($3,001) is a credit card debt that is not paid.16 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($68) is a medical debt that is not paid.17  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.r ($1,159) and 1.s ($818) are for cash advances Applicant 
received in 2005. He has not paid the debts.18  
 
Applicant has two current car loans totaling approximately $13,000 on which he 
makes regular payments.19  
 
Applicant stated he now has a budget. He no longer has any credit cards. He no 
longer is providing support payments to his wife, so he estimates he will have an 
additional $500 at the end of the month to use to pay delinquent debts. He also has to 
expend approximately $2,600 to fix his car. He has approximately $5 in his checking 
account and $140 in his savings account. He will try to borrow some money from his 
family to help him pay his delinquent debts. He has not contacted most of his creditors. 
He will to begin paying his smaller debts first and then his larger ones.20 
12 TR. 65-66. 
 
13 Tr. 66. 
 
14 Tr. 66-68. 
 
15 Tr. 71-72. 
 
16 Tr. 73. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Tr. 73-74. 
 
19 Tr. 48-49, 79. 
 
20 Tr. 31, 49-54. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant provided three character letters that were considered.21 His supervisor 
and two coworkers provided the following comments about him: 
 
• He is a reliable and valuable employee. 
• He is respected by the members of his team. 
• He is a fast learner and has problem solving abilities. 
• There is nothing detrimental in his character on or off the job.  
• He is professional and loyal. 
• He has a high degree of integrity, responsibility and ambition. 
• He is a leader. 
• He has a wealth of experience and is often the last one to leave the workspace. 
• He has a strong work ethic. 
• He is frugal and forthright. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
21 AE A, B, C. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
Applicant owes more than $67,000 for delinquent debts that remain unresolved 
and unpaid. He is unable and unwilling to pay the debts. He admitted living beyond his 
means by buying things he did not need or have the money to pay for. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered the following under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because the debts remain delinquent and he has 
not made arrangements to resolve them. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
Applicant attributes some of his delinquent debt to his ex-wife. However, he failed to 
provide proof that she is solely responsible for the debts. He had debts discharged in 
bankruptcy in 1992. He has accumulated additional delinquent debts since being 
married to his third wife. He has not provided sufficient evidence to show his financial 
circumstances were beyond his control or that he acted responsibly. Therefore, I find 
mitigating condition (b) does not apply. Applicant received some financial counseling in 
1995, but has not sought any recently. He has not taken any action to resolve his 
delinquent debts, although he stated he intends to do so. There are not clear indications 
the problem is being resolved and he has not made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts. I find the financial counseling is dated because it was prior to Applicant’s latest 
financial problems and did not have the expected result. Applicant does not have a 
formulated plan on how he will resolve his delinquent debts. I find mitigating conditions 
(c) and (d) do not apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his country in the 
military for 20 years and was honorably discharged. He had financial problems in 1992 
and had his delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy. He continued to have financial 
problems, as he admitted, because he lived beyond his means. He attributes some of 
the debts to his ex-wife, but failed to provide proof that she is responsible for paying 
specific debts. He has not provided a plan on how he will resolve his delinquent debts. 
He has not made payments on any of the debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.t:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
