 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01972
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On October 25, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
interrogatories to Applicant to obtain clarification of and/or additional information about
adverse information in his background.  Based on the results of the background1
investigation, including Applicant’s response to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised adjudicative guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, these guidelines take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2
to the Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in4
support of the government’s case.
2
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with2
the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On
September 30, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F (financial considerations).3
On November 3, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a
decision without a hearing. On November 19, 2009, Department Counsel prepared a
File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision.4
Applicant received the FORM on November 30, 2009, and was given 30 days to file a
response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit a response before the deadline, and
the case was assigned to me on March 5, 2010.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged that Applicant has not filed his federal income tax
returns for the tax years from 2003 through 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he did not file his
state income tax returns for the same period (SOR ¶ 1.b); and that he owes a $4,681
delinquent debt that was unpaid as of the SOR (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant admitted without
explanation all three allegations. (FORM, Item 3) In addition to the facts entered in the
record through Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of relevant fact.
In response to e-QIP question 28.a, Applicant disclosed that he has not filed his
federal or state tax returns since 2003. (FORM Item 4) He indicated in the e-QIP and in
his interview with a government investigator on May 5, 2008 (FORM, Item 6), that his
failure to file has been due to procrastination, but he believes he does not actually owe
any taxes. There is no information in the record, such as credit reports or tax authority
records attributing to Applicant any debt for unpaid taxes. In May 2008, Applicant stated
he intends to file his past-due returns soon. However, as of May 2009, he had not yet
done so. (FORM, Item 5)
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant disclosed that he also owes the
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Neither party submitted any other information about this
debt. As of December 30, 2009, the deadline for Applicant’s response to the FORM,
Applicant had not submitted information showing this debt was paid.
Applicant is 58 years old and has worked as a senior electrical engineer for a
large defense contractor since November 1988. He served on active duty in the U.S.
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
3
Army between December 1971 and November 1974. Thereafter, he served in the Army
Reserve until December 1977. He and his current wife have been married since
September 2005. He was previously married from September 1978 until he and his first
wife divorced in October 1987. (Form Item 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concern and adjudicative factors under AG ¶ 18
(Guideline F - financial considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
 The summary of Applicant’s May 5, 2008, subject interview reflected that he had not filed returns in 20029
either.
4
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the national interest.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The available information supports the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c. Further,
Applicant admitted that he did not file federal or state income tax returns between 20039
and 2007. He also owes a debt of $4,681, which has been delinquent since May 2009.
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the
same).
By contrast, the record contains no information that would mitigate or extenuate
the adverse security implications of the government’s information. As of December 30,
2009, Applicant had not presented any information showing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was
paid, or that he had filed his past-due tax returns as he said he would when he was
interviewed for his clearance in May 2008. Applicant’s claim that he may not actually
owe taxes for the years at issue does not negate the security concerns raised by his
unwillingness to comply with his annual filing requirement. Accordingly, none of the
mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20 apply, and the security concerns about
Applicant’s finances remain unchanged.
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant, a 58-year-old defense
contractor, is presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He has been steadily
employed by the same company since 1988. Without additional information about his
 See footnote 5, supra.10
 See footnote 8, supra. 11
5
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, positive inferences to be drawn from his age
and his stable employment history are not enough to overcome the security concerns
about a recent delinquent debt and his failure to file his tax returns for the past eight
years. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information creates10
doubts about Applicant’s suitability to hold a clearance that his response has not
adequately addressed. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
