 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-00309 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 20, 2008. On 
November 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline G. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 14, 2009; answered it on December 
31, 2009; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing before an 
 
2 
 
 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 4, 2010. On January 19, 
2010, Department Counsel requested a hearing and notified Applicant of his request. 
(Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II.) Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
26, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on February 2, 2010. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on February 16, 2010, scheduling the hearing for February 25, 2010. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but presented no 
documentary evidence. I kept the record open until March 8, 2010, to enable him to 
submit evidence. At his request, I extended the deadline until March 15, 2010. (HX III.) 
He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX A are attached to the record as HX III. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 4, 2010. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel orally notified Applicant of the time and place of the hearing 
on February 13, 2010, and the notice of hearing was dated February 16, 2010. Both 
notifications were less than the 15 days required by Directive ¶ E3.1.8. I explained the 
notice requirement to Applicant, and he affirmatively waived the 15-day notice 
requirement. (Tr. 20-22.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.d. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 23-year-old computer programmer employed by a federal 
contractor. He graduated from college in May 2008, and began working for his current 
employer in June 2008. (AX A at 1.) His performance appraisal for the period ending in 
May 2009 portrays him as eager to learn, hard working, creative, dependable, and 
considerate of colleagues and subordinates. His was rated “fully successful,” the middle 
rating among five ranging from unsatisfactory to outstanding. (AX A at 12.) 
 
 In October 2007, while Applicant was 21 years old and in college, he was 
arrested in a bar for public intoxication.1 The bar was open to the public, but its clientele 
was mostly members of certain fraternities of which Applicant was not a member. He 
had consumed more than six drinks, but there was no evidence that he was disruptive 
or disorderly. As he was standing alone waiting for a friend to return from the restroom, 
he was approached by a police officer performing security duties at the bar, and asked 
to go outside. He was arrested, held at the police station overnight to sober up, 
released, and fined $70. (Tr. 43-46; GX 3 at 1; GX 4 at 3.) He disclosed this incident on 
his security clearance application. (GX 2 at 30.) 
                                                          
1 The court records reflect the charge as “public swearing/intoxication.” The parties agreed that there was 
no inappropriate language involved, and that the court information was based on the fact that both public 
swearing and public intoxication were proscribed by the same law. (Tr. 60.) 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In October 2008, Applicant was arrested for having an open container of beer 
and obstructing justice. The incident occurred while he and his girlfriend were walking 
between two tailgate parties preceding a football game. He was carrying a plastic cup of 
beer. When he was approached by a police vehicle, he put his cup on the ground and 
walked between two cars in a parking lot. He was arrested and given a breathalyzer 
test, which registered a blood-alcohol level of .06%. The next day, he reported the 
incident to his security officer. In November 2008, he voluntarily disclosed this incident 
during a security interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), who apparently had not been informed of the incident. (Tr. 48-51; 
GX 4 at 3.) 
 
Applicant pleaded guilty to having an open container. He was fined $70, ordered 
to perform 70 hours of community service, and required to pay a $125 registration fee 
for the community service. 
 
 When questioned about his drinking habits, Applicant told a OPM investigator 
that he drank four or five beers, enough to become intoxicated, one to three times a 
week while socializing with friends. The investigator’s written summary of the interview 
recites: “Subject has not stopped or reduced use, because subject does not have a 
problem with alcohol. Subject intends to use alcohol in the future.” (GX 4 at 4.) In 
response to DOHA interrogatories dated April 7, 2009, Applicant stated that the 
interview summary was accurate except for one item not relevant to the allegations in 
the SOR. (GX 4 at 6.) However, in his response to the SOR, he stated that the portion 
of the summary pertaining to his alcohol consumption was inaccurate. He stated it 
would have been more accurate to say, “You become intoxicated one time a week, but 
never more than three times.” Finally, he stated that the portrayal of his future intentions 
in the interview summary was the product of an ill-framed question, because if he had 
been asked whether he would consider reducing his drinking, his answer would have 
been a resounding “yes.” (Answer at 3.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his arrest in October 2008 and the security interview in 
November 2008 made him realize that alcohol-related incidents could jeopardize his 
employment. (Tr. 54.) He testified his job is “extremely” important to him. (Tr. 67.) At the 
hearing, he testified he has reduced his drinking to about once a month at social events. 
He limits his consumption to two drinks. He last consumed alcohol about six weeks 
before the hearing. (Tr. 56-57.) His reduced consumption was motivated in part by his 
decision to consume healthier foods and exercise more. He testified he feels better on a 
healthier diet and intends to adhere to it. (Tr. 65-66.) 
 
 Applicant has never received any alcohol-related treatment and has never been 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (Tr. 53.) He testified he has never driven while 
intoxicated. (Tr. 54.) He also testified he understands the concern that excessive 
alcohol consumption causes poor decisions, and “confidential information is not 
something you want to leave in the hands of somebody who can’t control themselves.” 
(Tr. 59.)  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
5 
 
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant consumed alcohol, “at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication,” from approximately 2005 to at least 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and that he 
becomes intoxicated one to three times a week and does not intend to reduce or stop 
using alcohol (SOR ¶ 1.b). It also alleges he was arrested and charged with “public 
swearing/intoxication” in September 2007, pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to pay a 
fine and costs (SOR ¶ 1.c). Finally, it alleges he was arrested and charged with “public 
swearing/intoxication and obstruction of justice without force in about September 2008, 
prosecution was deferred, he was ordered to perform 50 hours of community service 
and pay court costs, and the charges were dismissed (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant admitted 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d, but he denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
and he testified that the allegations were based on an inaccurate summary of an OPM 
interview. 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” A disqualifying condition may arise under this guideline by  “alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, 
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” or 
“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 
22 (a) and (c).  
 
Both disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence, shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). The first prong of this 
mitigating condition (“so much time has passed”) focuses on whether the conduct was 
recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If 
the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
 
6 
 
 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
Although Applicant did not specifically state the date on which he decided to reduce his 
alcohol consumption, it appears to have occurred shortly after his OPM interview in 
November 2008. He is not alcohol dependent, and his change of behavior was 
prompted by the realization that he could not continue his college lifestyle if he wanted 
to continue his employment. He has had no further instances of alcohol-related 
misconduct. He last consumed alcohol six weeks before the hearing. He limits his 
consumption to two drinks. I am satisfied that his excessive alcohol consumption is not 
recent and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 23(a) is established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). After his security 
interview in November 2008, Applicant realized that his alcohol use could jeopardize his 
employment. He testified he does not believe he has an “alcohol problem,” but he 
acknowledged his previous alcohol abuse at the hearing. He drastically reduced his 
alcohol consumption and established a pattern of responsible use after his November 
2008 security interview. I conclude AG ¶ 23(b) is established. No other enumerated 
mitigating conditions are relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant is a young man, working at his first job after college. He is enthusiastic 
about his work and has performed well. The two arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d 
were for relatively minor offenses, but more serious security concerns were raised by 
his OPM interview describing his heavy alcohol consumption and his intention to 
continue it. Applicant mitigated those concerns at the hearing, when he declared his 
intention to drastically reduce his alcohol consumption. He was candid, sincere, 
remorseful, and credible. He has demonstrated his sincerity by reducing the frequency 
of his drinking and limiting himself to two drinks. He has learned that working for a 
federal contractor and holding a clearance are incompatible with the personal conduct 
that was tolerated in a college environment. There is no evidence that he is alcohol 
dependent. He persuaded me that he has put his college habits behind him, begun to 
act like an adult, and decided that his employment and his health require a more 
responsible lifestyle. 
 
 Applicant has been candid throughout the security clearance process. He 
disclosed his September 2007 arrest on his security clearance application. He reported 
the October 2008 incident to his superiors the day after it happened. He voluntarily 
disclosed the October 2008 incident to the security investigator, who apparently had not 
been informed of it by Applicant’s superiors.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve doubtful cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
