 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01446 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric S. Montalvo, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
May 21, 2009. On September 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On October 5, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
25, 2009. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2009. On December 15, 2009, 
a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for January 13, 2010. On 
January 11, 2010, the Notice of Hearing was amended to indicate that the hearing was 
to be conducted via video-teleconference. The case was heard on January 13, 2010. 
The Government offered seven exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(Gov) 1–7 without objection. The Applicant testified and offered one exhibit which was 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A without objection. AE A has six tabs containing 
various documents. The record was held open until January 27, 2010, to allow Applicant 
to submit additional documents.  He timely submitted a three-page document that was 
admitted as AE B. Department Counsel’s response to AE B is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant also timely submitted a one-page document that was admitted 
as AE C. Department Counsel’s response to AE C is marked as HE II. The transcript 
(Tr) was received on January 19, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.h and admitted the 
remaining SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old network troubleshooter, employed with a Department 
of Defense contractor, who is applying for a security clearance. He has worked for his 
current employer since March 24, 2008. He works at an overseas location. From May 1, 
1996 to July 15, 2005, he served on active duty in the United States Air Force. He was 
in the satellite communications career field. He separated as a Staff Sergeant (E-5) with 
an honorable discharge. He served two combat tours while on active duty, OPERATION 
SOUTHERN WATCH in Kuwait from May 2001 to September 2001, and OPERATION 
RESTORE HOPE in Haiti in April 2004. He was granted a SECRET clearance on May 
6, 1996. His clearance became inactive on July 14, 2007. He has earned two 
associates degrees, one in aerospace propulsions, and one in electronic systems. He is 
divorced and has no children. (Tr at 18-21; Gov 1; AE A, Tab 5)  
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that he 
encountered financial problems after he separated from active duty in July 2005. The 
SOR alleged the following delinquent accounts: a $32 debt for a insufficient funds check 
written to a pizza restaurant (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 7; Gov 5 at 7; Gov 6 at 1; Gov 7 at 1); 
a $176 cable television account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 5 at 7; 
Gov 6 at 1; Gov 7 at 1); a $1,713 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 6; 
Gov 5 at 7; Gov 6 at 1); a $4,502 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 6; 
Gov 5 at 7; Gov 6 at 1)); a $31 credit union account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.e: 
Gov 6 at 2); and a $582 account to purchase a computer that was charged off. (SOR ¶ 
1.f: Gov 2 at 12; Gov 5 at 7; Gov 6 at 2) 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $3,064 credit card account that was 
charged off  (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 4, 11; Gov 5 at 7; Gov 6 at 2); a $993 credit card 
account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 2 at 11; Gov 5 at 7; Gov 6 at 2); a $6,838 
military exchange credit card account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 2 at 11; Gov 
5 at 7; Gov 6 at 2); and a $1,000 credit card account that was placed for collection. 
(SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 2 at 9; Gov 5 at 7) 
 
 
3 
 
 
When Applicant separated from the Air Force he was not prepared for the 
transition to civilian life. He initially believed that he was to be placed on medical hold 
because of a back injury. His separation date was earlier than he anticipated. He was 
unemployed for several months. He found full-time employment in October 2005. The 
job location was 100 miles away from where he lived. He owned a house which he was 
unable to rent out until late January 2006. He got behind on his bills during this time 
because he was responsible for a mortgage payment and rent. (Tr at 21-23)  
 
When he separated from the Air Force, Applicant’s annual income was $28,000 a 
year. His take home pay was about $2,000 a month.  He earned $43,000 in his first post 
Air Force employment. His take home pay remained the same. His monthly take home 
pay in his current job is approximately $9,200. With the significant pay increase, he was 
able to start resolving his delinquent debts. He has no outstanding debts at this time. (Tr 
at 23-30) He sold the home he owned in January 2007. (Tr at 40) 
 
The current status of the delinquent accounts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a, $32 insufficient funds check, pizza company: Applicant made several 
attempts to contact this creditor. He was not aware of this debt and claims it is no longer 
on this credit report. He will pay it if it is a legitimate debt. The debt is unresolved but of 
a minimal amount. (Tr at 34-35; AE C) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, $176 cable television account: Debt was paid on December 21, 2009.  
(AE A, Tab 4 at 1)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $1,713 account placed for collection: The account was settled in full 
in December 2009. (Tr at 33; Gov 7 at 2;  AE A, Tab 3 at 6; AE A, Tab 4 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d, $4,502 account placed for collection: The account was settled. (Gov 
7 at 2; AE A, Tab 3 at 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $31 credit union account: Applicant disputed this account and it has 
been removed from his credit report. The account is resolved. (Tr at 35-36; AE A, Tab 3; 
AE B at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, $582 charged off computer account: The account was settled. (Gov 7 
at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g, $3,064: Account was paid in full on September 25, 2009. (AE A, Tab 
3 at 6; AE A, Tab 4 at 2) The account is the same as SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h, $993 charged off bank account: Account was paid. (AE A, Tab 3 at 5; 
AE B at 3)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i, $6,838 charged off military exchange credit card: Applicant made 
payments on this account until it was paid in full in July 2009. (Gov 5 at 4; Gov 7 at 2; 
AE A, Tab 3 at 6; AE B at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j, $1,000 credit card account placed for collection. The debt is paid. (AE 
A, Tab 3 at 11; AE A, Tab 4 at 3) 
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted an updated personal financial worksheet. 
His net monthly income is $9,719. This figure includes a $225 monthly disability 
payment from the Veteran’s Administration. His total monthly expenses are $5,490. He 
has approximately $4,284 left over each month after expenses. (Tr at 39-40; AE B, 
Note: The net remainder figure on Applicant’s personal financial worksheet is incorrect.) 
He currently has no delinquent accounts. He is current on federal and state income 
taxes. (Tr at 24, 39) Department Counsel conceded Applicant’s debts are resolved. (Tr 
at 37)  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor states that Applicant has worked for him for a year and a 
half.  He describes Applicant’s character as stable and reliable. He comes to work on 
time and completes assigned duties and responsibilities above expectations and in a 
timely manner. Applicant is trusted by his teammates because of his work ethic and his 
ability to pull his weight. The supervisor believes Applicant can be trusted to protect 
United States classified material. (AE A, Tab 2 at 1)  
 
 Applicant’s co-worker has worked with him since May 2008. He also socializes 
with Applicant outside of work. He states that Applicant has always conducted himself 
with a high degree of character in all situations. The co-worker states Applicant is a 
dependable co-worker and does his fair share of the work load.  The co-worker states 
Applicant is trustworthy and is capable of being entrusted with sensitive information. (AE 
A, Tab 2 at 2) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant encountered financial 
 
6 
 
 
problems during the first few years after he separated from the military. The SOR 
alleged 10 delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance of $18,931.   
 
The government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant’s 
financial problems occurred when he separated from the Air Force. He did not anticipate 
his early separation because he believed that he would be placed on medical hold. He 
was unemployed for a few months. When he found a job, it was 100 miles away and he 
was paying a mortgage at his former location and rent at his new job location.  When he 
found his current position, he received a substantial pay increase and was able to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. He has paid off all of his delinquent accounts with the 
exception of the $32 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. His financial situation is stable. His past 
financial struggles do not raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies because Applicant was unemployed 
for several months after separating from active duty. As a result he began to incur 
delinquent debts. Once he found a job, it was located 100 miles away. Applicant found 
himself paying a mortgage and rent for several months which added an additional 
financial burden.  He acted responsibly under the circumstances. Once he was able to 
resolve the debts, Applicant systematically resolved his delinquent accounts.   
   
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies. Applicant resolved all of his delinquent debts with the exception of a 
$32 debt resulting from an insufficient funds check. Applicant demonstrated that he took 
steps to resolve this account but could not locate the owner of the account. All of his 
debts are current. His income has increased significantly in his current job. His financial 
situation is under control.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant has resolved all of his accounts 
with the exception of one minor account which he attempted to resolve but was 
 
7 
 
 
unsuccessful in locating the owner of the debt. He is capable of paying the $32 debt if 
the owner of the debt is located in the future. As soon as he was able, Applicant began 
to pay the delinquent accounts that he incurred in his first few years after separating 
from the military.  He initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  
 
FC MC ¶20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) applies with respect to SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant disputed this debt and it was 
removed from his credit report.  
 
Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service and his honorable discharge from the military. I considered the favorable 
comments of Applicant’s supervisor and co-worker.  Applicant faced difficulties when he 
transitioned from active duty to civilian life. His discharge date came sooner than he 
expected. He did not have a job when he separated from the Air Force. After several 
months of unemployment, he found a job that was located 100 miles away and found 
himself responsible for a mortgage and a rent payment. He was able to resolve his 
delinquent accounts when he accepted his current position in an overseas location. He 
has resolved all delinquent accounts with the exception of a $32 account which he will 
pay if he is able to locate the current owner of the debt. Applicant has demonstrated that 
he is reliable. His current financial situation is stable. He mitigated the concerns raised 
under financial considerations.   
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
