 
1 
 
 
                        
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04632 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Foreign  
Influence adjudicative guideline.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
  
On November 20, 2007, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 16, 2009, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
2 
 
 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, provided additional 
information, and requested a hearing before a DOHA administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on January 19, 2010. I convened a hearing on February 22, 2010, 
to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
a security clearance for Applicant.   
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced two exhibits (Ex. 1 and Ex. 
2), which were admitted without objection. The Government offered for administrative 
notice a summary memorandum containing facts about the People’s Republic of China 
(China) found in 16 official U.S. Government documents. The Government also 
provided for administrative notice the 16 source documents from which the facts in the 
summary memorandum were derived. I marked the Government’s summary 
memorandum as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant did not object to my taking notice of 
the facts about China in the summary memorandum or in the source documents. 
 
Applicant testified on this own behalf and called no witnesses. At the hearing, he 
introduced seven exhibits, which were identified as Ex. A through Ex. G and admitted 
without objection. I left the record open until close of business March 1, 2010, so that 
Applicant could, if he wished, provide one additional document for inclusion in the 
record. By e-mail dated March 9, 2010, Applicant provided a character reference from 
an individual who supervised him from November 2000 until September 2003. 
Department Counsel did not object to the admission of the document. Accordingly, it 
was admitted to the record as Applicant’s Ex. H. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of 
the hearing on March 3, 2010. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations under AG B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.g.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all seven allegations 
and provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as 
findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including Applicant’s testimony, 
all exhibits, all relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and employed as an associate by a government 
contractor. He was born and raised in China, where he received his secondary 
education and an undergraduate academic degree. From 1985 to 1993, he was 
employed first as a research assistant and later as a research associate by a 
specialized Chinese research institute. In 1993, he came to the United States to pursue 
Ph.D. studies, and he was awarded a Ph.D. by a university in the United States in 1996.  
Since that time, he has been employed by U.S. government contractors. Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
became a U.S. citizen in 2007. He has not previously held a security clearance.  (Ex. 1; 
Ex. 2; Tr. 25-32, 78-79, 93-94.)  
 
 Applicant and his wife married in China in 1983. Their daughter was born in 
China in 1987. Applicant’s wife and daughter accompanied him to the United States 
when he came to study for his Ph.D. His daughter, a recent graduate of a U.S. 
university, is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His wife is a citizen of China and has U.S. 
permanent resident status. In December 2009, she applied for naturalization as a U.S. 
citizen. (Ex. 1; Ex. A; Tr. 33-34, 80.) 
 
 Applicant is an only child. His parents, who are citizens and residents of China, 
are both 77 years old and retired. They reside in a Chinese provincial city in an 
apartment that they own. During her working years, Applicant’s mother was an 
administrative assistant for a local government in China. Applicant’s father was 
employed as a teacher of the Chinese language. Both parents receive pensions under 
the Chinese system. Neither parent has served in the Chinese military, is or has been a 
member of the Chinese Communist party, or has held political office in China. (Tr. 36-
38; 63, 80.) 
 
 Applicant is close to his parents, who are in good health, and he communicates 
with them by telephone about once a week. He does not provide for their support, but 
he sends them a monetary gift at Chinese New Year. (Tr. 39, 57, 76-77.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law, a widow, is also a citizen and resident of China. She is 
retired and resides in the same city as do his parents. Like Applicant’s parents, she lives 
in an apartment she owns, and she receives a pension under the Chinese system. 
Applicant’s wife communicates with her mother about once a month. (Tr. 39-41, 91.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife has a brother and a sister, both of whom are citizens and 
residents of China. Applicant’s sister-in-law, a retired factory worker, is married. The 
sister-in-law’s husband, a professor of social science at a local college, served as a 
government official for a time. He is a member of the Communist Party. Applicant’s 
sister-in-law and her husband are the parents of one daughter, who is in her 20s and 
works for a travel agent. (Tr. 41-44.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s brother owns a small auto parts business in China. He is 
married and the father of two children. His wife works with him in his business. Neither 
the brother-in-law nor his wife has been imprisoned, served in the military, or held a 
government office. Applicant’s wife communicates with her siblings once a month or 
once every several months. (Tr. 45-46, 91.) 
 
 Between 1985 and 1993, when Applicant was employed at the Chinese research 
institute, he worked closely with an individual who was his supervisor and advisor. The 
person is a citizen and resident of China. In 2000, after Applicant received his Ph.D, the 
research institute invited him to a conference in China. Applicant attended the 
conference and saw his former supervisor and advisor, who was also at the conference. 
 
4 
 
 
After the conference, Applicant visited his parents. Applicant has not seen his former 
supervisor since the conference in 2000 in China. He and the former supervisor, who is 
now retired, have occasional e-mail contact and exchange greeting cards at Chinese 
New Year. (Ex. 2 at 2; Tr. 47-51.)  
  
 In addition to his trip to China in 2000, Applicant traveled with his family to China 
in 2002 and 2005 to visit his parents and his wife’s family. He has not traveled to China 
since 2005. In 2008, Applicant’s daughter traveled to China to attend the Olympic 
Games and to visit her grandparents. (Tr. 48-50, 92-93.) 
 
 In about 2002, before becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant became active in a 
Chinese association in the U.S. city where he was living and working. He served on the 
organization’s board of directors for about two years. In that capacity, he was invited, on 
one occasion, to a breakfast meeting with two Chinese government officials who were 
serving in the United States. Applicant has had no further contact with the officials. (Ex. 
2 at 1-2; Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has worked as a volunteer in a U.S. 
Presidential campaign. One of the individuals who worked with him as a volunteer 
provided a letter of character reference for the record. The individual stated that he 
perceived Applicant to be intelligent, kind, generous, thoughtful, and inquisitive. (Ex. C; 
Tr. 52-53.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife do not own property in China. He has no bank accounts, 
assets, or retirement funds in China. He acknowledged that, as an only child, he may 
inherit his parents’ apartment some day. He estimated the value of the apartment to be 
between $10,000 and $20,000. (Tr. 54-55, 64-66.) 
 
 Applicant stated that all of his financial interests are in the United States. He 
owns his home, which he values at $620,000. He and his wife have approximately 
$330,000 in their 401(k) plans. Additionally, Applicant has about $84,000 in bank 
accounts and stocks. He owns three automobiles which he values at $60,000. (Tr. 79-
80.) 
 
 Applicant provided a letter of character reference from an individual who has 
known him and his wife for about 20 years. The individual described Applicant as “a 
sincere, warm, honest, and ethical person” who is trustworthy and proud to be an 
American citizen. The person who supervised him from November 2000 to September 
2003 observed that Applicant exhibited a high level of professionalism and personal 
integrity. (Ex. B; Ex. H.) 
 
 Applicant provided copies of several awards and commendations he had 
received from his employers for his leadership and technical expertise. (Ex. D; Ex. E; 
Ex. F; Ex. G.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 I take administrative notice of the following facts, which appear in official U.S. 
government documents:1 
 
China has powerful military forces, including strategic nuclear missiles. China is 
geographically vast, and has a population of over a billion people. It has significant 
resources and an economy that in recent years has expanded about 10% per year. 
China aggressively competes with the United States in many areas. China’s competitive 
relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by Applicant’s 
connections to family members living in the China.   
 
In China reported human rights problems include suppression of political dissent, 
arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture and mistreatment of prisoners. 
The China also monitors communications devices, such as telephones, telefaxes, and 
internet servers. 
 
China has an authoritarian, Communist government. China has a poor human 
rights record, suppresses political dissent, and practices arbitrary arrest and detention, 
forced confessions, torture, and other prisoner mistreatment. 
 
 China actively collects military, economic, and proprietary industrial information 
about the United States for the following reasons: (1) its position as a global power; (2) 
its military, political, and economic investments in the Pacific Rim and Asia; and (3) its 
leading role in the development of advanced technology that China desires for 
economic growth. China’s active intelligence gathering programs focus on sensitive and 
protected U.S. technologies. “China’s espionage and industrial theft activities [are] the 
leading threat to the security of U.S. technology.”2  China seeks “to obtain sensitive U.S. 
technologies (e.g., missile, imaging, semiconductor and submarine) illegally by targeting 
well-placed scientists and businessmen.”3   
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
1 The following facts are from the Department Counsel’s documents submitted for Administrative Notice 
and U.S. Department of State, Background Note, China, October 2009 and, China—Country Specific 
Information, July 20, 2009 (Enclosures I and II). 
 
2U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2007 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission (2007 U.S. China ESRC Report), dated November 2007 at 
104 (Enclosure V). Department Counsel’s summary provides additional details of China’s aggressive 
intelligence efforts directed towards acquiring U.S. secrets and proprietary technologies. Id. at 2-5.  
 
3U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military 
Power of the People’s Republic of China 2009 at 31; Department Counsel’s summary at 3. 
 
6 
 
 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
7 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) are raised in this case. Applicant, his spouse, his 
parents, his mother-in-law, his sister-in-law, his brother-in-law, his daughter, and his 
former supervisor were born in China. His parents, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-
in-law, and former supervisor reside in China. Applicant, his spouse, and his daughter 
have close connections with family members living in China. Applicant has particularly 
close connections with his parents. His spouse has close connections to her mother, 
 
8 
 
 
brother, and sister, who is married to a member of the Communist Party in China. 
Applicant shares living quarters with his spouse.    
 
Applicant has a continuing relationship with his former supervisor at a Chinese 
government research facility. Although Applicant has not seen the supervisor since he 
attended a conference in China in 2000, he continues to exchange greetings with the 
supervisor at least once a year. This contact, while not regular, is significant because 
the individual acted as Applicant’s advisor and has knowledge of his professional 
training and expertise.    
 
Applicant communicates weekly with his parents, and his wife communicates 
with her mother monthly and with her siblings monthly or every few months. These 
frequent familial communications reflect Applicant’s and his spouse’s ties of affection 
with their family members living in China. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the 
person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant 
provided no information to rebut the presumption. His relationship with his parents and 
his wife’s relationship with her mother and her siblings are sufficient to create “a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” These relationships with residents of China create a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” family members who are in China. For example, if the Chinese 
Government wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on his 
parents. Applicant is also subject to potential, indirect coercion through his spouse’s 
relationship with her mother, brother, and sister. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in China is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of China with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts 
with his family members living in China, and his spouse’s relationships with her family 
members living in China, and his relationship with his former supervisor living in China 
do not pose a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.   
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from China seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his spouse, or their 
family members or his former supervisor living in China, it is not possible to rule out 
such a possibility in the future. Applicant’s relationships with family members and his 
former supervisor living in China create a potential conflict of interest because these 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist 
his spouse or their family members living in China, in the event they should be 
pressured or coerced by agents of the Chinese government or intelligence services for 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with his parents and his spouse’s contacts with her mother, 
sister, and brother living in China and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
 
10 
 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to China in 
2000, 2002, and 2005. Applicant has frequent contact with his parents and more 
intermittent contact with his former supervisor, all of whom live in China. His spouse has 
frequent contact with her mother. Because of his connections to China, to his parents, 
and to his former supervisor, and his spouse’s contacts with her mother, sister, and 
brother, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his and his spouse’s relationships with relatives who are Chinese citizens] could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”    
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has strong 
family connections to the United States. His daughter is a U.S. citizen and his wife 
recently sought naturalization as a U.S. citizen. Applicant has participated as a 
volunteer in the U.S. presidential election process. He owns a house in the United 
States. He has lived in the United States since 1993, and he has been a citizen since 
2007.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members and his 
former supervisor who live in China. He frequently communicates with his parents. His 
spouse frequently communicates with her mother. There is no evidence, however, that 
terrorists, criminals, the Chinese Government, or those conducting espionage have 
approached or threatened Applicant or his family in China to coerce Applicant or his 
family for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as targets for improper 
coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have any burden to prove the 
presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have 
a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ recent relationship with China, and 
especially China’s systematic human rights violations. China’s conduct makes it more 
likely that China would coerce Applicant through his family living in China, if China 
determined it was advantageous to do so.     
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in China. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family members living in China. 
 
 
11 
 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has minimal applicability. Applicant has substantial property interests in 
the United States, which include his employment and the value of his home in the 
United States. However, this mitigating condition can only fully mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 7(e) is not raised in this case. 
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with his 
spouse, his parents, and his former supervisor, as well as his spouse’s relationships 
with her mother, brother, and a sister who is married to a member of the Chinese 
Communist party. His parents, former supervisor, and his in-laws live in China and are 
readily available for coercion. The Chinese government’s history of espionage 
(especially industrial espionage) against the United States and its failure to follow the 
rule of law further increase the risk of coercion.  
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a talented, honorable, and hard-working U.S. citizen. He is considered to be 
a valued employee. He sought to use his experience, skills, and knowledge to serve his 
adopted country, and he sought a security clearance as a government contractor. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Applicant, an only child, is attentive and devoted to his mother and father, who 
are citizens and residents of China. Applicant is an admirable family member and an 
appreciative friend. However, he failed to extenuate or mitigate the security concerns 
raised by his contacts and relationships with his parents, who are citizens and residents 
of China, and his former supervisor, who is a citizen and resident of China, and with his 
wife’s mother, brother, and sister, who are residents and citizens of China, a country 
that poses “an extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy 
of the United States.”   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under AG  B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g.:    Against  Applicant 
 
  
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
