                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01037 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Husband of Applicant 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Consideration, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement, but she failed to mitigate 
the government’s security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines E, F, and H. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 14, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 19, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 20, 2010, and I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on February 16, 2010. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N. They were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 22, 2010.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.c,1 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 2.a, 2.b, 2.e, 2.i, 2.j, and 3.a. 
She denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 30 years old. She graduated from high school in 1997 and married in 
1998. She has two children, ages seven and eleven. She has taken colleges courses 
since 1996, and needs three credits to complete the requirements for her bachelor’s 
degree. In April 1999, she enlisted in the Air Force. She was honorably discharged in 
April 2005, in the rank of staff sergeant (E-5). From February 2000 to approximately 
September 2005, she held a Top Secret security clearance and was eligible for access 
to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). After Applicant was discharged from the 
Air Force, she accepted employment as a civilian in the same office she had worked 
while on active duty. As a civilian, she was required to switch her security clearance 
from the Air Force to the new government agency (Agency). The Agency required 
Applicant submit a new security clearance application (SCA) and take a polygraph.2  
 
Applicant submitted a SCA on September 29, 2005.3 On it she responded “No” to 
Question 27, asking if she had illegally used a controlled substance since the age of 16 
or in the last seven years, whichever is shorter. She responded “No” to Question 28, 
which asked if she had ever illegally used a controlled substance while possessing a 
security clearance.4  
 
On October 19, 2005, Applicant was interviewed, as part of her polygraph 
examination. During the interview she admitted she had used marijuana on two 
occasions between the spring of 1996 and January 1999. During the interview she did 
not initially disclose other drug use until after further questioning. She then admitted she 
was not completely honest about her drug involvement. She admitted she used Ecstasy 
one time in November 2004. She withheld the information because she did not want to 
disclose that she had used illegal drugs while possessing a Top Secret security 
1 Applicant admitted she answered “No”, and she knew and sought to conceal information set forth in 
subparagraph 3.a. She denied she sought to conceal information set forth in subparagraph 3.b. 
 
2 Tr. 26-35. 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 45. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
clearance and while assigned by the Air Force to the Agency.5 In November 2005, 
Applicant was denied access to SCI by the Agency due to the above information.6  
 
Applicant signed an Agency Personnel Security Policy Advisory on September 
15, 2004, verifying she understood and was willing to comply with their policies. Part of 
that agreement was the Agency’s policy of strictly prohibiting the illegal use of controlled 
substances.7  
 
Applicant’s first marijuana use was with friends in 1996. Her second marijuana 
use in 1999 was also with friends and her husband. Applicant stated that she thought 
this use might have been in 1997, instead of 1999. She used Ecstasy in 2004, with her 
husband, who was also on active duty at the time, and with other military friends. She 
stated her military friends also held security clearances. Applicant stated she made a 
terrible mistake by using an illegal drug while holding a security clearance. She has not 
used illegal drugs since then and has no intention of using them again in the future.8  
 
At her hearing, Applicant stated she thought the date she used Ecstasy was in 
2003, rather than November 2004, and her last marijuana use was 1997, instead of 
1999. The dates that Applicant used both marijuana and Ecstasy were provided by her 
to the Agency investigator. Her interview was on October 19, 2005, less than a year 
after she stated she used Ecstasy. I have considered her retraction of the dates, and 
find the dates she provided to the investigator are likely to be more accurate than her 
recent memories of the dates.9   
 
Applicant completed a SCA on May 28, 1999. In response to Question 27, asking 
if she had illegally used a controlled substance in the past seven years or since she was 
16 years old, which ever was shorter, she answered “No.” She failed to list her two 
marijuana uses on this SCA. When asked why she failed to disclose her drug uses she 
stated she had no explanation.10 
 
Applicant also answered “No” to Question 20 on her SCA dated May 28, 1999, 
which asked if she had been terminated or left a job under unfavorable circumstances. It 
was alleged that she was fired from a restaurant in 1996. Applicant provided documents 
5 Tr. 34-36, 51-52; GE 6. 
 
6 Tr. 31-33, 122-128. 
 
7 GE 6. 
 
8 Tr. 25, 45-51. 
 
9 Tr. 35-42,122-126; GE 8. 
 
10 Tr. 128-132. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
substantiating that she was not fired or terminated, nor did she leave under unfavorable 
circumstances.11 
 
Applicant’s husband was discharged from the Army in June 2006 and remained 
in the reserves. He was recalled to active duty in April 2007, and was discharged in July 
2007. After he was discharged, he had difficulty finding full-time employment until April 
2008. He was only able to work odd jobs during that period, and the lack of income 
negatively impacted the family’s financial situation. He handled the family’s finances. 
Applicant was aware that they were experiencing financial problems, but did not know 
the extent of the problem until October 2008, when she was interviewed by an 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). When Applicant 
completed a SCA on January 30, 2008, she did not disclose she had delinquent debts 
that were more than 180 days delinquent or 90 days past due. I find Applicant did not 
intentionally fail to disclose her delinquent debts. I found her credible and believe that 
she was unaware of the extent of her family’s delinquent debts when she completed the 
SCA.12  
 
Applicant stated that upon learning of the extent of their delinquent debts, she 
and her husband made a plan to reduce their expenses by moving to a residence where 
they paid less rent and utilities and budgeted their monthly expenditures to the “bare 
bones.” Applicant’s husband also was able to adjust his work hours so they would have 
less daycare costs. Beginning in June 2009, they began applying approximately $3,500, 
almost all of their excess income after paying their monthly expenses, towards reducing 
their delinquent debt.13  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.a ($621) was settled for $400 and paid in January 2010.14  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.b ($4,923) is a disputed utility bill. Applicant has disputed 
this bill in the past. The bill would change dramatically by thousands of dollars from one 
month to the next. She requested the creditor conduct an investigation regarding the 
bill, and they determined there was an error in the account. The debt was removed from 
Applicant’s credit report.15 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.c ($1,519) is for a telephone bill. It was disputed and 
settled. Applicant paid $683 in December 2009, and the debt is resolved.16 
11 Answer. 
 
12 Tr. 24-25, 53-63, 116-117. 
 
13 Tr. 25-26, 64-74. 
 
14 Tr. 74-75; AE H, J. 
 
15 Tr. 75-81; AE M, N. 
 
16 Tr. 81-83; AE B. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.d ($6,372) is a charged-off credit card account. Applicant 
made a settlement offer. The offer was accepted and Applicant is required to pay 
$3,186 in two equal installment payments in February and March 2010 to satisfy the 
debt. At the time of her hearing she intended to pay the settlement.17 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.e ($2,205) is a debt for a computer Applicant purchased in 
2005. She stated she made an offer to pay the full amount in two installments beginning 
in April 2010. She had not yet received a response to her offer.18 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.f ($10,172) is for a repossessed car that Applicant and her 
husband purchased in 2005. Their payments became delinquent in June or July 2008, 
when Applicant’s husband had difficulty finding a job. They began making monthly 
payments in August 2009 and pay between $400 and $900 a month. They intend to 
continue making payments until the debt is satisfied.19 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.g ($21,651) is a consolidated loan that was obtained in 
2006 to pay for a car and other debts. The original loan was for $25,000. Applicant 
made payments on the loan, reducing the balance the balance to approximately 
$19,000, before it became delinquent. She completed a repayment schedule in 
September 2009, and settled the debt for $9,744.20 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.h ($3,539) was for a credit card. The debt was settled for 
$2,100, and paid in two installments in December 2009 and January 2010.21 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.i ($892) was for bank overdrafts. Applicant settled and paid 
$642 to resolve the debt.22 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.j ($860) is for student fees from a college Applicant 
attended. She intends to pay the debt in May 2010.23  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.k ($591) is for student fees from a college Applicant 
attended. She has paid the debt.24  
17 Tr. 83-86, 114-115; AE G. 
 
18 Tr. 86-89. 
 
19 Tr. 89-91; AE A, I. 
 
20 Tr. 91-94; AE C. 
 
21 Tr. 94-96; AE D, E. 
 
22 Tr. 96-97; AE K. 
 
23 Tr. 97-99. 
 
24 Tr. 99-100; AE F. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant has approximately $13,000 in student loans that are deferred. She 
stated she has always paid her loans on time and never defaulted. She and her 
husband have received financial counseling through her husband’s employer. They use 
a financial software program to keep track of their budget and expenses. Applicant and 
her husband intend on paying all of their delinquent debts. She maintains only one store 
credit card that has a minimal balance.25  
 
The following documents were included in Applicant’s answer to the SOR and 
were considered: verification she was a volunteer for the county and passed a 
background investigation, a letter of recommendation from her supervisor, performance 
appraisal, documents from her college, showing her grades and that she was on the 
Dean’s List.26 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
25 Tr. 100-110. 
 
26 Answer to SOR. 
 
7 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s testimony and conclude that she was unaware of 
her family’s financial situation when she failed to disclose she had delinquent debts over 
180 days and 90 days past due on her 2005 SCA. I have also reviewed the evidence 
and conclude Applicant was not terminated from employment under unfavorable 
circumstances. I find none of the disqualifying conditions apply to these allegations. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose on her SCA in 1999 and 
again in 2005, that she had used marijuana in the past. She also failed to disclose on 
her 2005 SCA that she used Ecstasy in November 2004, while she held a Top Secret 
security clearance and access to SCI. In September 2004, she signed an Agency policy 
agreement to refrain from using illegal drugs. She did not disclose her past drug use 
until she was confronted by an investigator. I find both of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur, and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
Applicant intentionally misled the government when she failed to disclose illegal 
drug use on her 1999 SCA. She intentionally failed to disclose her prior marijuana use 
and her use of Ecstasy on her 2005 SCA, again misleading the government. She did 
not disclose her past drug use until she was confronted by an investigator. She 
continued to mislead the government and it was not until she was interviewed and was 
to be polygraphed, that she disclosed her drug use. Having served on active duty for six 
years, she was well aware of the military’s policy on illegal drug use. Although she 
changed the date from the one provided during her interview, stating she used Ecstasy 
in 2003 instead of 2004, the date is a matter in aggravation because of the proximity of 
when she signed the Agency’s drug policy statement. The real concern is while holding 
a Top Secret security clearance and access to SCI, and working with classified material, 
she used Ecstasy. She did this while on active duty, with her husband, who was also on 
 
9 
 
 
active duty, and with other military members. She risked potentially being court-
martialed or administratively separated under other than honorable conditions.  
 
Applicant did not promptly correct the omission. To the contrary, she continued to 
perpetuate the false information for many years and did not divulge it until she was 
going to be subjected to a polygraph. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. The 
offenses are not minor. She failed to disclose her drug use twice on SCAs. Her use of 
an illegal drug while she held a Top Secret security clearance is serious misconduct. 
These actions cast doubt on her good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I find 
mitigating condition (c) does not apply. I have considered mitigating condition (d) and 
find that Applicant acknowledges her mistake in using illegal drugs while she held a 
security clearance, and it is unlikely she will use illegal drugs in the future. She realizes 
the magnitude of her mistake. However, she used Ecstasy after she had served four to 
five years in the Air Force. She was a staff sergeant and used it with her husband and 
other military friends. She then lied about her use on her SCA. I find insufficient 
evidence was presented to conclude mitigating condition (d) applies. Applicant has 
acknowledged her mistakes, in both using Ecstasy, while holding a security clearance, 
and lying about all of her prior drug use. Other than her husband, it is unclear who else 
knows about her illegal drug use while holding a security clearance and lying on her 
SCAs. I am unaware of the steps Applicant has taken to reduce her vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I find mitigating condition (e) does not apply. 
Applicant used drugs with her husband in 1999 and again 2004. She stated she no 
longer associates with the Air Force personnel with whom she used Ecstasy. However, 
she and her husband remain married and two of the three times she used drugs were 
with him. I find the circumstances of her use of Ecstasy and her failures to disclose her 
drug use cast doubts on her reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. Therefore, I find mitigating condition (g) does not 
apply.   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
10 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant had ten delinquent debts totaling more than $48,000. She was unable 
or unwilling to address the debts until recently. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s behavior is recent because she is still resolving her financial 
delinquencies. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. Applicant’s husband was 
unemployed for a period of time, after he was discharged from active duty. His lack of 
income in a family accustomed to two salaries created a financial hardship. Although he 
worked odd jobs and temporary jobs, his salary was not enough. He did not tell 
Applicant about their financial problems. He obtained a full-time job in April 2008, and 
together they have been resolving their delinquent debts. They have received financial 
counseling through Applicant’s husband’s employer. They reduced their expenses by 
moving to a home that costs less. They are using almost all of their expendable income 
to pay their delinquent debts. They have settled and paid most of their debts and are 
addressing the remaining debts. I find there are clear indications the problem is being 
resolved and Applicant has made good-faith efforts to resolve their debts. I also find she 
has a reasonable dispute in SOR ¶ 2.b. The debt is no longer on her credit reports. I 
find mitigating conditions (b), (c), (d) and (e) apply.  
 
11 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Appellant used marijuana twice in the 1990s. She used Ecstasy one time in 
either 2003 or 2004, while she held a Top Secret security clearance and access to SCI. 
In order to use it she must have possessed the drugs. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana when she was young and prior to entering the Air 
Force. She used Ecstasy on active duty in the Air Force, as a staff sergeant, with her 
husband and other military personnel, and while holding a security clearance. There is 
 
12 
 
 
no evidence Applicant has used illegal drugs since 2004, or that she is drug dependant 
or an abuser. She credibly testified that her actions were a mistake and she never 
intends to use illegal drugs again. She has abstained from illegal drug use for at least 
six years, a significant period of abstinence. She used the Ecstasy with her husband, 
and they remain married. I find under the circumstances, he too has learned the 
seriousness of their actions and contact with him does not cause a concern. Applicant 
also understands the seriousness of her conduct and its ramifications on her career. 
She has demonstrated an intention not to use drugs in the future. I do not believe 
Applicant has a drug problem. Therefore, I find both mitigating conditions (a) and (b) 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the Air Force for 
five years and was honorably discharged. She is a good student and a valued 
employee. Applicant and her husband had financial difficulties when he was discharged 
from active duty and could not find a job. They accumulated delinquent debts. They 
have been aggressively resolving their debts and have settled most of them. The few 
remaining debts, they have plans to resolve. Applicant failed to disclose on her SCA in 
1999, that she had used illegal drugs in her past. She knew the information was false. 
She used Ecstasy while she was on active duty and holding a Top Secret security 
clearance. When completing her 2005 SCA, after being released from active duty, she 
failed to disclose all of her prior illegal drug use. Her use prior to enlisting can be 
attributed to youthful indiscretion. Although I do not believe Applicant has a drug 
problem or that she will use illegal drugs in the future, her disregard for the rules while 
maintaining a security clearance, cannot be overlooked or attributed to her youth. She 
was holding a responsible job at the time, and was trusted in having access to classified 
 
13 
 
 
                                                          
material. Her repeated failure to disclose her drug use on her SCAs causes concern 
about her honesty and trustworthiness. It was not until she was confronted at her 
interview prior to a polygraph that she finally told the truth. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, for 
Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a-1b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.e:   For Applicant27 
  Subparagraph:   1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph    1.g:   For Applicant28 
  Subparagraphs: 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph    1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subpargraphs   2.a-2.k:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  3.a-3.b:   For Applicant  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 This is a factual allegation that Applicant had no control over. The fact she was previously denied 
access to SCI is not a disqualifying condition.  
 
28 This allegation alleges the same conduct as SOR ¶ 1.f, and is therefore redundant. 
 
14 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
