                                                              
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 09-00930 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) for his employment with a defense contractor on June 4, 2008 (Gov X 4). On 
October 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) (Gov X 1). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on November 11, 
2009 (Gov X 3 at 3). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 12, 2009. His responses to 
the personal conduct security concern were inconsistent. Applicant denied the three 
factual allegations, but admitted the security concern. If Applicant does not admit the 
factual allegations, there is no security concern to admit. I find based on his answers to 
the factual allegations that Applicant denied the security concern under Guideline E. 
 
2 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegation under Guideline H pertaining to a positive 
urinalysis test, but denied the factual allegations concerning use of marijuana from 1996 
until May 2007. He admitted the drug involvement security concern. He stated that he 
passed another urinalysis test a week after the one he failed. Applicant elected to have 
the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Gov X 3). 
 
 Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on December 31, 
2009. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 22, 
2010, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He did not provide additional information. 
The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted only one of the factual allegations under Guidelines H, and 
denied all factual allegations under Guideline E. I carefully reviewed the case file and 
the pleadings, and make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old college graduate who has worked for a defense 
contractor as an engineer and technician for over two years. He is divorced with two 
children. He served nine years on active duty in the Navy. Applicant completed his 
security clearance application on June 4, 2008. Applicant responded "No" to questions 
concerning his use of illegal drugs. He stated in response to a question asking if he was 
ever fired from a job, that he was fired from a job for failing a urinalysis (Gov. X 4).  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by security investigators concerning his use of drugs 
on October 6, 2008. He admitted using marijuana from 1996 when he left the Navy until 
his last admitted use of marijuana in 2002 or 2003. He was asked about his termination 
from a job because he failed a drug urinalysis for marijuana in May 2007. He does not 
know why the test was positive because he had not used marijuana since 2003 or 2003. 
He did claim that his friends used marijuana and that is a possible reason for the 
positive test.  
 
 Applicant told security investigators in the same interview that he does not intend 
to use marijuana in the future. He did not provide information to investigators that he 
had treatment or counseling for drug use. He told investigators that he has not used 
other drugs. However, he is still friends with those that do use drugs, but he does not 
participate in their drug use. Applicant stated that his "no" answer to illegal drug use on 
the security clearance application was based on the fact he had not used marijuana 
since 2002 to 2003, and marijuana use was no longer relevant to him. He did admit to 
smoking marijuana socially once or twice a year because of peer pressure after leaving 
the Navy in 1996 (Gov X 5). 
 
Applicant stated in response to a DOHA interrogatory that he had not soberly or 
consciously used marijuana since the spring of 2002. He avoids places where 
 
3 
 
marijuana is used because he does not feel it is in his best interest to frequent these 
places (Gov X 6). 
 
 In response to another DOHA interrogatory, Applicant stated he failed a 
urinalysis in April 2007 given for employment with a temporary employment service, but 
passed a urinalysis for a different employer in June 2007. However, the test results 
show that the test for the temporary employment agency was administered on May 23, 
2007, and the positive marijuana use result was reported on June 21, 2007 (Gov X 7).  
 
 I find that Applicant failed a urinalysis drug test for marijuana in May 2007. 
Applicant's statement that he tested negative for marijuana use about one month later is 
only evidence that he did not use marijuana after the May 2007 positive test. It is not 
evidence that he did not use marijuana prior to the May 2007 positive drug test. Based 
on this positive drug test for marijuana, I find Applicant used the illegal drug marijuana in 
2007. There is ample evidence that Applicant used illegal drugs in varying frequency 
from 1996 until 2007, based on Applicant's admission to drug use after leaving the Navy 
in 1996 until 2003, and the 2007 positive test for illegal drugs, 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Administrative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, because it may impair judgment and raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are mood and 
behavior altering substances, and include those listed in the Controlled Substances Act 
of 1970. Marijuana is listed in the Act. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or the use 
of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 24).  
 
 The first factual allegation under drug involvement involves marijuana use with 
varying frequency from about 1996 until May 2007 (SOR 2a). Applicant admitted using 
marijuana from 1996 until 2002 or 2003. He tested positive for marijuana in a May 2007 
urinalysis. The second factual allegation concerns the May 2007 positive test for 
marijuana. Applicant denies use of marijuana after 2002 to 2003. He cannot explain the 
positive test except that he was in places where his friends used marijuana. While there 
is no direct evidence of marijuana use between 2002 or 2003 and May 2007, the fact 
that Applicant tested positive for marijuana in May 2007 indicates he has used 
marijuana since 2003. The government established the factual allegation. Applicant has 
not presented sufficient information to rebut the factual allegation.  
 
 I have considered the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) and find 
none apply. Applicant admitted using marijuana for an extended period of time from 
1996 until 2003. I find that he used marijuana after 2003, at least until May 2007, when 
he tested positive for marijuana use. His use of marijuana is recent and frequent since it 
occurred as late as 2007. DI MC AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was 
so infrequent, or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant stated he does not intend to use marijuana in the future. He also stated 
that he is still friends with those that do use marijuana, but does not participate with 
them in the marijuana use. This statement about being with marijuana using friends but 
not using marijuana is not valid evidence to show intent not to use marijuana in the 
future. He has not received any counseling for illegal drug use nor does he participate in 
any drug avoidance programs. Applicant has a long history of marijuana use, but his 
 
5 
 
intent not to use marijuana is only recent and in response to questions from security 
investigators. The 2007 failed drug test for marijuana is a further indication he continues 
to use illegal drugs. Applicant has not presented sufficient information of changed 
circumstances to  indicate and validate his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. DI 
MC AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) does 
not apply because he failed to provide evidence to support the mitigating condition. 
Guideline H is decided against Applicant 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. 
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
 Applicant answered "no" to a question on his June 2008 security clearance 
application concerning his use of marijuana from 1996 until May 2007. He told security 
investigators in October 2008, and responded to DOHA interrogatories in April 2009, 
that he had not used marijuana since 2002. The positive test for marijuana use in May 
2007, has not been explained and is sufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant used 
marijuana until at least May 2007. Applicant's statement that he tested negative for 
marijuana use about one month later is not evidence that he did not use marijuana prior 
to the positive drug test in May 2007, but only evidence he did not use marijuana from 
May 2007 until the test in June 2007. His failure to respond accurately to using 
marijuana after 2003 as evidenced by the May 2007 failed urinalysis raises concerns 
under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct investigations, 
to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness). 
 
 Applicant deliberately failed to provide accurate information concerning his illegal 
drug use. While there is a security concern for an omission, concealment, or falsification 
of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the government when 
applying for a security clearance, every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement 
is not a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is 
done knowingly and willfully. Applicant tested positive for marijuana in May 2007. He 
 
6 
 
indicated the date of the test as April 2007. However, the test results clearly show the 
test was administered on May 23, 2007, for pre-employment with the temporary 
employment agency. There is no confusion on the results of the test. I find that 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his illegal drug use evidenced by the positive 
test results for marijuana. I find against Applicant as to Personal Conduct.   
 
 “Whole-Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge evaluates the 
applicant’s conduct and all of the circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commons sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
 Applicant has not established that he is trustworthy, reliable, and exercises good 
judgment.  To the contrary, he used marijuana recently and frequently. He did not 
provide full and complete information about his drug use on his security clearance 
application, in response to interrogatories, and questions of security investigators. Even 
though he stated he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future, he did not present 
sufficient information to support his intent. Applicant used marijuana and has not 
provided sufficient evidence to convince me he should be trusted with access to 
classified information. The record evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has not 
mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
