 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-02160 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 17, 2008. On 
November 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 10, 2009; answered it on November 
19, 2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on November 23, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 31, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on January 4, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on January 6, 2010, scheduling the hearing for January 21, 
2020. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and presented the 
testimony of one witness.  
 
I kept the record open until February 2, 2010, to enable Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through H, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s cover letter for AX A through H is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I, and Department Counsel’s comments 
regarding AX A through H are attached as HX II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
January 27, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old business analyst employed by a federal contractor. He 
was hired in December 2009, but he has not begun working because his job requires a 
clearance (Tr. 34, 49). He graduated from college in December 1999, and he worked in 
various banking and financial institutions from 2002 to 2008 (Tr. 33). He has never held 
a security clearance. 
 
 Between December 2005 and July 2006, Applicant borrowed about $1.8 million 
to purchase seven investment properties that were then worth about $2.3 million (GX 2 
at 4-13; Tr. 30). He had ten loans, seven first mortgages and three home equity lines of 
credit (GX 2 at 3; Tr. 40). He borrowed 100% of the purchase price for his first four 
properties and 90% for the last three (Tr. 52). He relied on rental income to make the 
mortgage payments, which totaled about $14,000 per month.  
 
After several properties became vacant, Applicant used personal savings to 
make the mortgage payments. By December 2006, he had exhausted his savings and 
fell behind on his payments (GX 4 at 3; Tr. 28). His credit reports in June and October 
2009 reflected that foreclosure proceedings had been started on all the properties (GX 2 
at 2; GX 5; GX 6; Tr. 30). Applicant believes all the properties are now worth less than 
the amounts of the loans (Tr. 54).  
 
At the time Applicant purchased the properties, he was earning about $80,000 
per year. He changed jobs in October 2007 and began working solely on a commission 
basis. His employer went bankrupt in September 2008, and since then he has been 
earning less than $500 per month for intermittent accounting and marketing work (Tr. 
32, 35-36). He lives with his parents. He is unmarried and not responsible for supporting 
anyone but himself. His only expense is his car payment of $261 per month, which is 
current (AX H; Tr. 47, 57). 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent medical debts for $75 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and $228 
(SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant paid the $75 debt in January 2010 (AX D). He produced 
evidence that he had a zero balance with two hospitals (AX C and D), but he produced 
no evidence connecting those hospitals with the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 The SOR alleges a delinquent credit card balance of $6,267 (SOR ¶ 1.c). In 
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant produced evidence that the debt was 
resolved in February 2009 (GX 3 at 6-7). 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent home mortgages and three delinquent home 
equity lines of credit, totaling more than two million dollars (SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.m). These 
debts are not resolved. 
 
 The SOR alleged a delinquent water bill for one of Applicant’s rental properties 
(SOR ¶ 1.n). Applicant paid this debt on February 1, 2010, after the hearing (AX E, F, 
and G). 
  
 The hiring official for Applicant’s employer testified he learned about Applicant’s 
financial situation when his security clearance application was preliminarily denied. He 
considers Applicant a person of good character, notwithstanding his financial situation. 
He advised Applicant to resolve some of his smaller delinquent debts before the 
hearing. Based on his own extensive experience in the mortgage business, he does not 
believe that the lenders will pursue a deficiency judgment against Applicant on any of 
the foreclosed properties (Tr. 67-74). 
 
 Applicant produced no evidence of the terms of the security instruments involved 
in his real estate transactions or the law of the jurisdiction pertaining to the right of a 
lender to obtain a deficiency judgment after foreclosure. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories, he indicated he was trying to reach settlements with the various lenders 
(GX 3 at 2-4), but no settlements had been reached when the record closed. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
4 
 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
This case involves an applicant’s inability to pay debts, arising from a series of 
reckless investment decisions. Appellant’s financial history raises two disqualifying 
conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations), shifting the burden to him to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s debts are 
numerous, and all the large debts are unresolved. They were incurred during a real 
estate boom followed by a market downturn, circumstances that may well occur again. 
While speculative investment is not necessarily an indicator of bad judgment, the level 
of Applicant’s speculation -- trying to leverage two million dollars in debt on an annual 
income of about $80,000 -- suggests bad judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant intentionally put himself 
in a position where he was subject to the vagaries of the real estate market. 
Nevertheless, the market downturn was beyond his control. Once his investment plan 
collapsed, he reacted responsibly by trying to negotiate with the lenders and exhausting 
his personal savings in an effort to make the payments. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Neither 
prong of this mitigating condition is established, because Applicant has not sought or 
received counseling and his financial situation is not under control. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
 
6 
 
 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Evidence of past irresponsibility is not 
mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s employer testified, based on his experience in the mortgage 
business, that it is unlikely that the lenders will seek deficiency judgments on the 
foreclosed mortgages. However, even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable 
under state law, an administrative judge should consider the facts and circumstances 
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely 
manner. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
 
Applicant testified that he contacted the lenders in an effort to settle the defaulted 
mortgages, but he presented no documentary evidence of negotiations or offers of 
settlement. He presented no evidence showing that the lenders’ rights to collect the 
deficiencies were limited by the terms of his mortgages, that they were willing to forego 
efforts to collect the mortgage deficiencies, or that a deficiency judgment was precluded 
by local law. While his testimony is some evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve the 
debts, he has not shown that he is pursuing a course of action that has a reasonable 
chance of success. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established for the delinquent 
mortgages and lines of credit.  
 
The delinquent credit card debt, medical debts, and utility bill were resolved after 
Applicant applied for his clearance and was advised by his employer that he should 
resolve as many debts as possible in order to obtain a clearance. Although the 
resolution of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c and 1.n allays the underlying security 
concern that Applicant will resort to illegal means to pay them, it does not show good 
faith, because the motivation was not a sense of duty or obligation, but his need for a 
clearance. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for these debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is relatively young, but well educated and intelligent. He was candid 
and sincere at the hearing, but he remains delinquent on debts totaling about $2 million. 
He has no savings, no income, and no plan to resolve his debts. It is unclear whether he 
has learned his lesson, because he has not yet established a track record of financial 
responsibility. He has not dispelled the concerns about his judgment.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
