1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04597
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jon L. Roberts, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On October 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 7, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing.
She denied, with explanations, the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a through 1.aa. DOHA
assigned the case to me on January 8, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on
February 17, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 5, 2010.
Department Counsel offered seven exhibits, which were admitted as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1-7, without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented
the testimony of one witness. She offered 12 exhibits, which were admitted as Applicant
Exhibits (AE) A-L. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 15, 2010. Based upon a
2
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After graduating
from high school in 1994, she earned an undergraduate degree in 1998. She is
currently completing a Master of Science degree in Information Security Management.
Applicant has been employed with various contractors. She is single and has no
children. She has been with her current employer since September 2005 (AE D).
Applicant has held a security clearance since approximately 2004 (Tr. 51).
When Applicant was 21 years old, she co-signed a car note for her boyfriend.
Applicant did not have possession of the vehicle. She now acknowledges that this was
poor judgment on her part. Her boyfriend did not maintain payments on the car. She
was not aware of his default. The vehicle was repossessed. Applicant disputed this item
when she learned it was on her credit report. It has been deleted from her credit report
(AE J). SOR ¶ 1.s
In April 2005, Applicant broke her arm and was unable to work (AE E). She was
on short term disability for two to three months. As a result, she had a reduced income
of $500 a month and she could not pay some bills, including her apartment rent (GE 2).
She alerted the apartment manager that she could not pay the rent. Applicant left her
apartment and returned to her parents’ home to live (Tr. 141). However, a judgment was
entered at some point (SOR ¶ 1. aa). Applicant’s father helped Applicant pay the $2,476
in 2006 (AE J).
In 2005, Applicant’s employer obtained her credit report as part of a security
check. Her employer asked Applicant about various accounts that appeared delinquent
on her credit report (Tr. 53). Applicant did not recognize the accounts (Tr. 125). She had
no credit cards and many of the accounts were from department stores or cell phone
providers. She requested advice from a colleague who had insight and knowledge into
financial affairs (Tr. 39). He helped her read the credit report. Applicant realized that she
needed some professional help to resolve the issue.
She immediately obtained the services of Credit Counselors of America (Tr. 54).
She signed an agreement with them and made payments of $400 for a period of three
months (Tr. 55). However, she was not happy with the results. She then obtained the
services of Consolidated Credit Counselor Services in late 2005. She received some
counseling from them. Applicant did not like their methods and believed they were not
producing results. Applicant tried to research the accounts and deal with creditors on
her own, but she realized that she was not meeting with any success (Tr. 136).
In March 2009, Applicant obtained the services of Credit Restoration Bureau
(CRB) (AE G). She again realized that many accounts listed as delinquent did not
belong to her. She contacted the local police (Tr. 73) and they referred her back to the
3
CRB. She paid $4,000 over a four month period so that CRB could investigate the
deragatory accounts and have them deleted from her credit reports. She realized that
identity fraud was an issue. She is still working with CRB to ensure that her credit
reports are accurate. 
The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts in excess of $50,000 (GE 6). The current
status of Applicant’s delinquent debts is described below.
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-d, 1.f-r, 1.u-v, and 1.y-z were formally disputed
due to identity fraud. The accounts have either been deleted from Applicant’s latest
credit bureau report or satisfied (AE K, AE J). Many of the accounts were duplicates.
Applicant worked with two credit agencies, but they did nothing to help her situation.
After paying them with no results, she tried independently to dispute the unknown
accounts. When she discovered possible identity fraud, she obtained the services of
CRB. The process has taken several years to research the accounts.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.e for $1,451 is for a rental car. An accident occurred
and Applicant had the necessary insurance. She filed a dispute and the item has been
deleted from her credit report. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t for $588 has been paid. This was an account for
cable television. She was not aware of the bill until recently (Tr. 104). She paid the
account in full in September 2009.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.w for $75 is a medical account. Applicant does not
have any information about the account. She filed a protest with the credit bureaus
through CRB. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x for $609 was for a local county tax. The issue is
resolved (AE J).
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $6,000 (GE 2). She is current
with her monthly expenses. Her net monthly remainder is approximately $3,000.
Applicant has no credit cards. She is current on her car loan (Tr. 113). Her recent credit
reports confirm that she pays as agrees on her accounts.
Applicant’s former colleague described her as a trustworthy individual. He worked
with her in a classified environment from 2005 until 2007. He has maintained contact
with her over the years (AE C). He praises her dedication. He observed that he has
never seen Applicant act in a foolish or extravagant manner when dealing with finances.
Applicant’s former supervisor considered her a valuable asset to any
organization (AE L). She is a dedicated worker. Her ability, work ethic, and
accomplishments are unparalleled. She is a “take-charge” person. She successfully
develops plans and implements them. 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
 
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on several accounts. Her
credit reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying
conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant has
no unresolved delinquent debts. She is in a stable financial situation. There is no
likelihood that future debt will occur. The vast majority of the delinquent debts reported
on her credit reports was a result of identity fraud. She now monitors her credit reports
on a regular basis. This mitigating condition applies.  
Under AG & 20(b), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.@ Applicant had a 2005 judgment that resulted from her loss in
pay when she broke her arm and was on disability for several months. She was not able
to pay her rent. She alerted the manager and moved home to prevent incurring more
debt. With her father’s help, she resolved the judgment that the apartment complex
obtained. Applicant acted responsibly in paying her accounts under the circumstances.
This mitigating condition applies in part.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
6
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant received formal financial counseling. She worked
with several firms to help her research her accounts. She continued over the years to
locate creditors and pay an account if it belonged to her. Her efforts are sufficient to
carry her burden on those debts which are hers. I conclude these mitigating conditions
apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant formally disputed the majority of the
delinquent accounts on her credit reports. She contacted the local police when she
realized that there might be identity fraud. The police advised her to work with CRB to
resolve the issue. She immediately did so. CRB worked on her behalf to correct
inaccurate information. Each item was researched. Applicant produced documentation
to substantiate the negative information. Her current credit reports reflect this. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the government’s case. 
Applicant is a well-educated professional. She has favorable recommendations
from her employers. She has held a security clearance for a number of years without
incident. She earns a good salary and is financially stable. She has no delinquent debt.
She now has the skills to keep abreast of her credit through CRB. She acknowledged
poor judgment in 1998 when she co-signed the car loan with a boyfriend.
7
Applicant learned that her credit reports reflected many delinquent accounts. She
sought advice from three agencies so that she could protest or dispute accounts about
which she had no knowledge. She contacted the local police when she suspected
identity fraud. She obtained the services of CRB, after trying to resolve the issues on
her own for several years. CRB has contacted the three credit bureau reporters and
accounts have been deleted.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: through 1.aa: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
