                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03290 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006 as 
amended (Directive).  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 9, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 7, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on January 27, 2010. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8. Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and did not offer any exhibits. The record was held open until 
February 10, 2010, to give Applicant time to submit documents, which he did. They 
were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H. The government responded in 
Hearing Exhibit I and had no objections. The documents were admitted into evidence 
and the record closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 4, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, and 1.i. He 
denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He served in the Air Force from 1981 to 2001, and was 
honorably discharged in the rank of E-6. He married in 1983, separated in 
approximately 2004 or 2005, legally separated in December 2007, and divorced in 
2008. He has three grown children, ages 33, 26, and 25. Applicant has a bachelor’s 
degree in business management and an associate’s degree. He is presently working on 
a master’s degree. He has been employed with a federal contractor since 2008. He has 
had numerous jobs since retiring from the military and experienced periods of 
unemployment from October 2001 to February 2002, August 2004 to February 2005, 
and May 2007 to January 2008. During those periods he supported himself with his 
retirement, and his wife’s income while they were together.1 
 
 Applicant stated his financial problems began in 2000, before he retired. His 
mother became sick and he helped her pay her medical bills. He sold some real estate 
and owned some stock that he sold to pay her expenses. During that time his 39-year- 
old brother passed away, and Applicant paid some of the funeral expenses. His sister-
in-law passed away in 2001, and he helped pay her funeral expenses by selling some 
real estate he owned for $7,000. His brother-in-law passed away in 2004, and he gave 
his sister $3,000 for the funeral expenses. In 2004, his mother passed away and he 
paid the funeral expenses.2  
 
 Applicant explained that when he and his wife separated in 2005, he was paying 
a car loan, which he could no longer afford without her income to help with the 
expenses. He stated he has been working since then to pay his debts.3  
 
 Applicant admits he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in October 2002, and it was 
terminated in about July 2003. He filed again in January 2003, and it was terminated in 
1 Tr. 39-54. 
 
2 Tr. 34-36. 
 
3 Tr. 36-37. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
October 2003. He filed a third time in November 2003 and it was terminated in October 
2005. He stated he did not have any debts discharged in bankruptcy. At the time, he 
was working for a company that laid him off periodically and then rehired him. Each time 
he was laid off he had to go to the bankruptcy court to show his income had changed. 
This resulted in the petitions being dismissed and re-filed.4  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($213) is not paid. Applicant did not have the money to 
pay the debt. He stated he contacted the creditor on December 14, 2009, and they 
agreed to send him a payment arrangement, but did not. He provided a memo that he 
contacted the creditor again after his hearing and is working to resolve the debt.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($498) is a credit card debt. Applicant stated he contacted 
the three creditor bureaus in December 2009, and disputed the debt. He was going to 
provide copies of the dispute letters after the hearing. He did not provide the letters. 
Applicant contacted the creditor after his hearing and was advised to call at a later date 
to arrange a payment plan. He provided a memo to me stating what he had done. He 
does not believe he owes this debt. The debt is not resolved.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($20,973) is a car loan from 2002. Applicant admits he 
owes the debt for a loan he cosigned for his cousin. The car was repossessed in 2004 
or 2005. Applicant stated he has contacted the collection company over the past two 
years to determine the amount of the deficiency, but he has been unsuccessful in 
determining the balance. After his hearing, he contacted the three credit bureaus and 
disputed the debt.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($5,426) is for furniture Applicant purchased for his 
daughter in 2005. She agreed to make the payments on the debt. She stopped paying 
the debt in October 2007. Applicant stated he did not learn the debt was delinquent until 
May 2008, and he was unable to pay the debt at that time. He recently contacted the 
creditor and arranged to pay $50 a week on the current balance ($7,518) with his first 
payment due on January 29, 2010. He provided proof that he made his first payment.8  
 
 Applicant does not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($300). He does not believe 
the debt belongs to him. He provided a memo, after his hearing, stating he contacted 
the creditor on January 28, 2010, and learned the debt was for an early termination fee 
4 Tr. 18-19, 38-39, 86. 
 
5 Tr. 20-21, 88-89; AE G. 
 
6 Tr. 21-22, 90-92; AE F. 
 
7 Tr. 23-26, 92-93; AE H. 
 
8 Tr. 26-30, 93-94; AE B, C. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
on telephone services. He did not recall having service with this company, but agreed to 
pay the debt by March 12, 2010.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶1.i ($5,048) is for a debt Applicant owned jointly with his wife. 
He stated he was responsible for a portion of the debt and paid $2,500 in 2006. He 
explained that his divorce decree specifically divided the debt and he paid what he was 
required. Applicant was questioned on how his divorce decree divided the debt, if he 
already paid his share in 2006. He explained that the divorce decree took into 
consideration his prior payments. Applicant was provided an opportunity to provide a 
copy of his divorce decree, but did not. In February 2008, he made an offer to the 
creditor to pay $100 a month on the debt, beginning in March 2008. There is no 
evidence he made payments on this debt at that time.10 Applicant provided a letter from 
the collection company dated February 2, 2010, showing that he made another offer to 
pay $100 a month to satisfy the debt, beginning on February 20, 2010, and the offer 
was accepted.11 
 
Applicant stated he owes approximately $4,500 in student loans that are deferred 
until 2011. He lives with his girlfriend and she is not employed, but her parents help 
financially. She has a heart condition and cancer. He has been paying her medical bills 
because she could not obtain medical insurance. He does not have a budget, but 
estimates he has $1,000 remaining each month after paying his expenses and helping 
with the medical expenses. He explained that he does not know where his excess 
money is spent. He stated he has used his expendable income to pay off other debts in 
the past. He has approximately $600 in savings, but has a bill for a car repairs that he 
must pay. He purchased a house in 2001, and believes he has approximately $200,000 
in equity. He attempted to refinance his house, but was unsuccessful. Applicant has not 
received any financial counseling. He intends to use his income tax refund to pay his 
delinquent debts. He does not have any credit cards. He has been contributing to a 
401k retirement plan since he began employment with his present company.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
9 Tr. 30-33, 94; AE E. 
 
10 GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. 33-34, 94-96, 99-105; AE D. Applicant may have a legitimate dispute as to the payment of a portion 
of this debt, but he failed to provide substantiating documents. 
 
12 Tr. 54-87; GE 2. 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has had financial problems since 2000. He has delinquent debts that 
remain unpaid or unresolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent and ongoing because his delinquent debts remain 
unpaid or unresolved. Based on Applicant’s history of financial problems, I cannot find 
that the circumstances are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition (a) does not 
apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant assisted his family with medical and funeral expenses in 2000, 2001 
and 2004. He sold some real estate and stocks to fund the expenses. He experienced 
periods of unemployment, and when he and his wife separated he no longer had her 
income to rely on. For mitigating condition (b) to apply, Applicant must show that the 
conditions that caused the financial problems were beyond his control and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. I find these conditions were beyond Applicant’s 
control. However, I do not find he acted responsibly under the circumstances. It has 
been approximately six years since Applicant helped his family. He and his wife have 
been separated for five years and divorced since 2008. He admits he does not know 
where his expendable income is spent. Although he had periods of unemployment, he 
has been steadily employed since 2008, and did not take action until recently to resolve 
his delinquent debts. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not attended financial counseling and he does not have a budget. 
Although he attempted to set up a payment schedule in 2008 for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i, 
he did not provide proof he followed through and made payments. He now has a plan 
with the creditor to make future payments. He is attempting to address some of the 
other debts, but did not take action until after his hearing. I am not convinced the 
problem is being resolved or there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
situation is under control. I find mitigating condition (c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has not made good-faith efforts to pay his creditors. After his hearing, 
he disputed with the credit bureaus the large debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to substantiate any previous efforts regarding his dispute. Applicant 
may have a legitimate dispute with this creditor, but he failed to show he has been 
proactive in attempting to resolve it. There is insufficient evidence to apply mitigating 
condition (e). Applicant arranged a payment schedule with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.g, 
and made his first payment after his hearing. Other debts remain unresolved. At this 
juncture, it is too early to conclude that Applicant will make consistent payments toward 
resolving all of his delinquent debts. Therefore, I cannot find that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved. I find mitigating conditions (d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his country in the 
Air Force for twenty years. He helped his family financially when they were in need, had 
periods of unemployment, and helps his girlfriend with her medical needs. Those 
actions are commendable. However, Applicant has not sufficiently addressed his 
delinquent debts, despite learning of the government’s security concerns in 2008. He 
has been steadily employed since 2008, but did not take action to contact most of his 
creditor until after his hearing. He does not have a budget and has not received financial 
counseling. He does not know how he spends his expendable income each month. 
Applicant needs time to put his finances in order and show he is consistently making 
payments to resolve his debts and resolve any disputed debts. After he establishes a 
budget and track record of responsible financial management, as well as resolution of 
his delinquent debts, he should reapply for a security clearance. At this time, I find that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns related to his finances. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
