 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-02416 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On August 7, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 17, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 14, 2009, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the 
FORM on October 27, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. He did not submit further evidence or correspondence in 
response to the FORM and expressed no objection to my consideration of the evidence 
submitted by Department Counsel. On February 17, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to 
me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations. Those admissions 
and his statements in response to DOHA interrogatories are incorporated in the 
following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he began 
working in June 2007. He is married and has a 5-year-old stepchild. He has no military 
service and has never held a security clearance. He was unemployed from February 
2007 to June 2007. Prior to that, he was employed in low-paying positions. (Item 4.) 
  
 In September 2008, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
delinquent debts. He indicated that his financial problems were the result of low wages, 
periods of unemployment, and mismanagement of funds. With his current job, he 
thought he would be able to manage his expenses and to begin paying his delinquent 
debts. (Item 6 at 6.) 
 
  In May 2009, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories regarding delinquent 
debts listed on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated August 2008 and March 2009. In 
response to questions about the 15 delinquent debts, he claimed that he made a $200 
payment on the $2,960 debt (SOR ¶ 1.j), and unsuccessfully contacted two other 
creditors, including the creditor for his student loan to “avoid default.” (Item 5 at 6.) He 
did nothing regarding the other twelve debts. (Id.) He repeatedly stated, “I will seek 
financial counseling.” (Item 5 at 3.) He also submitted his budget, which recorded his 
net monthly salary as $2,164 and monthly expenses as $1,805, leaving him about $350 
at the end of the month for other expenses. (Item 5.) 
 
Based on said CBRs, the SOR alleged 15 delinquent debts, totaling 
approximately $21,000, including a $15,600 student loan. The debts became delinquent 
between August 2002 and October 2008. (Item 7; Item 8.) Applicant offered no 
corroborating evidence of any payment toward, or other attempt to resolve these debts.  
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence of a plan to resolve his delinquent debts 
and avoid incurring additional ones. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of 
his recent job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence 
tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to 
evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to 
be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Department Counsel argued that the evidence established security concerns 
under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG & 19(a) an Ainability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts;@ and AG & 19(c) Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on 
two CBRs and his statements, Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy debts 
that began accruing in 2002. He demonstrated a seven-year history of not meeting 
financial obligations, as well as a lack of good judgment and reliability. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline includes 
four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties in 
AG ¶ 20. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
arose in 2002 and remain unresolved to date. Because the ongoing problems are not 
isolated and there is no evidence to support a finding that the delinquent indebtedness 
is unlikely to recur, this condition does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment and underemployment, 
which may have been circumstances beyond his control prior to June 2007, when he 
started his current position. He also admitted that he made poor decisions related to his 
finances, and did not offer any evidence that he attempted to act responsibly while the 
debts were accruing or after they accrued. This MC marginally applies.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
 
5 
 
 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant established no mitigation under these 
two provisions. He failed to present evidence that he received credit counseling and/or 
that his financial problems are under control, as required under AG & 20(c). He did not 
provide evidence that he paid, attempted to pay, or has established a repayment plan 
for any debt, whether a $16 debt (SOR 1.a.) or the $15,600 student loan (SOR 1.i.). AG 
& 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
set out in the SOR. He established a consistent pattern of financial irresponsibility 
dating back to 2002, with no evidence of efforts to resolve his outstanding obligations 
despite learning of the Government’s concerns in September 2008, and stating in the 
May 2009 Interrogatories that he intended to address them.  
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation from the present time 
forward, so recurrence and worsening of his financial concerns cannot be said to be 
unlikely. The record contains insufficient other evidence about his character, 
trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or make their continuation 
less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:       Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
