                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-03812 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
A transportation company employed Applicant from 1999 to February 2007. 
Applicant provided wine to a 20-year-old passenger and made comments of a sexual 
nature to her. Applicant denied that he made the inappropriate comments to his 
company and to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. Shortly after 
lying to the OPM investigator, Applicant admitted he made the inappropriate comments 
to the 20-year-old passenger. He failed to fully mitigate security concerns under 
Guideline E. Access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On October 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
amended and modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct) 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On November 2, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge (HE 3). On December 10, 2009, 
Department Counsel announced he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
December 16, 2009, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On January 11, 2010, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice (HE 1). On February 4, 2010, Applicant’s hearing was 
held. At the hearing, Applicant and his spouse made statements. Department Counsel 
offered three exhibits (GE 1-3) (Tr. 18-22), and Applicant offered five exhibits (Tr. 23-26; 
AE A-E). Applicant clarified the date of one of his drug-related arrests as being incorrect 
in his personal subject interview (GE 2). His clarification is accepted with respect to his 
personal subject interview as fact (GE 2). There were no other objections or 
clarifications, and I admitted GE 1-3 (Tr. 22), and AE A-E (Tr. 23-26). Additionally, I 
admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and response to the SOR (HE 1-3). On February 12, 
2010, I received the transcript.     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.d (HE 3). He also provided clarifications and explanations about why he 
believes the security concerns are mitigated (HE 3). His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor (Tr. 6, 54). In 1982, 
he graduated from high school (Tr. 6). He has not attended college (Tr. 6). In 2003, he 
married, and his children are ages five and ten (Tr. 6-7, 54). He has never served in the 
military and has never held a security clearance (Tr. 7, 55-56). He has maintained air 
conditioning equipment for a defense contractor since 2007 (Tr. 55).   
     
Termination from employment with a transportation company  
 
Applicant worked for a transportation company from March 1999 to February 
2007 (GE 1). In December 2006 or January 2007, Applicant provided wine to a 20-year-
old female passenger (Tr. 57, 60). She told Applicant that she was old enough to drink 
alcohol; however, he did not ask her for identification to verify her age (Tr. 60). He also 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
played cards with her for 90 to 120 minutes (Tr. 58, 63). During the card games, 
Applicant said the prize was a massage (Tr. 59). She responded she was not interested 
in a massage (Tr. 59). He said she had pretty eyes, and joking said she should join a 
club similar to the “mile-high club” (Tr. 59). He was indicating that people sometimes 
have sex on transportation vehicles such as an aircraft while in flight (Tr. 6). Applicant 
passed her a note suggesting that she meet with him if she was lonely (Tr. 58, 65). She 
drank half of a 750 milliliter bottle of wine while they were playing cards, and took the 
half-full bottle of wine with her when she left the card game (Tr. 61). He did not charge 
her for the wine because it is company policy to give out complementary wine (Tr. 61-
62). Applicant did not drink any alcohol while on duty that day (Tr. 62). He never 
touched her (Tr. 60). He admitted that he was indirectly “hitting on” her (Tr. 60). The 
passenger informed her parents about Applicant’s conduct, and her parents wrote a 
letter about Applicant’s conduct to Applicant’s employer (Tr. 39). 
 
Applicant’s statements about his inappropriate conduct with the passenger 
 
About two weeks after the incident with the passenger, Applicant’s company 
suspended him from his employment for inappropriate conduct with a passenger (Tr. 
66). Applicant’s company gave him a hearing to contest the allegation, and Applicant 
made a statement at his hearing (Tr. 69). His company generated a transcript of the 
hearing (Tr. 69). At his hearing, Applicant falsely denied making the comments to the 
20-year-old passenger about the massage, and the mile-high club (Tr. 69). He admitted 
giving her the note about meeting her later. He was unsure whether his statement at the 
hearing was under oath or not (Tr. 70). On February 7, 2007, Applicant was fired from 
his employment at the transportation company for inappropriate conduct (Tr. 63, 70). 
  
When Applicant completed his security clearance application on December 15, 
2008, he disclosed he was fired from a job, and he explained in Section 22: 
 
A guest wrote a damaging letter alleging misconduct by me [on the 
transportation company’s vehicle] stating I was trying to pick her up. A 
hearing was held based on her allegations. The company chose to believe 
the guest despite no proof of her allegations and I was fired. The guest 
was looking to get a free travel voucher as she travels frequently.2   
 
 
2The SOR did not allege that Applicant provided false information on his security clearance 
application, or that he lied at his termination hearing held by the transportation company. In ISCR Case 
No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct 
not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
On January 15, 2009, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant (Tr. 73). He told 
the OPM investigator, “the Charge that the subject was hitting on the passenger was 
untrue. Subject believes that the passenger was looking to get free rides from [the 
transportation company] by making the complaint” (Tr. 74; GE 2 at 6). He also told the 
OPM investigator he “has never deliberately concealed or falsified relevant information 
on any form used to conduct investigations or to determine security clearance eligibility” 
(GE 2 at 10).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant said that he lied when he falsely denied making the 
flirtatious comments because he was worried about damaging his marriage and losing 
his family (Tr. 75, 80). Applicant recognized that he made a false statement to the OPM 
investigator, and consulted with his church and his NA sponsor (Tr. 74-75). He called 
the OPM investigator six days later on January 21, 2009, and told the investigator the 
truth (Tr. 75-78; GE 2 at 10). He also told his spouse the truth about providing wine, 
playing cards, writing a note, and making the flirtatious comments to the 20-year-old 
passenger (Tr. 78-80).     
 
Illegal drug use 
 
From about age 18 to about age 30, Applicant used cocaine one to three times 
per week (Tr. 85; GE 3; SOR ¶ 1.d). He used hashish, marijuana, ecstasy, 
methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), valium, and barbiturates at least weekly (Tr. 85; 
GE 3; SOR ¶ 1.d). From about age 30 to about age 37, he used cocaine or crack 
cocaine two to three times per week (Tr. 85; GE 3; SOR ¶ 1.d).  
 
Applicant was arrested for three drug-related offenses in the 1980s, and one 
drug-related offense in the 1990s.  He has not had any drug-related arrests in more 
than ten years (GE 2, 3). 
  
In 1997, Applicant began attending Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meetings (Tr. 86). 
He stopped using illegal drugs on December 14, 1998 (Tr. 86). He did not use illegal 
drugs for 30 months (Tr. 86). He stopped attending NA meetings (Tr. 86-87). In May 
2001, he used illegal drugs for one month (Tr. 86-87). From July 1, 2001, to July 22, 
2001, Applicant attended in-patient drug treatment (Tr. 85; AE B). He successfully 
completed the program on July 22, 2001 (AE B). He currently attends two to three NA 
meetings each week (Tr. 88). He has an eight-year medallion from NA for not using 
illegal drugs for eight years (Tr. 89). It will be nine years without illegal drug use on June 
22, 2010 (Tr. 89).  He has sponsored 12 drug addicts at NA (Tr. 90-91). 
 
Applicant provided a statement indicating if he had a urine sample that tested 
positive for the presence of any illegal drug that his clearance would be automatically 
revoked (Tr. 92; AE A). His urine was tested on November 1, 2007, March 3, 2009, and 
January 5, 2010, and no illegal substances were detected (AE C-E).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Character evidence 
 
Applicant’s spouse has known him for 11 years (Tr. 29). When she met him, he 
was attending NA meetings (Tr. 34). He has attended NA meetings for years and 
sponsored other persons at NA (Tr. 36-37). She has never observed Applicant 
possessing or using illegal drugs (Tr. 29-30). She was aware that he used drugs, and 
received drug rehabilitation in 2001 (Tr. 35). She worked for the same transportation 
company as Applicant for 15 years, and Applicant had an excellent reputation as a 
reliable, dedicated, and hard-working employee (Tr. 49-51). She opined that he was 
trustworthy and honest (Tr. 28). She believed his firing from the transportation company 
could not be used to pressure or extort Applicant for access to classified or sensitive 
information (Tr. 53-54). She recommended that Applicant receive a security clearance 
(Tr. 28).   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline E (personal conduct).  
  
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(b) and 16(d) describe two conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;3 and, 
 
3The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's 
time or resources. 
 
Applicant engaged in a lengthy pattern of drug abuse. From about age 18 to 
about age 30, Applicant used cocaine, hashish, marijuana, ecstasy, MDA, valium, and 
barbiturates on numerous occasions. From about age 30 to about age 37, he used 
cocaine or crack cocaine two to three times per week.  
  
In February 2007, Applicant was terminated from employment with a 
transportation company for making inappropriate comments of a sexual nature to a 20-
year-old passenger. Applicant was 43 years old when he made the inappropriate 
comments. He provided wine to her without verifying that she was 21 years old. His 
behavior in the work place was inappropriate, unreliable and showed poor judgment. He 
falsely denied to his company that he made the inappropriate oral comments of a sexual 
nature to the passenger.  
 
 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
On January 15, 2009, Applicant told an OPM investigator that the allegations the 
passenger made against him were not true. He claimed her motive for fabricating the 
allegations against him was to obtain free rides from the transportation company. He 
lied when he falsely denied making the flirtatious comments because he was worried 
about damaging his marriage and losing his family.  
 
AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(d)(1), 16(d)(2), and 16(d)(3) apply. Further inquiry concerning 
the potential applicability of mitigating conditions is required. AG ¶ 17 provides seven 
conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17 fully apply to all of the SOR 
allegations. Applicant’s false statement to the OPM investigator cannot be mitigated at 
this time because it is too serious and too recent. From early 2007, until January 21, 
2008, Applicant falsely denied making the sexual comments to the 20-year-old 
passenger. He repeatedly accused her of lying when he knew she was telling the truth 
about his inappropriate comments. AG ¶ 17(a) cannot be fully applied because 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant was confronted with the facts at his employment termination hearing in 2007. 
Also his disclosure of the truth was not prompt because he lied in February 2007 at his 
employment termination hearing and on January 15, 2009, to an OPM investigator 
about what really happened in regard to the 20-year-old passenger.4 He deserves 
substantial credit for telling the truth on January 21, 2009, and at his hearing; however, 
it is too soon to fully mitigate the conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.   
 
Applicant has fully disclosed his inappropriate conduct to his spouse. AG ¶ 17(e) 
mitigates the allegation that he did not disclose his misconduct to his spouse in order to 
protect his marriage and preserve his family (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
  
Applicant’s illegal drug use is mitigated. He has not used illegal drugs in almost 
nine years. He has attended thousands of NA sessions and sponsored 12 drug addicts 
through NA counseling. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(g) all apply and mitigate his 
illegal drug possession and use (SOR ¶ 1.d).     
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
4Applicant’s false descriptions of his inappropriate oral statements to the 20-year-old passenger 
at his employment termination hearing and on his security clearance application are used solely to 
evaluate the applicability of AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) and in the whole person concept as discussed in n. 2, 
supra. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12548 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (indicating no abuse of discretion 
for Judge to find disclosures not prompt when Applicant provided false, misleading, or incomplete 
information on his security clearance application and in his first interview with a government 
investigation); ISCR Case No. 05-10921 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 2007) (discussing when a disclosure at 
an investigative interview is “prompt”).   
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. He has not possessed or used any illegal drugs for almost nine years.  
Applicant provided eight years of diligent, loyal service to the transportation company 
until February 2007. In November 2007, Applicant began employment with a defense 
contractor and has contributed to the national defense through his current employment. 
Aside from the incident that resulted in his termination from employment with the 
transportation company, there is no evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. 
There is no evidence of disloyalty. There is no evidence that he would intentionally 
violate national security, or that he would deliberately fail to safeguard sensitive or 
classified information. Applicant provided truthful information to the OPM investigator on 
January 21, 2008, six days after lying to the OPM investigator. He told his spouse the 
truth about making sexual comments to a 20-year-old passenger. He was credible at his 
security clearance hearing. His character and good work performance show substantial 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. The importance to the integrity of the security clearance process of providing 
accurate information on a security clearance application and to an OPM investigator is 
manifest. Applicant also provided false information to the transportation company when 
he denied making oral sexual comments to a 20-year-old passenger at his employment 
termination hearing. His failure to be truthful and candid when he denied or omitted 
potentially disqualifying information from his security clearance application and to an 
OPM investigator on January 15, 2009, at his initial interview outweighs his subsequent 
disclosure of the truth on January 21, 2009. Ultimately, he took full responsibility for 
providing false information to the transportation company and to an OPM investigator.  
 
Applicant’s false statements cannot be fully mitigated at this time because they 
were knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He was 43 years old when he made his 
most recent false statement and sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his 
conduct. His false statements show lack of judgment and a failure to abide by the law. 
Such conduct establishes a serious security concern, and access to classified 
information is not warranted at this time. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has not fully mitigated the security concerns pertaining to personal 
conduct.     
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information.  
 
 
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
