                                                              
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 09-00756 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his latest Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), on September 3, 2008 (Item 5). He previously submitted an e-QIP 
on August 29, 2003 (Item 6). On August 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) (Item 1). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant received 
the SOR on August 31, 2009 (Item 3). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 13, 2009. He admitted all of 
the allegations, and elected to have the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing (Item 4). Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on 
November 4, 2009. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
November 10, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He did not provide 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2010. Based 
upon a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under Guidelines H and E. I carefully 
reviewed the case file and the pleadings, and make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He is a high school graduate, married, with one child. 
At the time he submitted his September 3, 2008 e-QIP, he was waiting for a 
determination of his request for a security clearance to serve as a security officer for a 
defense contractor. While waiting a determination on his security clearance, he was 
working as an outside survey officer for the defense contractor (Item 5). Applicant had 
previously submitted an e-QIP on August 29, 2003 (Item 6). He was granted access to 
classified information on November 23, 2004 (Item 13). In April 2007, he was employed 
as a security officer for the defense contractor but was terminated after he accidently 
discharged his weapon and failed a drug test for marijuana and cocaine (Items 12). 
Applicant was referred by his employer to a drug treatment clinic and was treated by a 
licensed social worker on at least six occasions for drug dependence. His last treatment 
was on June 4, 2007 (Item 10). 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admits he used marijuana from at least 1996 
until 2007 (Item 4). He resigned his position as a corrections officer in December 1996 
after he was questioned by police about his purchase and use of marijuana. Applicant 
arrived at a residence while drug enforcement officers were executing a search-warrant 
search at the premises. The occupants told police Applicant was one of their customers. 
At the time, Applicant was a corrections officer for the local court system (item 7). 
Applicant admitted in an affidavit to security investigators that he inhaled a line of 
cocaine as well as cocaine sprinkled in a marijuana cigarette in January 2007. Applicant 
also admitted he tested positive for marijuana and cocaine in March 2007, after being 
tested for drugs when his weapon discharged while he was working as a security officer 
for the defense contractor. Applicant noted on his security clearance application that he 
used marijuana and cocaine six to ten times from January to March 2007 (Item 5). He 
stated he does not intend to use marijuana or cocaine in the future (Item 9).  
 
 Applicant answered "No" in response to questions concerning his drug use on his 
August 29, 2003 security clearance application. He answered no to questions 27 and 28 
asking if in the last seven years or since the age of 16, he ever used a controlled 
substance while employed as a law enforcement official or while holding a security 
clearance (item 6). On his September 3, 2008, security clearance application, he noted 
that he used marijuana and cocaine from January 2007 until April 2007, but did not list 
any previous illegal drug use (Item 5).  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Administrative Guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
 
4 
 
substances, and include those listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. 
Marijuana is listed in the Act. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal 
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 24).  
 
 Applicant admitted to using marijuana from 1996 until 2007. He admitted using 
cocaine and marijuana six to ten times from January to March 2007. He had to possess 
the marijuana to use it. He was granted a security clearance in 2004. His drug use 
raises Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions (DI DC) AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug use); DI 
DC AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution); and DI DC AG ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance).  
 
 I have considered the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) and find 
none apply. Applicant admitted using marijuana for an extended period of time. He 
admitted using cocaine as recently as 2007.  Even though he states he stopped using 
marijuana and cocaine in 2007, it is recent when compared to his over ten years of 
regular drug use. His use of marijuana and cocaine is therefore recent and frequent. DI 
MC AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant notes that he has not used marijuana or cocaine since 2007. He states he 
does not intend to use marijuana or cocaine in the future. His statement alone is not a 
clear intent to stop using marijuana or cocaine. There is no indication of any changed 
circumstances that may indicate his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. In 
addition, this stated intent is too recent and is in response to interrogatories, as opposed 
to his long history of drug use. DI MC AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
drugs in the future, such as; (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation) does not apply because he failed to provide evidence to 
support the mitigating condition. Applicant used marijuana and cocaine willingly while 
holding a security clearance, and while serving in a law enforcement position of trust. 
He failed to provide any mitigating evidence for his use while holding a security 
clearance. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to overcome the security 
concern for his use of marijuana and cocaine. Guideline H is decided against Applicant 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. 
 
5 
 
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government. Applicant’s false answers on his August 
2003 security clearance application concerning his use of marijuana from 1996 until 
2003, and his use while serving as a law enforcement official raise a security concern. 
His failure to list all of his drug use on the 2008 security clearance application also 
raises security concerns. His false answers raise concerns under Personal Conduct 
Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history, or similar form used to conduct investigations, to determine security 
eligibility or trustworthiness). The discharge of his weapon after using illegal drugs, his 
resignation as a law enforcement official after being at a residence that was a known 
drug distribution point, as well as illegal drug use while holding a security clearance 
raises PC DC AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation, or other character issues indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information). 
 
 Applicant admitted that he deliberately failed to answer drug-related questions 
correctly and accurately on his August 29, 2003, security clearance application.  While 
there is a security concern for an omission, concealment, or falsification of a material 
fact in any written document or oral statement to the government when applying for a 
security clearance, every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a 
falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done 
knowingly and willfully. Applicant notes that since he was not arrested for any offense, 
he was confused by the question. However, the question is straightforward and directly 
asks if he ever used illegal drugs in the last seven year or while a law enforcement 
official. There is little chance for confusion. I find that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose all of his drug use and answered the question to hide his drug use. It is evident 
to any applicant for a security clearance that a clear reason for denying access to 
classified formation is long term extensive drug use, particularly if the individual used it 
while a law enforcement official. For this same reason, he did not list his early drug use, 
but only recent use, in answer to a similar question on his 2007 application. His conduct 
in using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance, and using drugs while carrying 
a weapon shows questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and failure to follow rules 
and regulations. I find against Applicant as to Personal Conduct.   
 
 “Whole-Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge evaluates the 
applicant’s conduct and all of the circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commons sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
 Applicant has not established that he is trustworthy, reliable, and exercises good 
judgment.  To the contrary, he used marijuana and cocaine recently and frequently. He 
used illegal drugs while a law enforcement official, and while holding a security 
clearance. He did not provide full and complete information about his long-term drug 
use on his security clearance applications. Even though he stated he does not intend to 
use illegal drugs in the future, he did not present any information to support his intent. 
Applicant used marijuana and cocaine while being trusted with access to classified 
information. He provided no evidence to convince me he should be trusted again. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a - 2.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
