                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-01001 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists six delinquent debts totaling 
$32,712. He did not provide proof of any payments, or corroborating documentation of 
any SOR debt resolution. He failed to make sufficient effort to resolve his delinquent 
SOR debts. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 8, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (SF 86) (Item 5). On August 19, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant (Item 1), pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
(Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked (Item 1). 
 
On September 10, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
requested a hearing (Item 2). On October 13, 2009, the case was scheduled for a 
hearing; however, Applicant requested a continuance. Administrative Judge Crean 
denied the request for a continuance. Department Counsel orally notified Applicant that 
the request for delay was denied, and the hearing would be held as scheduled on 
October 19, 2009 (Item 4). Applicant did not appear at the hearing. Applicant 
subsequently requested a decision on the record, which Administrative Judge Crean 
granted (Item 4).    
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 24, 
2009, was provided to him on January 12, 2010, and he was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted responsibility for the three debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d (Items 1, 2).3 He also described why he did not resolve 
some of his debts. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor.4 His position title is 
individual training specialist. He received a bachelor of science degree in June 1997. In 
2006 he married, and he was divorced in 2008. His children were born in 1991 and 
1995. He served in the Army from March 1987 to the present.    
 
Applicant did not disclose any unpaid liens, garnishments, debt currently over 90 
days delinquent, debt over 180 days delinquent in the last seven years, illegal drug use, 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated December 29, 2009; and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
January 12, 2010 (file). The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his 
receipt to submit information (file).  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
September 10, 2009, SOR response (Item 2). 
 
4Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
October 8, 2008, SF 86 (Item 5). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
or alcohol-related offenses on his October 8, 2008, security clearance application. He 
disclosed that a sexual assault charge was dismissed in 2002, and the record of the 
charge was expunged.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
An Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant on 
November 13, 2008 (Item 6). The OPM investigator reviewed the SOR debts with 
Applicant. Applicant asserted that he was separated from his fiancée and then wife for a 
time, and she was receiving the bills, which she did not pay (Item 6). In 2008, they were 
divorced (Item 6). 
 
On June 1, 2009, Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS) (Item 
7 at 4). His monthly gross salary is $4,188. His monthly net salary is $2,956. His 
monthly expenses are $1,870. His monthly debt payments total $760. His net remainder 
is $826. None of the SOR debts are listed as a financial obligation on his PFS. 
Applicant’s SOR lists six delinquent debts totaling $32,712. A detailed description of the 
status of those debts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($192)—DEBT UNRESOLVED. On September 5, 2009, Applicant 
said this account was transferred, and he is in the process of contacting the new 
creditor concerning the debt (Item 2 at 1). On January 12, 2010, Applicant was served 
with the FORM and notified he had 30 days to provide updated information. He did not 
provide an update about resolution of this debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($14,867)—DEBT UNRESOLVED. On September 5, 2009, Applicant 
said he and his wife were mutually responsible for this debt. He stated, “This debt was 
contested due to divorce agreement that entitles her to the vehicle. This debt is 
currently going through litigation proceedings to counter it’s legitimacy” (Item 2 at 1). On 
January 12, 2010, Applicant was served with the FORM and notified he had 30 days to 
provide updated information. He did not provide an update about resolution of this debt. 
He did not provide a copy of his divorce decree or any other documentation showing the 
dispute of this debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($15,490)—DEBT UNRESOLVED. Applicant’s vehicle was 
repossessed in 2002 (FORM at 3; Item 6 at 3-4; Item 8 at 5). There were two settlement 
offers; however, there is no evidence of acceptance and payments (FORM at 4). On 
June 1, 2009, Applicant said he asked for more information from the creditor and was 
waiting for the creditor to further decrease their settlement offer (Item 7 at 5). On 
September 5, 2009, Applicant provided a copy of a September 2, 2009, settlement offer 
from the creditor seeking $1,566 in a lump sum, or payments of $10 per month (Item 2 
at 3). The offer expired on September 30, 2009 (Item 2 at 3). On January 12, 2010, 
Applicant was served with the FORM and notified he had 30 days to provide updated 
information. He did not provide an update about resolution of this debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d ($257)—DEBT UNRESOLVED. On September 5, 2009, Applicant 
admitted responsibility for the debt; however, he said this account was transferred (Item 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
2 at 2). On January 12, 2010, Applicant was served with the FORM and notified he had 
30 days to provide updated information. He did not provide an update about resolution 
of this debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($363)—UNRESOLVED. On September 5, 2009, Applicant said this 
account was disputed. Applicant said an insurance company overcharged him for a 
vehicle that he sold two years previously (Item 2 at 2). On January 12, 2010, Applicant 
was served with the FORM and notified he had 30 days to provide updated information. 
He did not provide any correspondence to or from the creditor or update the status of 
the resolution of this debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,543)—UNRESOLVED. On September 5, 2009, Applicant said this 
account was disputed. Applicant said a telecommunications debt was generated in 
1998. He unsuccessfully attempted to have it removed from his credit report (Item 2 at 
2). On January 12, 2010, Applicant was served with the FORM and notified he had 30 
days to provide updated information. He did not provide any correspondence to or from 
the creditor or update the status of the resolution of this debt.  
 
The FORM cites lack of documentation showing disputed debts, payments, and 
financial counseling, placing Applicant on notice of what he needed to do to alleviate or 
mitigate security concerns. The file does not contain any documentary evidence that 
debts are paid, disputed, in established payment plans, or that Applicant has received 
financial counseling.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, responses to interrogatories, Office of Personnel Management interview, 
and his SOR response. His six delinquent SOR debts total $32,712. One debt became 
delinquent in 1998, and has not been resolved. One creditor offered to settle a debt for 
10% of the amount owed, and Applicant did not take action to accept the settlement and 
pay the debt. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). Additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions is 
required.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether Applicant is fully committed to resolving his delinquent 
SOR debts and is making adequate steps to do so.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by his 
fiancée and then spouse’s failure to pay the family debts, when she was in a position to 
do so. In 2008, he was divorced. However, there is insufficient evidence about these 
circumstances to show their effect on his financial situation, and that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is insufficient evidence he maintained 
contact with his creditors on several of his SOR debts.5 Once he learned of his 
delinquent debts at his OPM interview on November 13, 2008, his documented actions 
were insufficient to establish he acted responsibly under the circumstances.     
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He did not receive financial counseling. Applicant 
provided a PFS or budget, and he understands from the FORM what he must do to 
establish his financial responsibility. Applicant cannot receive full credit under AG ¶ 
20(c) because he has not paid, established payment plans (by making payments), 
adequately documented disputes of debts, or otherwise resolved any of his SOR debts. 
There are some initial, positive “indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.” He has admitted responsibility for three SOR debts, and documented his 
communication with one of them. He also established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) 
by showing some good faith6 in the resolution of his SOR debts by admitting 
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
responsibility for three SOR debts, and promising to pay them. AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable because Applicant did not provide documentation showing he disputed any 
of his SOR debts.   
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He has had steady employment. He did 
not provide proof of any payments to his SOR creditors. He has not provided 
documentation showing sufficient progress on his SOR debts. His steps are simply 
inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant is 43 years old. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He has served in the Army 
since 1987, and has a bachelor of science degree. He deserves substantial credit for 
volunteering to support the Department of Defense as an employee of a defense 
contractor. There is no evidence that he has ever violated security rules. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States, the Department of Defense, and his 
employer. There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. His fiancée 
and then spouse’s failure to pay their bills, and his divorce contributed to his financial 
woes. He communicated with several creditors and discussed payment arrangements. 
These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a history of financial problems. His oldest delinquent SOR 
debt became delinquent in 1998. When an OPM investigator interviewed him on 
November 13, 2008, he learned of several delinquent SOR debts. Financial security 
concerns were further highlighted when he responded to DOHA interrogatories, and on 
September 10, 2009, when he responded to the SOR. He had ample notice of his 
delinquent SOR debts, and sufficient opportunity to make greater progress in the 
resolution of his SOR debts. He did not pay, start payments, document and justify any 
disputes, or otherwise resolve any SOR debts. He did not prove he lacked sufficient 
income to make greater progress resolving his debts. Applicant has not proven that he 
has an established payment plan on any SOR debts. His promises to pay some of the 
SOR debts are insufficient to mitigate these debts because there is insufficient evidence 
to explain why he has not done more to address his SOR debts after becoming aware 
that they raised a security concern.    
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person and Adjudicative Process factors and supporting 
evidence, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
