  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07213 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In 2007, Applicant wrongfully obtained an access badge, which allowed him 
access to the United States Embassy in Baghdad. He was also aware another person 
had obtained a similar access badge. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the 
government’s security concerns under personal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 11, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
personal conduct. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
1 
  
 On January 26, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated February 24, 2010. The FORM 
contained 7 attachments (Items). On March 2, 2010, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
On March 15, 2010, Applicant’s response to the FORM was received. 
Department Counsel did not object to the material. Applicant's response was admitted 
into the record. On March 19, 2010, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the factual allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old logistics specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2009, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. In July 
2006, Applicant retired from the Marine Corps as a lieutenant colonel with 22 years of 
service. (Item 5) From January 2004 through April 2005, he had been stationed in Iraq 
as an advisor to the Iraqi Army. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant began working on construction projects in Iraq as a project 
program manager. (Item 7) In July 2006, while traveling to his work site, he was shot in 
the leg during an ambush and medivaced to a military hospital in Germany. (Item 6) In 
December 2006, he returned to Baghdad where he met a retired Marine Corps master 
sergeant working for a DoD security contractor involved in convoy and escort security. 
(Item 7, p. 1) Applicant knew this individual when both were assigned as Marine Corps 
advisors to the Iraqi army. Both were working in the Green Zone. A coworker of the 
retired master sergeant made identification (ID) cards and access badges for their 
company. That individual made Applicant an access badge allowing him access to the 
U.S. Embassy grounds for six months. Applicant believes the access badges were the 
same badges issued to all employees working for the DoD security contractor.  
 
 Although the other individual never asked for money, Applicant gave the 
individual $50 for doing him the favor of providing him the badge. The badge allowed 
Applicant to use the gym, swimming pool, dining facilities, and attend entertainment 
events at the Embassy. (Item 5, page 49 of 53, Item 6, Item 7) Applicant knew he was 
unauthorized to have the card because he was not working for the same defense 
contractor as his friend. (Item 6) Applicant used the card to use the Embassy’s 
recreation area. In June or July 2007, shortly after the access badge expired, Applicant 
shredded it. (Item 7) In May 2007, Applicant left Iraq and went to Afghanistan. In 
January 2008, he returned to Iraq working for a Lebanese company operated by 
American citizens.  
 
2 
 Applicant was aware the former master sergeant helped a Lebanese contractor 
obtain a similar badge. Applicant, the former master sergeant, and the Lebanese 
contractor had met in 2004 when they all worked at the same Iraqi military base. The 
contractor was working on several contracts with the Iraqi military. (Item 7, p. 3) The 
Lebanese contractor obtained the badge so he could carry a weapon while traveling to 
different construction sites in Iraq. People were being killed on the roads daily and also 
kidnapped at gunpoint. (Answer to FORM) Being attacked traveling to job sites was not 
uncommon. Applicant failed to report that he knew the Lebanese contractor had 
obtained the badge.  
 
 An investigation into access badges started when the Lebanese contractor was 
stopped entering the Green Zone with his expired access badge. (Item 7) The retired 
master sergeant was terminated from his DoD security contractor job for providing the 
access badges. When questioned during the investigation, Applicant disclosed all he 
knew about the badges and the other contractor having a badge. The former master 
sergeant was terminated from his employment for his conduct. 
 
Applicant realizes his conduct was wrong and he is extremely sorry for the 
damage caused by his action. He takes full responsibility for his conduct. (Answer to 
FORM) In his August 2009 statement, Applicant says, “I definitely made a poor decision 
and understand that I must live with the consequences of that decision.” (Item 6, p. 3-4) 
Applicant asks that his previous service be taken into consideration. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
3 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The Directive sets out various factors relevant to an applicant=s personal conduct 
that may be potentially disqualifying. Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 
articulates the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
potentially be disqualifying. The applicable conditions are : 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
4 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. 
 
For a six month period ending in June or July 2007, Applicant wrongfully 
possessed an access badge granting him access to the U.S. Embassy compound and 
knew a Lebanese contractor possessed similar access. Applicant’s judgment and 
reliability were questionable. Applicant exercised poor judgment, lack of candor, and 
dishonesty. He was unwilling to comply with rules and regulations. To his credit, he fully 
explained his involvement, but only when an investigation had already started and he 
was questioned about the access badges. AG ¶ 16(c) applies. Although this was a rule 
violation and Applicant was not authorized to have the access badge, it was not a 
“pattern” of dishonesty or rule violations . AG ¶ 16(d)(3) does not apply. 
 
Applicant realizes his conduct was wrong and he is extremely sorry for the 
damage caused by his action. He takes full responsibility for his conduct. (Answer to 
FORM) 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
5 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) and AG ¶ 17(b) do not apply because falsification was not alleged. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because the conduct was not minor. In this case, the illegally 
obtained badges did not cause a security incident, but potentially such a breach of 
security could have resulted in severe consequences.  
 
AG ¶ 17(d) has limited application. Applicant has acknowledged his guilt and 
acknowledged his behavior was inappropriate. However, there is no indication as to 
positive steps he has taken to eliminate the inappropriate behavior. AG ¶ 17(e) does not 
apply because vulnerability was not alleged. AG ¶ 17(f) does not apply because the 
information was substantiated and AG ¶ 17(g) does not apply because Applicant was 
not alleged to have associated with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had a former colleague 
get him an access badge so he could use the gym, pool, and recreational area at the 
Embassy. This was wrong. He also knew a civilian contractor had a similar access 
6 
7 
badge allowing him to carry a weapon when traveling to and from construction sites. 
Applicant’s knowledge about the other contractor having a badge and not reporting it 
was also wrong. This inappropriate conduct is balanced against Applicant’s past service 
to his country.  
 
Applicant deserves substantial credit for his service in Southwest Asia at various 
times from 2004 through 2008. Applicant spent 22 years in the Marine Corps, retiring as 
a lieutenant colonel. In 2004 and 2005, he was in Iraq training the Iraqi military. He has 
demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism, and trustworthiness through his service to the DoD 
through his active duty service and as a contractor. He has served more than four years 
in combat zones in Iraq and Afghanistan on active duty and as a contractor. He has 
risked his life to support DoD missions in those countries.  
 
In July 2006, while performing his service as a contractor, Applicant’s convoy 
was ambushed and he was shot in the leg. Four months later, he was out of the hospital 
and returned to Iraq to continue his duties as a contractor. He served not only in Iraq, 
but also in Afghanistan in support of the DoD mission. His security clearance application 
does not list any other reportable incidents involving illegal drugs, alcohol, the police or 
courts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
