DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
The response to the FORM was identical to the supplemental materials Applicant provide with his Answer.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-06441
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 6 November 2009 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines J, Criminal Conduct, E, Personal Conduct, and F, Financial Considerations.1
Applicant answered the SOR 24 November 2009, and requested a decision without
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 19 March 2010. The record in this case closed
8 March 2010, the day Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s
response  to the FORM.2
These misrepresentations were not alleged in the SOR, but provide essential context for assessing the3
alleged false statements made to the government investigator in May 2009.
Although Applicant reported it on his clearance application as his past due debt.4
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 3.b. and 3.i. He is a 36-
year-old range maintenance technician employed by a defense contractor since March
2009. He has not previously held a  security clearance.
In July 2007, Applicant was charged with larceny, forgery, and false official
statement under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and referred to trial by general
court-martial [Item 5]. In August 2007, Applicant, with the advice of counsel, requested
to be discharged in lieu of court-martial. His request acknowledged in some detail his
criminal culpability [Item 8]. In separate correspondence, he provided character
references and asked for a General Discharge (Under Honorable Conditions). In
September 2007, his request was approved and he was discharged. 
The Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) has placed Applicant’s
account for collection of $31,000 in improper payments [Item 10]. Applicant’s answer
and response to the FORM reflect that Applicant repaid DFAS about $6,800 for four
vouchers totaling nearly $12,000 in late February/early March 2007. He has claimed in
various documents that this constitutes full repayment of amounts improperly paid to
him. He also claims, without corroboration, that he voluntarily reported the improper
payments to DFAS.
In March 2009, Applicant completed a clearance application in which he
misrepresented the circumstances of his separation from the military.  As a past3
employment, Applicant did not report his discharge as an adverse employment action [
13 (c)]. Although he disclosed the fact of his referral to court-martial, he disclosed only
one of the three charges against him and claimed he was referred to a special court-
martial, a lesser forum [§ 15]. He claimed to have only taken a discharge because he
felt the military was treating him unfairly concerning the charges [§ 22]. He certified that
his statements were “true, complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief
and are made in good faith.” [Item 4] During an interview with a government investigator
in May 2009, Applicant insisted that, contrary to express statements in his request for
discharge, he had violated no regulation and had committed no crime.
The SOR alleged, and government exhibits confirmed, 11 delinquent debts
totaling nearly $49,000. Applicant admitted nine debts totaling over $36,000. The bulk of
the debt, $31,000, is to DFAS, although Applicant questions the amount owed.
Applicant denies a utility debt (1.b) claiming it belongs to his father,  and claims that a4
Applicant provided no divorce records to substantiate this claim.5
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
3
joint debt for a repossessed car (1.I) was assigned to his ex-wife in their divorce
decree.  He has not been in contact with any of his creditors.5
Applicant divorced his wife in May 2006, and is currently engaged. He offered no
explanation for his indebtedness, and appears to have been continuously employed
since May 2000.
Applicant provided no work or character references. He does not have a budget
and has not received financial counseling.
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial commonsense consideration of the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.6
¶31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,7
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
¶32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual8
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or judgment; (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, . . . good employment record . . .
¶16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel9
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline J, and
Applicant did not mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. Applicant stole from
the government, using forged documentation to request voucher repayment.  He7
breached his fiduciary duty to the government. He appears to have made only partial
restitution of the amounts he stole, and demonstrates no remorse—insisting despite his
written statements to the contrary—that he did nothing wrong.  I resolve Guideline J8
against Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. His statements to the government
investigator misrepresented the full circumstances attendant to his discharge from the
military in September 2007.  Applicant’s misrepresentations on his clearance application9
lead me to conclude that his misrepresentations during the interview were deliberate,
and designed to influence the direction of the investigation.
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant did not give a full account of the
circumstances of his discharge.
Applicant’s concealment of relevant and material information demonstrates a lack
of candor required of cleared personnel. The government has an interest in examining
all relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before making a
clearance decision. The government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that
adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about
himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has significant delinquent
¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.10
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that11
it is  unlikely to recur .
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and12
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
¶ 20(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications13
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.14
5
debt dating back several years, for which he has no ameliorating explanation.  The10
major debt is directly attributable to his criminal actions. It may be inferred that he
submitted fraudulent travel claims because he needed the money.
Applicant satisfies none of the mitigating factors for financial concerns. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  The debts do not appear to be due to11
circumstances beyond his control, and he has not acted responsibly in addressing his
debts.  He has not sought credit counseling, made a budget, or devised a plan to12
address his debts, so I cannot conclude he has brought the problem under control.  He13
has made no efforts to contact or repay his creditors, so there has been no good-faith
effort to satisfy his debts.  I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.14
Beyond the specific guidelines alleged by the government, the generally
applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions lead to the same result. Theft, breach 
of fiduciary duty, and falsifications are core security concerns [AG &2(a)(1)]. His 
behavior was deliberate and not due to circumstances beyond his control 
[AG &2(a)(2); AG &2(a)(5)]. His misconduct was both recent and frequent 
[AG &2(a)(3)]. Applicant was not a neophyte when he made his falsifications
[AG &2(a)(4).)]. Rehabilitation and other behavioral changes are difficult to measure
under these circumstances, as he produced no evidence to corroborate his claims [AG
& 2(a)(6)]. He clearly sought to mislead the government about his discharge [AG
&2(a)(7)].
Applicant’s willingness to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government
interests increases his potential vulnerability and he has not demonstrated that the
misconduct is unlikely to recur [AG & 2(a)(8); AG & 2(a)(9)]. The concern is whether
Applicant would disclose situations or circumstances, whether deliberate or inadvertent,
that raise security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial doubt
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal
conduct, falsification, and financial problems.
6
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-j Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
