 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 09-05233 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF-86) on January 
5, 2009. On December 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On January 19, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 
 
2 
 
 
2010. I convened a hearing on February 22, 2010, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced six exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through F and admitted to the record 
without objection.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open for one week, until close of 
business March 1, 2010, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional 
information for the record. Applicant did not file any additional information. The record 
closed on March 1, 2010. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on March 3, 
2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG ¶ 18, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all eight allegations. Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as 
findings of fact. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 19-20, 28-31, 35-46, 55-63.)  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old, married, and the father of three young children. He 
seeks a security clearance for his duties as a security administrator and physical 
security investigator for a government contractor. (Ex. 1; Tr. 41-42, 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant attended college from 1993 to 1997, but he did not take a degree. He 
enlisted in the military in 1997, where he served as a hospital corpsman. In April 2005, 
he was released from the military for failure to advance in rank within a certain period of 
time. Applicant was unemployed between April and June 2005. (Ex. 1; Tr. 42-45, 50.) 
 
 In 2006 or 2007, Applicant enlisted in a military reserve unit, with the 
understanding that he would serve for one year, receive a bonus, medical benefits, and 
an increase in rank. He did not receive his increase in rank, and he was recalled to 
active duty in July 2007. He was released from active duty orders for medical reasons. 
He has not returned to drill, although he does not recall receiving a release letter. His 
commitment to the inactive reserve ends in May 2010. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 In 2001, Applicant and his wife purchased a home for approximately $58,000. In 
late 2005 or early 2006, he and his wife refinanced their house for approximately 
$101,000. They used the proceeds from the refinance to pay numerous debts, including 
a loan of approximately $12,000, an automobile loan of approximately $5,000 to 6,000, 
and several credit card obligations. After their debts were paid from the proceeds of the 
refinance, Applicant and his wife netted approximately $3,000. The refinance provided 
them with a clean financial slate. (Tr. 88-90.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 In 2007, Applicant accepted a job in another community, and he and his wife 
rented their home to individuals who agreed to purchase it. The prospective purchasers 
decided not to buy Applicant’s home. Applicant and his wife then put their home on the 
market and tried, unsuccessfully, to sell it. Their monthly rent payments in the new 
community were twice as high as their mortgage payments had been. As of December 
23, 2009, Applicant and his wife were past due on their mortgage payments and owed 
the mortgage company $4,000. Their mortgage was in foreclosure with a total loan 
balance of $101,000. Applicant was unable to provide information on how long the 
home was rented or when it went into foreclosure. This debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Applicant has made no payments on this debt. He claimed the creditor had filed for 
bankruptcy and he was unable to contact a successor creditor.  (Tr. 34-40, 77-82.) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant provided a personal financial statement in response 
to DOHA interrogatories. The personal financial statement shows Applicant’s net 
monthly salary as $2,416 and his wife’s net monthly salary as $3,000. In addition, 
Applicant’s wife receives $1,063 each month in military disability pay. At his hearing, 
Applicant confirmed the accuracy of these amounts, which, in total, reflect a net monthly 
household income of $6,479. (Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 50-54.) 
 
 Applicant also confirmed at his hearing that his monthly household expenses are 
as follows: rent: $1,725; groceries: $600; clothing: $250; utilities: $820; car expenses: 
$1,0001; life and other insurance: $1.80; medical expenses (co-pays): $250; day care: 
$125; and miscellaneous: $300. Applicant’s personal financial statement reflected that 
he made no payments on any of his existing debts. After paying his household 
expenses of $5,071.80, Applicant has a monthly net remainder of approximately $1,407. 
(Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 55, 57-58, 61.) 
 
 The SOR alleged eight financial delinquencies, all of which were identified on 
Applicant’s personal financial statement of October 2009. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the eight alleged debts. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant owed a creditor $2,266 on an unpaid 
debt in collection status. Applicant admitted the debt and stated that the debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.d. was a duplicate of the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. He offered to provide 
documentation to corroborate his statement, but he failed to do so. The debt, identified 
as a non-tax federal debt, was satisfied when the Department of the Treasury 
intercepted Applicant’s federal income tax refund and applied it to the delinquent debt.  
(Ex. E; Tr. 34-38, 64-66.)  
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶1.b. that Applicant owed a department store creditor a $620 
debt which as in collection status. Applicant acknowledged that the debt was 
 
1Applicant and his wife own two automobiles: a 2001 Chevrolet, which is paid for, and a 2010 Mitsubishi, 
which was purchased to replace a Ford Expedition which was deemed a total loss as the result of a fire. 
Applicant’s monthly car expenses of $1000 include an estimated $400 payment on the 2010 Mitsubishi. 
(Tr. 93-95.)    
 
4 
 
 
unresolved. He provided a settlement offer from the creditor, dated December 2009, 
which he had not responded to. (Ex. F; Tr. 66-72.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant owed a creditor $3,852 on a debt in 
collection status. In October 2009, Applicant’s employer complied with a wage 
garnishment order from the U.S. Treasury Department. In compliance with the order,   
Applicant’s wages are garnished by approximately $240 every two weeks to satisfy the 
debt, which was identified as $4,931 in October 2009. (Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. C; Tr. 33-34, 
75-76.)  
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant owed a charged-off debt of $266 to a 
communications company. The SOR alleged at ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.h. that Applicant also 
owed charged-off debts of $58 and $82 to the same communications company. At his 
hearing, Applicant stated he had not contacted the creditor communications company to 
arrange payment. The debts remain unresolved. (Tr. 76-77.)  
 
 Applicant reported he had $5 in a savings account and $4,000 in his 401(k) 
account.  He reported total assets of $11,000, which included an automobile, jewelry, 
clothing, household furnishings, and electronic equipment. (Ex. 3 at 3; Tr. 59-60.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is responsible for managing the family’s finances, paying all bills, 
and filing the couple’s federal and state income tax returns. Applicant and his wife do 
not have a budget. Applicant has not had financial counseling. (Tr. 60-62.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor provided a letter of character reference for the record. He 
noted that he had supervised Applicant for two years and, during that time, he had 
found Applicant to be a responsible and professional employee. He also noted that 
Applicant had received favorable job performance ratings and had been promoted 
twice. (Ex. D.)  
 
                                                  Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
5 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties that began in at least 2005 or 
2006, when he refinanced his home in order to satisfy a number of his creditors. With 
the exception of a brief period of unemployment from April to June 2005, Applicant has   
been steadily employed since he was released from the military in 2005. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant failed to provide documentation that he had voluntarily satisfied any of 
the debts alleged on the SOR. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. was satisfied when the 
Treasury Department seized Applicant’s federal income tax refund and applied it to a 
non-tax federal delinquent debt that he owed. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. is 
currently being satisfied by wage garnishment. Applicant’s mortgage debt remains 
unsatisfied, as do three small debts to a communication company, and a department 
store debt of $620. Moreover, Applicant failed to provide documentation to corroborate 
his claim that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. duplicated the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He does not have a budget. His 
monthly net remainder of approximately $1,400 resulted from his failure to pay his 
delinquent debts. While he admitted his financial delinquencies, it was not clear that he 
understood his financial problems or how to resolve them. He has no plan in place to 
systematically resolve his substantial delinquent debt and prepare for future 
contingencies. I conclude that none of the Financial Consideration mitigating conditions 
apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 35 
years. His financial problems began at least four to five years ago. During that time, he 
has failed to take an interest in his financial obligations, and he has left all financial 
decisions and actions to his wife. He has not taken affirmative action to live within his 
means and to pay or resolve his substantial delinquent debts. His lack of attention to his 
financial delinquencies continues to raise security concerns. Despite a steady income 
for several years, he has failed to budget his income to satisfy his many debts, and he 
has not sought credit counseling. 
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment and his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:            Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:            Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
  
                                                         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
