                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 09-04233
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 31, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D.,  Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on March 10, 2009.  On October 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on November 23, 2009, in which
he elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on December 15, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit
information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant
received the FORM on January 13, 2010, and he submitted a reply dated February 16,
2
2010, which was admitted without objection.  The case was assigned to the
undersigned for resolution on March 11, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.    
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 30 years old and has a Bachelor’s Degree.  He is employed by a
defense contractor, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  He has a
history of illegal drug use.  He began using marijuana in 1998, that continued until July
2007.  Applicant states that the bulk of his marijuana use occurred while in high school,
from 1998 to 1999.  He use marijuana every few months with friends.  In total, the
Applicant admits to using marijuana between 20 and 30 times. On some occasions, the
Applicant purchased marijuana, but it was strictly for his use.  In November 2000, at the
age of twenty-one, the Applicant was diagnosed with cancer in his sinus cavity and from
then until July 2001, he underwent daily radiation and chemotherapy and did not use
any illegal drugs during that time.  He then moved out of state and came away with a
“you only live once attitude”.  
In 2003, the Applicant used cocaine for the first time.  His girlfriend at the time
introduced him to cocaine and he used it, never alone, but with her and her friends.
From 2003 through July 2008, the Applicant used cocaine.  During this period he was in
college.   Applicant used cocaine every couple of months during a five month period.
Applicant admits to using cocaine between 10 and 20 times.  The majority of his
cocaine usage occurred in 2003 and 2004.  Applicant also tried mushrooms on two
occasions between 1998 and 2001.  (Government Exhibit 3).  The Applicant graduated
from college in 2008 and stopped using illegal drugs.  (Government Exhibit 3).  
Applicant now no longer associates with individuals who use illegal drugs.  He
has recently completed his second bout with cancer and is undergoing treatment for a
tumor.  Once he beats cancer for the second time, his indicates that his singular goal is
to maintain a successful career that will allow him to pay off his student loans and
someday raise a family.  (Government Exhibit 3).         
Applicant submitted a letter of intent dated February 3, 2010, indicating that he
swears never to use any illegal drug in the future.  He understands that if he violates
any provision set forth in DoD Directive 5220.6, he willingly agrees to have his security
clearance automatically revoked.  (Applicant’s Reply to the FORM).  
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s direct supervisor and from a
coworker indicate that the Applicant has developed a great deal of respect based upon
3
his wonderful attributes that include, professionalism, integrity, unwavering work ethic,
excellent team player, positive attitude, dedication to the company, organization skills,
rapid learning abilities, self supervision/discipline and multi-discipline technical prowess.
Applicant is said to be easy to get along with and is an excellent problem solver.  He
has their highest recommendation for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Reply to the
FORM) 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25. (a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26. (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
4
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”             
                                   
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
5
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines H of the SOR.  I have considered all of the
evidence presented in this case, including the letters of recommendation, and the letter
of intent signed by the Applicant.  The Applicant has not used any illegal drug since
2008, over two years ago, and he has no intentions of ever using any illegal drug again.
He now has a better understanding of the seriousness and negative effects of illegal
drugs, namely how they can destroy your mind, your body and your career potential.
He realizes that he used bad judgment during the period he used illegal drugs and is
now committed to a drug free lifestyle.  He has significantly matured since college, and
no longer associates with illegal drug users.  He has obviously increased his self-
confidence and no longer needs to hang around with losers in society.  Applicant has
signed a statement of intent indicating that he will not use illegal drugs in the future, and
if he does, his security clearance will be immediately revoked.  This further
demonstrates his commitment to a drug free lifestyle.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25.(a) any drug
abuse, and 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, apply.
Mitigating Conditions 26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,
such as: 26.(b).(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 26.(b).(3) an
appropriate period of abstinence, and 26.(b).(4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation applies.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 30 years old, educated,
intelligent and successful.  He understands the responsibilities of an individual who has
the privilege of holding a security clearance.  He realizes the seriousness of illegal drug
use and how negatively it can effect his life.  He no longer uses illegal drugs, and is
looking forward to a successful career and a good life.  Under the particular facts of this
case, the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines
as a whole, support a whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.  
6
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and that he meets the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information at this time.  Accordingly, I
find for the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1.                                                                                                                      
  
  FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
