  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00200 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had two unpaid judgments, a state tax lien, and twelve accounts placed 
for collection, which totaled approximately $10,500. Applicant has paid most of the 
debts and has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 29, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On June 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
July 15, 2009, I was assigned the case. On July 27, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on August 24, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence. Four individuals testified on Applicant’s behalf. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Exhibits A through P, which were admitted into evidence. The 
record was held open to allow additional information from Applicant. On September 3, 
2009, additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the 
material, which was admitted into the record as Ex. Q and R. On January 19, 2010, 
additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the 
material, which was admitted into the record as Ex. S through W. On March 1, 2010, 
additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the 
material, which was admitted into the record as Ex. X through UU. On September 1, 
2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Procedural 
 
 At the start of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR. There 
being no objection, the following changes were made: SOR ¶ 1.d was amended by 
adding the words “in the amount of $2,554”; ¶ 1.e was amended by adding the words “in 
the amount of $202”; and, ¶ 1.j was amended deleting the word “Texas” and replacing it 
with the word “Utah.” (Tr. 20-22) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations, with 
explanations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. 
After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old information technology (IT) technician and help desk 
analysts who has worked for a defense contractor since August 2008, and is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 119) Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, and friends 
state: Applicant is hard working, intelligent, dedicated, compassionate, honest, and 
trustworthy. He places the value of his employer and work assignment at the same level 
as his personal wants and needs. (Ex. A, B, F) He has tenacity, a positive attitude, and 
is an effective team builder who creates a positive work environment. (Ex. C) Applicant 
is a solid, dedicated, determined person who serves as a role model for his children and 
associates. (Ex. D, E, G) Applicant is “a man of quiet confidence with a desire to 
succeed.” (Ex. H) He has received a certificate of recognition and appreciation for his 
duty performance from September 2000 to June 2003. (Ex. P) 
 
2 
At his home group 12-step program, Applicant provides substance when relating 
his past mistakes and hardships. (Tr. 40) Applicant knows how important it is to make 
amends for his shortcomings concerning his finances. (Tr. 41) Applicant is serious 
about correcting his financial problems. (Tr. 45) A month prior the hearing, Applicant 
received assistance from his church to pay a $215 electrical utility bill. (Tr. 51, 52) 
Applicant’s pastor believes Applicant will follow through on promises made. (Tr. 57) His 
church has a detailed program addressing financial problems and providing financial 
counseling. However, Applicant had yet to start the counseling. (Tr. 55, 199) In his June 
2009, response to the SOR, Applicant stated he would enroll in a personal finance 
course offered by the local community college and provided a copy of the course 
syllabus. He never enrolled.  
 
Applicant’s sponsor in a 12-step program believes Applicant is sincere, hard 
working, responsible, and focused. (Tr. 66, 85) His sponsor states Applicant has a firm 
resolve to satisfy his debts as quickly as possible. (Tr. 71) Applicant’s father said there 
is property from an estate, a home, which is being sold. When it sells, Applicant’s 
portions would be at least $15,000. (Ex. L, M, N, Tr. 98, 114) the house was just being 
put on the market. (Tr. 100) In the past, his father has given him $1,500 twice. (Tr. 106)  
 
In August 2003, Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. 
In August 2004, the bankruptcy was discharged. In 2003 or 2003, Applicant was 
working in the IT field making twice what other employees at the company were making. 
(Tr. 187) Instead of firing him, his pay was cut. (Tr. 187)  
 
 Applicant submitted four pages of his Chapter 7 Schedule F, a list of creditors 
holding unsecured nonpriority claims. The total unsecured debt as listed on page 3 was 
$51,998.65, however, the four pages add up to only $47,752.65 a difference of $4,246. 
No explanation was provided for the missing creditors. A page may be missing from the 
Schedule F. The schedule lists six medical debts: three hospital debts ($2,525, $2,003, 
and $858); a neonatal associates’ debt ($443); and two credit services related to 
medical ($63 and $858). The SOR lists two medically related judgments: a $2,554 
judgment (SOR ¶ 1.d) and a $202 dental bill judgment (SOR ¶ 1.e). Two other medical 
accounts are also listed in the SOR: a $452 debt (SOR ¶ 1.c), and a $437 debt (SOR ¶ 
1.l).  
 
 Applicant asserts he will check the SOR debts against his bankruptcy to 
determine if any of the SOR debts were included in the bankruptcy. In March 2010, 
Applicant asserted, but failed to provide documentation, that the $665 credit card debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.m) was included in his bankruptcy. (Ex. X) 
 
 Applicant asserts, but fails to document, that the three accounts placed for 
collection in SOR ¶ 1.f ($681), SOR ¶ 1.h ($369), and SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,083) are 
duplications of the same debt. Applicant’s May 2009 credit bureau report (Ex. 3) lists the 
same firm and identification code for the three debts, which means a single collection 
firm is attempting to collect the three debts. The $1,048 debt is a bank credit card 
3 
account, the $369 debt is past due electric and power utility bill, and the $665 is the 
same debt as listed in (SOR ¶ 1.m). (Ex. 3, 4)  
 
In October 1989, a $226 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1. j) was filed against him, which 
his mother paid. Court records show the lien was satisfied in 1989. (Ex. U) A $2,554 
judgment (SOR ¶ 1.d) was filed against Applicant by a medical provider. A dentist 
obtained a $202 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.e) against him. (Ex. 2) 
 
Applicant and his wife have five children. (Tr. 72, 120) His wife makes $11 per 
hour working at a grocery store. (Ex. J, K) He is paid $24 per hour at his job and 
contributes two percent of this salary to a savings plan. (Ex. J, R) He currently has 
$1,700 in the plan. (Ex. R) He obtained a part-time job working at a restaurant to help 
pay his debts, which paid $10 per hour. (Ex. 2) At the time of the hearing, he no longer 
had his part-time job. (Tr. 125) His annual salary is $50,000 per year. (Tr. 185) His 
monthly income was $3,500 and his wife’s monthly income was $800. (Tr. 160) 
Applicant’s net monthly discretionary income (gross income less expenses and bill 
payment) is $20 to $30 each month. (Tr. 170)  
 
Applicant drives a 1995 Honda. (Tr. 215) When he gets home from work, he 
takes his wife to her evening job at the supermarket and returns four hours later to pick 
her up. (Tr. 216) His current job is the first job that provided him and his family medical 
coverage. (Tr. 220) 
 
In September 2008, Applicant was interviewed about his finances. (Tr. 141) On 
March 31, 2009, Applicant answered written interrogatories. (Ex. 2) At that time, 
Applicant’s net monthly income was $4,146; his monthly expenses were $3,945, which 
included payment of $173 to a credit solution company, which left a net monthly 
remainder of $28. However, Applicant did not make any payments to the credit solution 
company. (Tr. 130)  
 
In September 2008, when questioned about his finances, Applicant stated his 
financial situation was the result of his own financial irresponsibility and was not caused 
by events beyond his control. (Ex. 2) He planned to enroll in the employee assistance 
program offered by his employer and seek credit counseling and debt consolidation 
service assistance. (Ex. 2) Much of his debt is five years old, and he went to the debt 
consolidation company six months prior to or before the hearing. (Tr. 148)  
On March 31, 2009, Applicant sought the services of a credit solutions company 
to help him with his debt and completed an enrollment package. (Tr. 2) This was 
through his company’s emergency assistance program (EAP). (Tr. 113) The plan 
covered seven debts, which totaled $9,682 and required Applicant to make $174 
monthly payments. (Ex. 2) The covered debts include: a $2,554 judgment by a medical 
creditor (SOR ¶ 1.d); a $1,607 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.g); miscellaneous medical bill, 
the $202 judgment by a medical creditor (¶ 1.e); the collection agency attempting to 
collect a $1,083 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.i); a $665 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.m); and, 
a $217 debt (SOR ¶ 1.n).  
 
4 
The plan also includes a $1,024 credit card (SOR ¶ 1.i, $1,083) debt. Applicant’s 
September 13, 2008 credit bureau report (CBR) (Ex. 4) lists the original creditor with a 
high credit of $1,024, but the CBR indicates the debt was sold to another creditor. The 
same CBR lists a $1,024 high credit amount listed under the collection agency 
referenced in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. 
 
The agreement required Applicant to pay $174 each month for April, May, and 
June 2009. Starting in July 2009, he was required to pay the credit solutions company 
$72 monthly. (Ex. 2) There is no evidence Applicant has made any payments in accord 
of this agreement. Applicant states shortly after entering into the agreement his second 
job ended and he made no payments. (Tr. 150) Applicant completed a debt 
management worksheet with a different company. (Ex I) Applicant’s monthly net 
remainder (income less expenses) was $28. (Ex. I, Tr. 113) 
 
Applicant’s use of alcohol contributed to his financial problems. Applicant stated, 
“I suffer from the disease of alcoholism. When I drink, unfortunately, the majority of my 
money goes to that. That’s how the debt occurred.” (Tr. 155) In the past, alcohol 
consumption has been a problem for Applicant, but he is active in recovery. He last 
drank in October 2008. (Tr. 158) In 1989, Applicant was in a seven-day detoxification 
and treatment program. Followed by a 30-day inpatient program during which he 
attended counseling and received education. He entered the program as a requirement 
for his parent’s bailing him out of jail. In February 2007, he entered into a seven-day 
inpatient program. (Ex. 2) He admitted himself because he wanted to stop drinking and 
could not stop by himself. Applicant describes the 2007 treatment as “active addiction” 
not “active recovery.” (Tr. 159) He states that it was not until last year that the actual 
true recovery process started. (Tr. 207)  
 
At the end of 2009, Applicant’s sister sent him $7,000 with which to pay his 
debts. (Ex. S) He failed to explain why he needed to borrow $7,000 from his sister 
when, at the hearing he had asserted he would “soon” receive an inheritance of 
$17,552. (Answer to SOR) As of January 10, 2010, Applicant has received offers to 
settle from some of his creditors. He was attempting to negotiate with other creditors to 
lower the amount owed and was attempting to locate the remaining creditors. On March 
1, 2010, Applicant provided documentation that he had paid approximately $4,300 on 
his debts. (Ex. X – UU) The use of the balance of the $7,000 is not part of the record. 
 
Applicant has been through financial credit counseling several times. One period 
of counseling that lasted six months, one that had seven sessions, and counseling that 
lasted a year. (Tr. 193) He learned to live within his means, to scale back spending, 
establish a budget, and accumulate savings. A summary of his 15 debts and their 
current status follows:  
 
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
a Apartment complex debt placed 
for collection. 
$426 Paid. Settled for $385. (Ex. CC, BB, S, 
Tr. 127) 
5 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
b Account placed for collection. $670 
 
Unpaid. Applicant is unsure the nature 
of the original debt. (Tr. 127) Creditor 
will to settle for $401, which is 60% of 
the debt. (Ex. S) In March 2010, 
Applicant asserted creditor will 
remove it from his CBR. (Ex. X) 
c Medical creditor. #3372 $452 Unpaid. In January 2010, Applicant 
requested copies of the judgments 
against him. (Ex. T, DD) In March 
2010, Applicant asserted he would 
contact the hospital and set up 
payments. (Ex. X) 
d Medical creditor judgement.(Ex. 
FF)  
$2,554 Unpaid. In January 2010, Applicant 
requested copies of the judgments 
against him. (Ex. T, DD) In March 
2010, Applicant asserted he would 
contact the hospital and set up 
payments. (Ex. X) 
e Medical creditor judgment for 
dental services. (Ex. EE) 
$202 Unpaid. In March 2010, Applicant 
asserts he paid this debt and will 
contact the dentist to determine if it is 
yet owed. (Ex. X) He will pay it if it is 
owed.  
F Account placed for collection. $681 Paid. Applicant asserts he paid $535 
on this debt. (Ex. X) A letter from the 
creditor states, “This document is not 
proof of payment on this account and 
should not be used or accepted by 
any party as proof of payment on this 
account. Please contact us to obtain 
proof of payment.”(Ex. II) Same debt 
as SOR ¶ 1.m. (Ex 3) 
g Credit card account placed for 
collection. 
$1,607 Paid. (Ex. S, JJ, KK) No actual proof 
of payment from creditor was 
presented. 
h Electric and power company 
account. 
$369 Paid. Settled for $184. (Ex. V, LL, 
MM) Debt was incurred five years ago 
and is not the same electrical bill 
recently paid by Applicant’s church. 
(Tr. 135)  
 
6 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
I Credit card account.  
 
$1,083 Paid. Applicant asserts he paid $950 
on this debt. (Ex. X) A letter from the 
creditor states, “This document is not 
proof of payment on this account and 
should not be used or accepted by 
any party as proof of payment on this 
account. Please contact us to obtain 
proof of payment.” (Ex. NN, OO) 
J State of tax lien.  $226 Paid. (Ex. U, Tr. 140) 
k Telephone account.  
 
$302 Included in bankruptcy. Applicant 
disputed the debt as having been paid 
and said the creditor was investigating 
the claim. (Ex. S) A $202 telephone 
bill with this creditor was included in 
his Chapter 7. 
L $437 medical debt. $437 Unpaid. At the hearing, Applicant 
asserted, if valid he will attempt to 
negotiate the debt before paying it. 
(Ex. S) Following the hearing, 
Applicant asserts this was a 
duplication of another debt, but 
provided no supporting 
documentation. 
m Credit card account placed for 
collection. 
$665 
 
Unpaid. Applicant asserts at the 
hearing the creditor is willing to settle 
for $566. (Ex. S) Following the 
hearing, Applicant asserts this was 
included in his bankruptcy, but 
provided no supporting 
documentation. 
n Bank account placed for 
collection. 
$217 
 
Paid. (Ex. S, TT) 
o Unpaid tuition debt from 2003 
or 2004 placed for collection. 
(Tr. 141)  
$666 Paid. (Ex. S, UU) 
p Chapter 7 bankruptcy.   
 
In August 2004, the bankruptcy 
discharged $52,000 in nonpriority 
claims. 
 Total debt listed in SOR $10,557  
 
 
7 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail or safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
8 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. In 2004, Applicant had $52,000 of debt discharged. The SOR lists two unpaid 
judgments, a state tax lien, and twelve additional accounts placed for collection, which 
together totaled approximately $10,500. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
9 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence because he had two large delinquent debts from 
November 2008 until December 2009. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant 
does not receive credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debts are recent and numerous.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. September 2008, when questioned about his 
finances, Applicant stated his financial situation was the result of his own financial 
irresponsibility and was not caused by events beyond his control. He also stated his use 
of alcohol contributed to his financial problems. Applicant stated, “I suffer from the 
disease of alcoholism. When I drink, unfortunately, the majority of my money goes to 
that. That’s how the debt occurred.” In the past, alcohol consumption has been a 
problem for Applicant, but he is active in recovery. He last drank in October 2008. Under 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant=s financial problems were not contributed to by factors beyond his 
control. Applicant meets none of the factors set forth in AG ¶ 20(b) such as loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because Applicant had yet to start financial 
counseling. AG ¶ 20(d) does apply. Applicant has paid eight of his debts, which 
indicates a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
Another account placed for collection was included in his bankruptcy. Those debts total 
approximately $5,500. Applicant asserts, but fails to provide documentation that four 
additional debts have been addressed. He asserts, without documentation, that the 
$202 dentist bill (SOR 1.e) was paid; the $437 medical debt (SOR 1.l) was a duplication 
of another debt; the $665 credit card debt (SOR 1.m) was included in his bankruptcy; 
and the creditor had agreed to remove the $670 bank debt placed for collection (SOR 
1.b) from his CBR. 
 
Applicant has agreed to pay the remaining two debts ($452, SOR 1.c and 
$2,554, SOR 1.d). Having paid the majority of his debts coupled with the character 
references provided attesting to Applicant’s good character, it is likely he will pay the 
two remaining debts, which total approximately $3,000. 
 
10 
Neither the remaining unpaid debt, nor his having to have resorted to bankruptcy 
protection raise concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The debts incurred were 
not the type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations. Applicant has paid the majority of his debts. Of course, the 
issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).)  
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted 
that the concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) (‘Available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
11 
12 
                                                          
payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations 
omitted).  
 
Applicant understands he needs to maintain his financial responsibility. Clearly, 
he could have acted more aggressively to resolve his debts. There is, however, simply 
no reason not to trust him. Moreover, he has established a “meaningful track record” of 
debt payments. He has promised to pay the two remaining debts.2 I found his hearing 
statement to be candid, forthright, and credible. His character witnesses laud his 
responsibility, trustworthiness, and integrity.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a –1.p:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
2 Of course, the government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation and/or additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the government 
from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. This footnote does not imply that this clearance is conditional. 
 
