 
 
1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-05344 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for drug 
involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP), signed on April 15, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
On December 11, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on December 28, 2009, in which he 
admitted all allegations under Guideline H. The single allegation under Guideline E 
cross-references allegation 1.f., which states that Applicant used marijuana after 
completing his security clearance application in April 2009. Applicant failed to 
specifically admit or deny allegation 2.a. He admitted that the behavior cited in 
allegation 1.f. showed poor judgment. As allegation 2.a. refers to an allegation that 
Applicant admits (1.f.), I construe Applicant's answer as an admission of allegation 2.a. 
 
In his Answer, Applicant also requested a decision without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM), dated January 21, 2010, which 
included six documents (Items 1-6) proffered in support of the government’s case. 
Applicant received the FORM on January 29, 2010, and was given 30 days to file a 
response. He did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
March 29, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the 
Statement of Reasons, and  the FORM submitted by the government, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old. Applicant has never been married and has no children. 
He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2002. Since then, he has been employed by the same 
defense contractor as a research engineer/systems administrator. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant first used ecstasy when he purchased it at a party in 1999. He used it 
twice in 2000 when he purchased pills at parties. He again purchased it in 2001. Each 
time, the cost was about $20 per pill. His last use occurred in December 2004, when 
he was about 27 years old. Applicant has no intent to use ecstasy in the future. (Items 
5, 6) 
 
Applicant used marijuana more frequently than ecstasy. Starting in 1993, 
Applicant used marijuana three times during high school and once during his first year 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3
                                                
in college. During his second year of college, he began using it regularly, from three to 
four times per week. In 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with marijuana use 
after he was stopped while driving. The officer determined that Applicant had been 
smoking marijuana within the past several hours. Applicant pled guilty and was 
convicted, fined, and sentenced to suspension of his driver’s license for six months, 
and one year probation. During his year of probation, Applicant did not use marijuana. 
His family and coworkers are aware of this incident (Item 6) 
 
During his subject interview with an agent from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in June 2009, Applicant stated that when he completed his 
probation in January 2003, he returned to using marijuana, but decreased his use to 
about once per month. However, he later qualified this information, noting that when 
marijuana was not available, he used it once per month, but if it was available, he 
smoked it about three times per week. He chose his city of residence because he 
believed it had a relaxed attitude toward marijuana use. His use has not affected his 
school performance, or his home or family life. Applicant has never received drug 
treatment. He does not believe that marijuana use is serious; however, he has not told 
anyone at his place of employment that he uses marijuana, because he worries that it 
would affect his reputation if his drug use were to become known. (Item 6) 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation that states that he used marijuana until at least 
June 2009. He uses marijuana more often if he is under stress. He smokes it with 
friends and family members. He continues to associate with individuals who use illegal 
drugs. Applicant spends about $50 every three months on marijuana purchases. He 
informed the OPM agent that he uses marijuana responsibly. He stated that it does not 
affect his judgment or reliability, but admitted that knowingly breaking the law does 
raise questions about his judgment. He stated that he is not happy breaking the law, 
but marijuana is appealing to him and he enjoys using it. Applicant has discontinued 
his drug use at times in the past, but has returned to it because he enjoys it. He 
believes marijuana use should be legal. He also told the OPM agent that he would 
continue to use marijuana after he receives a security clearance. He qualified this 
information when he completed his interrogatory in September 2009 by stating, “In an 
attempt to be totally honest, I answered that there was a chance I would occasionally 
partake if granted a security clearance. I have since come to realize that this behavior 
would not allow me to obtain a security clearance and have therefore discontinued my 
use of marijuana with the intention of never using it again.” (Items 4, 6)   
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4
                                                
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct).  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an Applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern related to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5
Of the eight disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 25, the following apply:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia;  
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to 
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
 Applicant admits that he used illegal drugs, specifically marijuana and ecstasy. 
He also purchased both drugs during the period that he used them. As an illegal drug 
user, it follows that he possessed them. Although he now states that he has no intent 
to use illegal drugs in the future, he told the OPM investigator in 2009 that he would 
continue to use marijuana in the future. These statements, as well as his use of 
marijuana at least to June 2009, nine months ago, raise doubts about his commitment 
to avoid illegal drugs.  
 
AG ¶ 26 includes two mitigating conditions that are relevant and warrant 
discussion:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 When Applicant met with the OPM investigator in June 2009, he discussed his 
use of marijuana at that time, including the amount he pays to purchase it, who he 
associates with when he uses it, and that he realizes he is breaking the law when he 
uses it. He stated that if the marijuana is readily available, he uses it approximately 
three times per week, and that he uses it because he enjoys it. His use is both recent 
 
 
6
and frequent, and his statements cast significant doubt on his current trustworthiness 
and reliability. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not used ecstasy since 2004, and he says he will not use it in the 
future. However, he has not convincingly demonstrated that he will discontinue 
marijuana use. He used it infrequently during high school, but starting in 2002, he 
began a period of frequent marijuana use that extended seven years, to at least June 
2009. He mentioned brief periods of abstinence, such as during his one year probation, 
but he has always returned to marijuana use because he enjoys it. His statement of 
intent to stop marijuana use occurred only recently, in September 2009, six months 
ago. As of June 2009, he had not dissociated from his friends with whom he used 
illegal drugs. Moreover, Applicant plainly stated to the OPM agent that he would 
continue to use marijuana after obtaining a security clearance. Applicant's subsequent 
statement that he would not longer use marijuana stems from a belated realization that 
using marijuana would prevent him from obtaining a security clearance. Applicant's 
actions and statements do not indicate a clear intent to avoid marijuana in the future. 
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing;… 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
Under Guideline E, Applicant's illegal drug use raises security concerns about 
his judgment, trustworthiness and ability to safeguard classified information. In 
addition, Applicant’s actions have made him vulnerable to exploitation because he 
admits he worries about his reputation at work if his illegal drug use were to become 
known. In addition, as of June 2009, he continued to associate with the friends with 
 
 
7
whom he used illegal drugs. He also used drugs with family members, and it is likely he 
will continue to associate with family members. AG ¶¶ 16(e) and (g) apply. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are relevant under Guideline E: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs over a ten-year period from 1999 to 2009. From 
2002 to 2009, he often used them up to several times per week. Such frequent use 
cannot be  considered minor. The fact that he knowingly and willingly broke the law 
raises serious concerns about his judgment. Applicant has made no effort to obtain 
drug-related counseling, and there is no basis on which to conclude that his behavior is 
unlikely to recur. Finally, nothing in the record indicates that Applicant has disclosed his 
drug use to his coworkers, and eliminated the possibility of exploitation. None of the 
relevant mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
8
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant has used two illegal drugs, marijuana and ecstasy. Although his 
ecstasy use ended in 2004, he has continued to use marijuana over a period of ten 
years. His behavior cannot be ascribed to youthful experimentation, as he used it as 
recently as 2009, when he was 33 years old. Despite the fact that his marijuana use 
resulted in his arrest and a year of probation in 2002, he resumed illegal drug use after 
completing his probation. As of June 2009, it was his intent to continue to use 
marijuana after he obtained his security clearance. He belatedly stated, in September 
2009, that he would end his marijuana use, without expressing any remorse for 
breaking the law over a period of ten years. His decision to quit marijuana use stems 
from his realization that it will interfere with his obtaining a security clearance. 
Applicant's conduct raises serious doubts about his suitability for access to classified 
information.  
 
 For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.f.   Against Applicant     
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
