                                                              
 
1 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 09-04240 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) for his employment with a defense contractor, on March 4, 2009 (Gov. X 4). On 
October 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H 
(Drug Involvement) (Gov. X 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on October 26, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 3, 2009. He admitted the 
five factual allegations, provided a detailed explanation of his actions to mitigate the 
security concerns, and elected to have the matter decided on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing (Gov X 3). Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case 
on January 13, 2010. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
February 1, 2010, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He did not provide 
 
2 
 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2010. Based on a 
review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under Guideline H. I carefully reviewed 
the case file and the pleadings, and make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a single 26-year-old college graduate employed as an engineer by a 
defense contractor since September 2008 (Gov. X 4). Applicant noted in response to 
questions concerning drug use on his e-QIP that he used marijuana in December 2008. 
He admitted he used marijuana from September 2003 until June 2007. He noted he 
used cocaine on two occasions in March 2006, and mushrooms on one occasion in May 
2004. He stated on the application that he was a straight A student in elementary school 
and high school. He felt inclined to experiment with new experiences. From these 
experiments, he now knows drugs have no place in his life and he is not a drug user. He 
suggested he has no desire to use drugs any more (Gov X 4 at 40-41).  
 
Applicant was requested by security investigators to clarify his statements on the 
security clearance application concerning drug use. In an undated addendum to his e-
QIP, he noted that from September 2008 until January 2009, he used marijuana with 
friends on four occasions. On three of the occasions, he took one puff of a marijuana 
cigarette that was being passed around. On the fourth occasion in October 2008, he 
purchased marijuana to use socially one evening. He used marijuana while socializing 
as a result of peer pressure. Applicant admits taking one or two vicodin tablets not 
prescribed by a physician in November 2003 and July 2008. He also admitted using 
marijuana while in high school on a number of occasions from March 2002 until 
September 2003 (Gov. X 5).  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by security investigators on April 7, 2009. In response 
to their questions, he admitted using marijuana with friends on a number of occasions 
while in high school from March 2002 until September 2003. He took one to three puffs 
of the marijuana cigarettes being passed around to fit in with his high school friends. 
Applicant admitted to investigators that he used marijuana by smoking it on about ten 
occasions while in college from September 2003 until June 2007. He would only take 
one or two puffs of the marijuana cigarette. Applicant admitted that he used marijuana 
from September 2008 until January 2009 with friends. He admitted purchasing a small 
amount of marijuana for his and his girlfriend's personal use in October 2008. He 
admitted to taking two vicodin pills, a prescription drug not prescribed for him, at a 
college party in November 2003. He also admitted to taking two vicodin pills while hiking 
in July 2008. Applicant admitted using cocaine on two occasions while in college in 
March 2006. He did not feel pressure from his friends to use cocaine. He also admitted 
using mushrooms while in college with friends in May 2004. The mushrooms were 
crushed and mixed with orange juice (Gov. X 6).  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated the vast majority of his drug use 
was when he was a college student as a result of peer pressure in a social setting. He 
 
3 
 
thought declining drugs when offered had a negative effect on his social image. He 
never used drugs on a regular basis. The time between his using drugs varied, up to a 
few months apart. He was unaware the impact drug use might have on his ability to 
obtain a security clearance. He now has a good solid reason - his work and a potential 
security clearance - to decline drugs when offered. He has matured and does not have 
a feeling of not fitting in or of peer pressure. He has not had a desire or used drugs 
since January 2009. He avoids the environment and places where drugs are used. He 
executed a statement that he will not use drugs while holding a security clearance (Gov. 
X 3). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
4 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair 
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are mood and behavior altering 
substances, and include those listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. 
Marijuana, cocaine, and mushrooms are listed as illegal drugs. The use of a prescription 
drug not prescribed for the individual by a physician is the misuse of that drugs. Drug 
abuse is the illegal use of a drug or the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 24).  
 
 Applicant admitted to using marijuana in high school in 2002 and 2003. He 
admitted using marijuana, cocaine, and mushrooms while in college from September 
2003 until June 2007, and after graduation from college until January 2009. He admitted 
purchasing marijuana, and using a prescription drug not prescribed for his use while in 
college. His use of illegal drugs and misuse of a prescription drug raises Drug 
Involvement Disqualifying Conditions (DI DC) AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug use); and DI DC AG 
¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution).  
 
 I have considered the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) and find 
none apply. Applicant admitted using marijuana from March 2002 until January 2009. 
He admitted using cocaine in March 2006.  Even though he states he stopped using 
marijuana in January 2009 and cocaine in 2006, his use is recent when compared to his 
over eight years of drug use. His use of marijuana over ten times until January 2009 is 
recent and frequent use. DI MC AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was 
so infrequent, or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of drug use starting when he was in high school. He 
states that he has not used marijuana since January 2009, and cocaine since March 
2006. His last reported abuse of a prescription drug was in July 2008. He used 
mushrooms only one time in May 2004. He states he does not intend to use or abuse 
drugs in the future. He also executed a statement that he will not use drugs while 
holding a security clearance. His statement alone is not a clear intent to stop using or 
abusing drugs when compared with his long use of drugs starting in high school. He has 
not established, beyond his self-serving statements, any changed circumstances to 
indicate his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. In addition, this stated intent is 
very recent, in response to the SOR, and in furtherance of his desire to be granted a 
security clearance. DI MC AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the 
 
5 
 
future, such as; (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation) does not apply. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to 
overcome the security concern for his use of illegal drugs. Guideline H is decided 
against Applicant 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge evaluates the 
applicant’s conduct and all of the circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
 Applicant has not established that he is trustworthy, reliable, and exercises good 
judgment. To the contrary, he used marijuana frequently over an extended period of 
time. His last use was just over a year ago in January 2009. He also used cocaine, 
mushrooms, and abused a prescription drug while a college student. He used the drugs 
to "fit in" with his friends and as a result of peer pressure. While he may now be older 
and more mature, he has not presented sufficient information to establish that he will 
not again succumb to the peer pressure and the desire to "fit in." Even though he stated 
he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future, he did not present any information 
to support his intent. He provided no evidence to convince me he should be trusted with 
access to classified information. The record evidence leaves me with questions about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
