1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-05236
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I  grant
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
Applicant completed her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on April 13, 2009. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F
on October 9, 2009. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant denied owing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d when she met with the investigator and in her response to1
interrogatories in August 2009 because she did not recognize the creditor. She admitted the debt in her
response when the SOR identified an additional creditor which she recognized. See Item 3 and Item 5. The
April 2009 credit report reflects that the debt related to miscellaneous credit cards, but does not identify which
credit cards. A question is raised as to whether any of the debts in the SOR are also part of this debt.
Applicant has not provided evidence to show that other SOR debts are included in this rather large debt. See
Item 5.
Item 4.2
Id.3
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 19, 2009. She answered
the SOR in writing on October 31, 2009, and requested a decision on the written record
in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on November 23, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on
December 2, 2009. She had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not submit a response
or additional evidence. DOHA assigned this case to me on March 19, 2010. The
Government submitted six exhibits, which have been marked as Item 1-6 and admitted
into the record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked and admitted as
Item 3.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.f of the SOR.  She provided an explanation for her answer. Her admissions1
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 57 years old, works as a data-entry operator for a Department
of Defense contractor. Applicant graduated from high school in 1970. She did not attend
college. She never married and has no children. Applicant purchased a house in 1979.2
In June 1999, Applicant accepted a position full-time position as a human
resources administrative assistant. In July 2002, she started working a part-time job as
a customer service representative for an answering service. In August 2002, her full-
time employer eliminated her position and laid her off. She did not immediately find a
full-time position. She worked her part-time job until she was terminated in February
2003.3
Applicant accepted a full-time position as a mortgage loan officer in April 2003.
When business slowed, her employer laid her off in November 2003. After four months
of unemployment, she obtained another mortgage loan officer position, which ended a
month later. Three months later, in July 2004, she obtained another position as a senior
Id.4
Id.5
Id.6
Item 3.7
Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.8
Item 4; Item 5.9
Id.10
3
teller at a bank. At the end of her probation period in October 2004, the bank terminated
her, a fact she admitted on her e-QIP.4
 
Applicant worked for a temporary employment agency from April 2005 until
August 2005, when she obtained a position as a terminal clerk with a trucking company.
The trucking company laid her off in January 2007, when it downsized. From January
2007 until November 2008, Applicant worked for temporary employment agencies. She
began her current employment in November 2008.5
When she completed the e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged a foreclosure, a tax lien
on her property, and five debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c through 1.f). She also acknowledged
making payments on the judgment, which had a balance of $4,700 in April 2009.6
Applicant’s financial problems began when she lost her full-time position in
August 2002. She does not indicate her salary at this time, but states that her current
income is lower that her income in 2002. Since 2002, her income has fluctuated,
depending upon her employment status. Prior to losing her job, Applicant paid her living
expenses and credit card debts. The record reflects that she had a significant balance
on these cards before losing her job. Applicant used her credit cards to help pay some
living expenses after August 2002.7
In 2004, Applicant defaulted on her mortgage payment and the mortgagor
proceeded with foreclosure. The day before the mortgage company sold her house at
public auction, she sold the property. She paid the mortgage, a second mortgage, and a
property tax lien with the proceeds from the sale. The record does not reflect any
indebtedness from her foreclosure.8
Applicant moved into her mother’s home in 2004. She continues to live with her
mother and pays her mother $400 a month in rent.9
Applicant earns $2,260 a month in gross salary and $1,724 a month in net
income. Her monthly expenses total $1,440 a month, including her rent and two monthly
payments on her debts. She has approximately $385 a month for debt payment. She
drives a 1993 GEO, valued at $700, and does not own a cell phone.10
Item 5; Item 6.11
Item 5.12
Item 4; Item 5.13
These balances have increased nearly 50% since she defaulted.14
Item 4.15
Item 6.16
4
The SOR listsfive debts related to credit cards and one judgment. Applicant
stopped payments on these debts in 2002 and 2003. The court entered a judgment
against her in 2008 for $5,035. The April 2009 credit report reflects that Applicant paid a
$7,500 charged-off credit card debt after defaulting on her payments in 2003 and a
$5,400 debt in 2002. She also provided evidence that she paid a past due telephone
debt of $76 in August 2009.  11
When she first encountered difficulties paying her debts in 2002 and 2003,
Applicant contacted her creditors and advised them about her employment situation.
Her creditors refused to work with her. She also contacted a debt consolidation
company. She did not qualify for their program because her income was too low.12
 
Applicant developed a monthly payment plan of $30 for the $5,035 judgment in
SOR ¶ 1.b in April 2008, before she completed her e-QIP, and a monthly payment plan
of $79 for the $3,914 debt in SOR ¶ 1.e in April 2009. She immediately started her
negotiated payments. She provided documentation with her response to the August
2009 interrogatories which indicated that she complied with her payment plans through
August 2009. As of August 2009, she owed $4,525 on the judgment and $3,519 on the
debt in allegation 1.e. The record does not contain any evidence showing that she
stopped her monthly payments on her debts. Given the extensive information provided
on her e-QIP, her statements to the investigator, and her 17-month payment history on
the judgment, an inference can be drawn that she is continuing to comply with the terms
of her agreements.13
Applicant has not developed any payment plans for the four remaining debts,
which are substantial.  She contacted the creditors, each of whom requested that she14
make a lump-sum payment. She does not have the money to make such a payment.
These creditors refused to accept a monthly payment from her. These debts remain
unpaid.15
Applicant pays her current living expenses. The credit reports show that she has
not incurred any new credit card debt since 2002 or other unpaid debts since 2004. She
lives within her limited financial resources.16
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
6
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and under AG & 19(c), Aa
history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise security concerns. Under AG ¶
19(e), a security concern may be raised by “consistent spending beyond one's means,
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” Applicant accumulated delinquent
debt and has been unable to pay her obligations for a period of time. When she lost her
job in 2002, Applicant had a high level of unpaid credit debt, which suggests that she
was living beyond her financial means even though she made the monthly payments on
the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), mitigation may occur when
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose
between about 2002 and 2003 after she lost her job and did not obtain steady
employment. While her financial problems developed a long time ago, she has not held
long-term, steady and well-paying employment since 2002, although her current
position has this potential. Thus, employment problems continue to be a circumstance
which could occur in the future. This mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above,
Applicant’s financial problems arose when she lost her full-time job in August 2002.
Since 2002, Applicant has worked only part-time, not at all, or for limited periods of time.
She began her current position 16 months ago, the second longest period of
employment since she lost her job in 2002. Most jobs she held for short periods of time,
except for the terminal clerk position, which she held for 18 months. For the last seven
and one-half years, she has earned less money than she did in 2002. When she lost her
job in 2002, she attempted to retain a debt consolidation company to help her manage
The Appeal Board’s discussion of AG ¶ 20(b) in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) clarifies17
the applicability of this mitigating condition when an Applicant is unable to make substantial progress on
delinquent debts after circumstances outside an applicant’s control cause delinquent debt.  In ISCR Case No.
08-06567 (A.J. July 27, 2009), the applicant had a judgment against him in June 2001 for $7,948; an IRS tax
lien in January 2001 for $25,441 from tax years 1993 to 1997 (since released), and a state tax lien in
September 1999 for $6,701 (since released). These three delinquent debts established a history of financial
problems, which included significant tax problems extending over eight years (1993 to 2001). Id. at 2. In 2007,
the applicant’s business faltered (the circumstance beyond his control), and he generated about $21,000 in
additional delinquent debt. Id. at 3-4. He paid six of his new debts, and three debts totaling about $17,000
remain for resolution. ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). He obtained financial
counseling, developed a repayment plan, and took reasonable actions to effectuate his repayment plan. Id.
at 3. The Appeal Board at 3 determined that administrative judge erred when he failed to explain,
.  .  .  what he believes that Applicant could or should have done under the circumstances
that he has not already done to rectify his poor financial condition, or why the approach taken
by Applicant was not “responsible” in light of his limited circumstances.   
AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) are not applicable in this case.18
7
her debts, but the company found that she did not qualify for its program because she
did not earn sufficient income. She sold the house she had owned for 25 years in 2004
and paid the three related debts. At age 52, she returned to living with her mother and
still does. She paid a $7,500 collection account sometime after 2003, another $5,400,
and a small $76 debt. She tried to develop repayment plans with her creditors, but they
declined to work with her. When she later contacted her creditors, two creditors
developed payment plans and four creditors refused to do so, demanding a lump-sum
payment instead. She acted reasonably under the circumstances as there was little
more she could do.  This mitigating condition applies.17
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant contacted a debt consolidation
company in 2002, but has not received any debt counseling in recent years. She pays
monthly on two debts and pays her current bills. This mitigating condition has some
applicability.
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant
developed a payment plan for the judgment in 2008 and for one debt in 2009. She pays
these debts as she agreed. She does not have a payment plan for the remaining four
debts listed in the SOR, and cannot develop a payment plan because the creditors
demand a lump- sum payment and refuse to accept monthly payments. She has not
paid the remaining four debts listed in the SOR. This mitigating condition applies to
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e only.18
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
8
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The decision to grant or deny a security
clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both favorable and
unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the evidence of record,
not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is established and then
whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct, but on a
reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a nexus
exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. BD. Mar. 1, 200). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. BD. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See,
e.g.,ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a)(“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
9
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a high level of unpaid
credit card debt. Prior to August 2002, Applicant worked steadily and paid her monthly
bills. She paid her mortgage and her property taxes. While she had high debt on her
credit cards, she paid her monthly payments. The reason for her high credit card
balances is unknown. She owned her house for 25 years before she defaulted on the
mortgage and sold the house. She paid all debts on her house from the sale proceeds.
She also paid two other debts subsequent to losing her job and a steady income.
Her financial problems first became unmanageable when she lost her job in
2002. For the last seven and one-half years, she has worked temporary jobs, one
permanent job, and been unemployed. The longest she held a job was 18 months. Her
earnings have not reached her 2002 income level. When she first lost her job in 2002,
she tried to consolidate her debts, but did not qualify for a debt consolidation program
because she did not earn enough money. She is paying two debts, but has not, cannot,
and will not be able to pay most of her remaining debts until she can save up enough
money for the requested lump-sum payment. The current creditors refuse to accept a
monthly payment; demanding a lump-sum payment instead. Applicant lacks the
financial resources to accumulate money to make a lump-sum payment, even though
she works full-time. Since these creditors are not willing to work with her, Applicant
cannot develop a payment plan at this time. (See AG & 2(a)(1)-(3).) 
Since losing her job in 2002 and her house in 2004, Applicant has changed her
approach to financial management. She does not use credit cards. Her credit reports
reflect that she has not accumulated any additional outstanding credit card debt when
the debts at issue became delinquent in 2002 and 2003. At age 57, she lives with her
mother, as she cannot afford to live elsewhere. She drives a 1993 GEO and does not
own a cell phone. She pays her basic living expenses and two creditors, but lacks funds
to pay her remaining creditors large, one-time payments. She has struggled to find
steady employment with a good wage since 2002, and as a result she has learned to
live frugally. Applicant has learned from the events of 2002 to 2004. See AG ¶ 2(a)(6).
Applicant’s net monthly income averages $1,724. After paying her living
expenses and her two debt payments, she has $385 remaining. She was willing to use
some of this money to repay her debts on a monthly plan, but the creditors refuse to
accept monthly payments. She does not have any savings or investments which she
could use to pay the requested lump sums. Although she indicates she would like to
repay her other debts, she will not be able to do so until she can accumulate the funds
for lump-sum payments. 
In the last seven and one-half years, Applicant had to make choices about using
her scarce resources. When the mortgagor foreclosed on her house, she sold it and
10
with the proceeds paid off all her debts connected with her house. Her inability to pay
her debts relates directly to her inability to find steady employment with a high income.
She worked, but made only enough money to pay her usual living expenses. By living
with her mother, she can save the money for her debts, instead of paying more for
housing. She is financially stable on her current expenses. She pays her living
expenses and does not use her credit cards.  
Applicant’s remaining unpaid debts are over six years old. She is fully aware of
her debts, but cannot pay the debts. Under the State law where she resides, a creditor
has six years to initiate legal action to recover unpaid debts. See  State Code. §52-576.
One creditor obtained a judgment against her. The remaining three creditors failed to
exercise their legal rights, thus, waiving any rights to collect these debts forever.
Applicant incurred these delinquent debts over seven years ago. She has not incurred
any new unpaid debt, which would reflect an ongoing problem with financial and debt
management. It is unlikely that Applicant could be coerced, pressured, or induced to
betray secrets of the United States because of her old, unpaid debts, as she has been
open and honest about her past debts and she is no longer legally liable for the debts.
The fact that these debts are old and not collectible under state law does not negate her
past conduct in accumulating significant debt, which she could not pay after losing her
job, a factor I have considered. 
Applicant was forthright and candid in her security clearance application, her
responses to DOHA interrogatories, her responses to the security investigator, and her
SOR response. She acts responsibly in all aspects of her life. Her current finances are
good. She has no criminal record. Before 2002, she paid her bills. The loss of her job
and subsequent sporadic and underemployment made it impossible for her to continue
paying her credit card debts. Financial hardship forced her to make difficult decisions on
how to resolve these debts. She had no choice but to default on these debts when she
failed to qualify for a debt consolidation program and the creditors refused to work with
her. Two creditors accepted a monthly payment plan, but the other four creditors have
refused. She cannot pay a lump-sum settlement on her present income. 
In the last seven and one-half years, Applicant paid two large debts and one
small debt, as well as succeeded in paying all her debts related to the foreclosure action
on her house. (See AG ¶  2(a)(8).) Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her
debts are paid -- it is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her
fitness to hold a security clearance. An alcoholic who remains sober for three or more
years and a drug user who remains drug free for two or more years may be considered
rehabilitated. Given Applicant has shown the ability to live within her limited income and
avoid new debt for seven years, she has rehabilitated her attitude and behavior towards
the acquisition of any debt. Security concerns are not raised because of these old
debts. She has demonstrated that she is a reliable and responsible individual. She has
been honest and forthcoming about her debts, which indicates that she would act the
same if a foreign agent attempted to obtain sensitive or classified information from her.
(See AG & 2(a)(1), (7)-(9).)
11
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
