  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02090 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has 14 accounts which are past due, written off, or placed for 
collection, which total approximately $27,000. She is paying $200 per month on one of 
the accounts. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 20, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On June 10, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
August 5, 2009, I was assigned the case. On August 17, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on September 30, 2009.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through Q, 
which were admitted into evidence. On October 5, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted all of the factual allegations, with 
explanations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. 
After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old configuration and product data manager, who has 
worked for a defense contractor for 12 years. (Tr. 24) She is seeking to maintain a 
secret security clearance. Applicant has held a security clearance for 20 years. 
(Applicant’s answer to the SOR) Applicant’s manager stated Applicant is a valuable and 
dependable asset, and an outstanding employee who truly cares about her work. She 
continually meets challenging deadlines; cares about those she works with; has a 
reputation for making goods decisions; and has a reputation for being a stable and 
reliable resource. (Ex. A) 
 
The SOR lists 14 accounts which are past due, written off, or placed for collection 
totaling approximately $27,000. Four of the debts are each for $75 or less and another 
four are under $200 each. These eight debts total approximately $900.  
 
In 1995, Applicant and her husband of 15 years divorced, At that time, she had 
little experience managing money. During the marriage, her husband managed the 
household finances. Their household combined annual income was $90,000. After the 
divorce, her annual income was $20,000. In October 2002, Applicant remarried. (Ex. 1) 
 
In October 2003, Applicant provided a sworn statement to the Defense Security 
Service about her finances. (Ex. 2) As of that time, Applicant has not received any 
financial counseling. Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS) showing 
a monthly net remainder (monthly income less monthly expenses and monthly payment 
on debts) was $743. Her October 2003 PFS listed five past due accounts that totaled 
approximately $11,000.  
 
In September 2003, Applicant’s oldest son, his girlfriend, and their baby moved 
into Applicant’s home. (Tr. 41) At the end of 2003, Applicant was not prepared for the 
 
2 
loss of $780 per month in child support when her youngest son turned 18. Financial 
problems brought her credit score from 640 to the 400s.  
 
In 2004, Applicant entered into a lease to purchase a home, which increased her 
rent payments from $550 to $900 per month. (Ex. 1, p. 32, Tr. 39) In October 2008, 
when Applicant completed her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), she stated she hoped to have her medical collection accounts paid by the 
middle of 2009, and the remainder of her debts paid by the end of 2009. (Ex. 1, p. 34)  
 
Between 2004 and 2006, Applicant had three cars repossessed. All of the 
vehicles were purchased used. (Tr. 27) In October 2004, she had a Crowne Victoria 
automobile repossessed. The creditor has not contacted her recently for payment. In 
2004, she purchased a 2003 Cougar for her son. (Tr. 29) Shortly after the warranty 
expired, the car developed engine trouble. (Tr. 40) The vehicle was repossessed. 
Applicant currently makes $200 monthly payments on the $5,812 debt (SOR ¶ 1.h) 
related to this last repossession. (Tr. 29) She had previously been making $400 monthly 
payments on the debt. Once this debt is paid, she will start paying her other obligations. 
 
Several months after her son’s Cougar had been repossessed, Applicant agreed 
to purchase her son a Chevrolet pickup truck if he would make the payments. He made 
six months of payments before being two weeks late on a payment. (Tr. 31) The pickup 
was repossessed, resold, and the balance owed is $10,000 (SOR ¶ 1. i). (Tr. 31)  
 
She currently has two vehicles which are more than six years old. The 2003 
Buick, purchased in 2005, will be paid off in October 2009, and her $407 monthly 
payments will end. (Ex. B. Tr. 26, 34) She was planning on selling the 2002 Avalanche, 
purchased in 2008, for $1,000 to pay off pay-day loans. (Ex. C, Tr. 26) In 2008, 
Applicant attended a budget vacation plan presentation. She succumbed to the high 
pressure sales tactics and purchased a vacation plan, incurring a $6,513 debt (SOR ¶ 
1.c). At the time, Applicant’s husband was working part-time in a job they hoped would 
become full-time. (Tr. 42) However, his part-time job ended and they were never able to 
start making the payments on the vacation plan. (Tr. 42)  
 
Applicant asserts the creditor of the $1,309 doctor’s account placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.j) offered to settle for half the balance and allow her to make payment over a 
six-month period. (Tr. 49) Applicant has not accepted the offer. She has not paid or 
made a repayment arrangement on any of the other alleged SOR accounts.  
 
In September 2009, Applicant completed another personal financial statement, 
which indicated her monthly net remainder was $333. (Ex. B) Applicant’s husband is 
currently unemployed. (Tr. 25) They have decided to move to a smaller house, thereby 
reducing their rent from $1,200 per month to $600. (Tr. 36) Applicant is repaying two 
payday loans with monthly fees of $260. (Tr. 37) With the smaller home, Applicant 
anticipates her insurance premium and utilities will be reduced. (Tr. 43) Applicant hopes 
to start addressing her past due obligations. Applicant asserts she has been poor all her 
 
3 
life and has dealt with financial issues all her adult life. (Tr. 51) She had some financial 
counseling in the mid-1990s, and is seriously thinking about obtaining more. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of 
financial problems. The SOR lists 14 accounts which are past due, written off, or placed 
for collection totaling approximately $27,000. Four of the debts are each for $75 or less 
and another four are under $200 each. These eight debts total approximately $900. 
Even the minor debts have yet to be addressed. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a) because she did 
not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve her delinquent debts. Her 
delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The financial problems were not caused by conditions beyond her control. The 
three largest debts, which represent more than 80 per cent of the total debt, arose from 
two vehicle repossessions and a vacation plan. Six years ago, when asked about her 
finances, she was past due on five accounts. She has experienced financial difficulties 
all of her adult life. She has nine smaller debts, which together total less than $900, that 
have not been addressed. Even the four debts for $75 or less have yet to be paid. AG & 
20(b) does not apply. 
 
In the mid-1990s, Applicant had some financial counseling and is seriously 
thinking about obtaining more. It does not appear that her financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. AG & 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant is making $200 monthly payments on a debt (SOR & 1.h) that resulted 
from a vehicle repossession. This represents a good-faith effort to repay the debt. I find 
for her as to this debt. Another creditor has offered to settle a debt placed for collection, 
but Applicant has yet to accept the offer or make payment on the debt. Applicant hopes 
to be able to repay her other debts. With time, Applicant may be able to address her 
debts, but there is no meaningful track record of her paying any of the SOR debts, with 
the one exception. 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the DOHA Appeal Board has previously noted 
that the concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 
 
6 
(App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish that she has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that she has “ . . . established a plan to resolve [her] financial problems 
and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-
09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). Applicant has failed to do this. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The financial consideration security 
factors are unfavorable to the reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance. However, the 
factors do warrant reweighing under the whole person concept. Failure to pay or resolve 
her just debts is not prudent or responsible. Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. When asked about her finances six years ago, she had past due accounts. 
She has experienced financial problems all her life and has not shown that she can 
manage her income and expenses.  
 
There is no clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
 
7 
 
8 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
