 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01932 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Criminal Conduct, Sexual Behavior, and Personal 
Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct), D (Sexual Behavior), and E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 2, 2009, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
submitted the government’s written case on December 7, 2009. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 14, 2009. As of February 
18, 2010, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on February 19, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
retain a security clearance. He served on active duty in the United States Navy from 
1986 until he retired with an honorable discharge as a second class petty officer in 
2006. He attended college for a period, but it is unclear if he obtained a degree. He 
reported on a 2005 security clearance application that he was married since 1989. It is 
unclear if he is still married, but he appears to be at least separated. He reported four 
children, ages 20, 18, 9, and 8.1  
 
 Applicant was drinking at a party at a friend’s home in June 2008. He was drunk 
and went to a bedroom where a 15-year-old girl had fallen asleep after drinking alcohol. 
He performed inappropriate sexual acts on her while she was drunk or passed out.2   
 
 Applicant was arrested the next day and charged with the felony offenses of rape 
by foreign object – unconscious victim, and two counts of lewd act upon a child 14 or 15 
years of age. In August 2008, he pled guilty to a lesser included offense of the first 
charge. He admitted to the court that he “unlawfully attempted to penetrate the sexual 
organ of another with [his] fingers for the purpose of sexual gratification.” In November 
2008, he was sentenced to 365 days in jail with credit for 7 days, supervised probation 
for three years expiring in November 2011, attend counseling, pay restitution and a fine, 
and register as a sex offender. He is a registered sex offender and remains on 
probation.3 
 
 In September 2008, Applicant told a background investigator that on the night in 
question, he had between eight to ten drinks, a combination of beer, mixed drinks, and 
shots of tequila. He stated that he rarely drinks to intoxication and did not believe his 
drinking affected his judgment or reliability. He stated that he had reduced his drinking, 
and he only had alcohol on one occasion since his arrest, when he drank two beers at 
dinner with his girlfriend. He stated that his arrest is common knowledge and he is not 
susceptible to blackmail or coercion. Applicant’s security officer is aware of his criminal 
record.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5. 
 
2 Items 3, 5-10. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Items 5, 10. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant committed a serious crime in June 2008. He remains on probation until 
November 2011. All of the above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant is a registered sex offender. That is true, but it 
does not state any criminal conduct that is not already alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. SOR ¶ 1.b 
is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Four Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct was in June 2008, and he will be on probation until 
November 2011. I find under the circumstances that the conduct was recent. There was 
nothing so “unusual” about the circumstances leading to the crime that I can find that it 
is unlikely to recur. It adversely reflects on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) is not applicable. There is insufficient evidence to 
warrant the application of any other Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
Applicant’s sexual offense against a 15-year-old girl establishes all the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
Conditions that could mitigate Sexual Behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 14(b) is not applicable for the same rationale discussed above. Applicant 
stated that his arrest is common knowledge. That has lessened, but not eliminated, his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. AG ¶ 14(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s actions were so egregious that Sexual Behavior concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s crimes led to a conviction and registration as a sex offender. That 
conduct created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not applicable for the same rationale discussed under the Criminal 
Conduct analysis. Applicant received some counselling as a requirement of his 
probation. Details were not provided. I cannot make an affirmative finding from the 
limited information in the record that the behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(d) is 
partially applicable. Applicant’s arrest is common knowledge, which has lessened his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. AG ¶ 14(e) is partially applicable.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that Personal Conduct concerns are still present despite the 
presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, D, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, he was a mature 
man when he sexually abused a 15-year-old girl in June 2008. He is a registered sex 
offender and remains on probation until November 2011. I have significant concerns 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Criminal Conduct, Sexual Behavior, and Personal 
Conduct security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
