 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.09-04994 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Terry L. Elling, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On April 9, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 3, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about November 10, 2009, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
December 4, 2009, and issued a Notice of Hearing setting the hearing for January 26, 
2010. On that date, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 6 into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 3, 2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
India are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through XIV (Tr. at 17). 
Applicant raised objections to HE IV, and VII through XIII. After hearing argument on the 
objections, all Exhibits were admitted into the record with the limitation that only 
information pertinent to India would be considered in those Exhibits to which Applicant 
objected. (Tr. at 18-23.) The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of 
general knowledge and pertinent to India, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.g of the SOR.   
 
 Applicant is 69 years old. He was born in India. After completing high school, he 
went to an Indian military academy. The Indian government then sent him to Europe to 
obtain a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering, which he did in 1972. After 
completing his education and training in naval weapons, he was commissioned an 
officer and served in the Indian Navy. He served in the Indian Navy from July 1961 to 
July 1981, when he retired, in the rank of commander, with an honorable discharge at 
age 40. His area of expertise was weapons’ engineering and installation. (Tr. at 61-65), 
He had access to classified information while serving in the Indian Navy. (Tr. at 102)  
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in July 1982 with his wife and two 
daughters, all of whom were born in India. From September 1984 until December 1987, 
he attended graduate school part-time. (GE 3) In July 1988, he became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen and his wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1989. Both daughters also 
became naturalized U.S. citizens. (GE 1) His wife is a retired educator. One of his 
daughters is a realtor, and the other daughter is a medical doctor, having graduated 
from a U.S. university. (GE at 2.) He became an American citizen “to find a better life for 
my family and to make sure that my children could go to the type of schools that would 
make them . . . good careers.” (Tr. at 82) They surrendered their passports when they 
became U.S. citizens. (Tr. at 104) 
 
 
 
 
3
 
 After arriving in the United States, Applicant worked as a technical director for a 
federal contractor from July 1982 to December 2002, when he retired from full-time 
employment. (GE 1, 3) He obtained a security clearance shortly after he became a 
naturalized citizen in 1988. (Tr. at 71, 84) In April 2003, he started a consulting 
company and secured work with federal contractors, including the company that 
previously employed him. (GE 1) His unique background in electrical engineering and 
naval systems has been a valuable asset to defense contractors, resulting in the 
development of significant contributions to U.S. military capabilities. (Tr. at 99) 
 
 Applicant does not discuss his work with other people, including his family, which 
is a practice that began when he was in the Indian Navy. He takes his responsibilities 
for protecting classified information very seriously. As a former director for a federal 
contractor and supervisor of 150 engineers, he made certain that no one violated rules 
or regulations pertaining to classified information. (Tr. at 98-99) 
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born and raised in India. They are deceased. 
His father was an attorney. (GE 2 at 2) Applicant is one of three children, all born in 
India. Applicant has two brothers, who are citizens and residents of India. Both of his 
brothers are attorneys. Applicant stays with his brothers when he visits India. (Id.) 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law were residents and citizens of India. They 
are deceased. (Id.) Less than ten of his extended family members reside in India at this 
time. (Tr. at 122)  
  
 Applicant has four friends, also former Indian naval officers, with whom he has 
maintained contact. They are citizens and residents of India. He has known them since 
1963. Three of them are retired and the other one works for a private company that 
provides shipping operations. He visits them when he travels to India. (Tr. at 84-85) 
They do not have knowledge of Applicant’s work projects in the United States. (Tr. at 
86) He contacts his friends between six to eight times a year. Some of the friends have 
visited him in the United States. (Tr. at 111-113) He saw his friends in November 2009, 
when he traveled to India for a wedding. (Tr. at 121) 
 
 Applicant traveled to India five times between 2002 and 2009. (Tr. at 121) One of 
the trips was as a tourist, and the other four trips were to visit family and friends. (Tr. at 
95, 121) While in India, no one questioned him about his work with a federal contractor. 
(Tr. at 96) 
 
 On occasion, Applicant communicated through emails with a naval attaché at the 
Indian Embassy. The attaché was interested in communicating with former Indian naval 
officers living in the United States through email newsletters. (AE 2) Applicant has never 
spoken to anyone at the Indian Embassy about his work. He has not had any contact 
with the organization since 2009. (Tr. at 95)  
 
 In 2003, Applicant’s company entered into a brief business relationship with one 
of his Indian friends, who started a small electronics company in India. (Tr. at 87) In 
 
 
 
 
4
exchange for his services, he obtained 100 shares of stock worth $5,000. He later sold 
the stock for $31,000 and realized a $21,000 profit. Based on his accountant’s advice, 
he invested the money in bonds in order to avoid paying a large amount of taxes. In 
February 2010, he plans to sell the bonds, transfer the money into the United States, 
and avoid a tax consequence. (Tr. at 89-90) The bonds are worth about $26,000. His 
friend’s Indian company dissolved in 2006. (Tr. at 123)  
 
 Applicant receives an annual pension of $3,000 from the Indian government for 
his service in the Navy. The $250 monthly payment is deposited directly into an Indian 
bank account. (GE 2 at 2; Tr. at 90) The bank account was opened in 1981. The Indian 
government will not deposit the money into an U.S. bank account. (Tr. at 91; AE 1) He 
uses the money for his vacations to India and charitable contributions. (Id.) 
Approximately $30,000 is in the account. This account and the bond account total about 
$56,000 and represent about 3% of his net worth. (Tr. at 93)  
 
 Applicant owns a house and condominium in the United States. He also owns 
stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. His estimated net worth is $1.7 million. (Tr. at 69) 
There is no information that he has a police record or derogatory financial records. He 
has never been fired from a job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal 
drugs or been involved in an alcohol-related incident. (GE 1.) There is no evidence in 
the record that Applicant breached any security policies or procedures while holding a 
security clearance for more than 20 years. 
 
 Two witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. Both have security clearances. 
One of the witnesses has known Applicant since the mid 1990s when he interacted with 
him at operational meetings. At the time, Applicant was the chief engineer and technical 
director for a program. From 2000 to his retirement in 2002, the witness worked for 
Applicant. Now, the witness is the consulting manager for the division that employs 
Applicant. He stated that Applicant is the “model for following rules, regulations, and 
processes.” (Tr. at 37) The witness found that Applicant’s “services in terms of giving 
advice of the technical directions and the system engineering efforts . . . very valuable.” 
(Tr. at 40) He believes that Applicant’s contributions to our national security systems are 
significant. (Tr. at 41) 
 
 The second witness worked as an engineer for the defense contractor with whom 
Applicant was formerly employed from 1982 to 2002. (Tr. at 49) He was both a co-
worker and subordinate of Applicant. (Tr. at 50) He has no reservations about Applicant 
holding a security clearance. (Tr. at 57) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted pride in his U.S. 
citizenship. He considers himself an American and not an Indian. (Tr. at 82) He stated, 
“When I and my family migrated to the United States, I made a conscious decision to 
change allegiance to this country, my adopted country. And I have stuck with that 
through everything.” (Tr. at 97) He has made significant contributions to combat 
systems for the U.S. military because he feels “a loyalty to this country. And I have 
absolutely no allegiance or loyalty to the State of India.” (Id.)  
 
 
 
 
5
India 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: According to its constitution, 
India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal, 
parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 
1.1 billion.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but numerous 
serious problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were 
committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, the 
terrorists coordinated an attack at a hotel in Mumbai frequented by westerners.    
 
The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s largest democracies, 
both committed to political freedom protected by representative government, and share 
common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting terrorism, and in creating a 
strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s nuclear weapons program 
and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns about India’s relations with 
Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual–use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign government and 
private entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. In March 2008, an 
American businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally exporting technology to 
entities in India.  
 
The U.S. views India as a growing world power with which it shares common 
strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries and they are 
expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and collaborative 
future. The U.S. and India seek to elevate the strategic partnership further to include 
cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and joint democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
 
 
 
7
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern, which may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has contact and connections with two brothers and four friends, who 
are residents and citizens of India. He also communicated with an attaché at the Indian 
Embassy as a result of his status as a former Indian naval officer. There is no evidence 
that his brothers, who practice law, are connected to the government or military or other 
positions in which they could benefit from Applicant’s access to classified information or 
technology. His four friends are retired Indian naval officers with obvious connections to 
the military that could benefit from Applicant’s work. Although India is the world’s largest 
democracy, works closely with the U.S. on many matters, shares common strategic 
interest, and generally respects the rights of its citizens, it also continues to have human 
rights issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, and has received illegally 
exported restricted dual-use technology. This creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have 
been raised by the evidence. Applicant also maintains about $56,000 deposited in 
Indian banks. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(e).  
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. Four mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying conditions based 
on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Only the physical presence of Applicant’s brothers in India raises a potential 
conflict for Applicant if he were confronted with a choice between their interests and 
those of the United States. While his long-term friendships with four former naval 
officers create a potential that their interests could be threatened to the point that 
Applicant would confront a choice between their well-being and his obligations to protect 
sensitive information of the United States, the likelihood is diminished by the fact that 
India is a strong democracy and strategic partner of the United States. Additionally, the 
Hearing Exhibits that reference the recent illegal export of U.S. technology to India do 
not document that coercion was utilized in the commission of the crime. Because he no 
longer communicates with the Indian attaché, potential conflicts raised by that 
association are eliminated.  Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.   
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest. He and his immediate family members have lived in 
the United States since 1982. All have become naturalized U.S. citizens. He attended 
graduate school at a U.S. university. His daughters have careers here. Since arriving in 
the United States, he has worked for defense contractors on significant projects for the 
military and the defense of the United States and supervised 150 engineers working on 
 
 
 
 
9
defense projects. He held a security clearance for more than 20 years without question 
or incident. He was trusted with classified material during the 20 years he held a 
security clearance. He demonstrated that he is not a security risk and proved that he 
can be trusted. He has strong financial ties to the U.S. with investments in the United 
States total $1.7 million. He expressed a strong zeal for his work that supports our 
national defense. His coworkers, who worked in close contact with him, consider him to 
be an ethical man and a valuable asset to our national security. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not have application to the security concerns raised because 
Applicant’s contacts with his brothers and friends are frequent and not casual. He stays 
with his brothers when he travels to India and contacts his friends six to eight times a 
year. The friends also visit him in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s net worth is $1.7 million. His accounts in India total $56,000, about 
3% of that net, which is insignificant compared to his U.S. interests. It is unlikely that 
any potential threat to confiscate the accounts would cause him concern or conflict. AG 
¶ 8(f) is applicable.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his 
[or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although this case pertains to Guideline 
B, the security concerns do not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but 
 
 
 
 
10
rather circumstances that warrant further analysis. First, there is a risk of terrorism in 
India. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists in India are hostile to the United 
States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly 
governments, could attempt to use Applicant’s brothers or friends to obtain such 
information. Second, he had numerous and long-standing connections to India before 
he immigrated to the United States in 1982. Following his birth, he spent his formative 
years there. He was an Indian naval officer for 20 years and worked in the area of 
weapons defense. Third, two brothers remain residents and citizens of India. He 
maintains consistent communication with four former naval officer friends. Fourth, his 
consulting business performed work for his naval friend’s company sometime between 
2003 and 2006.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a 69-year old man who has lived in the United States for 28 years, and 
has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1988. His spouse has been living in the United 
States since 1982 and is a naturalized U.S. citizen, as are his two Indian-born children, 
now adults. His U.S. assets are worth $1.7 million. In his current employment, he 
provides vital innovation and support to the U.S. military’s defense systems. His ties to 
the United States are much stronger than his ties to family members or friends living in 
India. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential 
harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously and 
adherence to the rules and regulations pertaining to classified information. While 
working for a defense contractor from 1982 to 2002, he held a security clearance 
without incident and demonstrated that he can be trusted with access to classified 
material. His coworkers assess him as ethical and responsible, praising his technical 
military contributions. He expressed a deep allegiance to the United States and gave 
credible testimony in response to the security concerns alleged in this case.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                             
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
