 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-04301 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on August 29, 2008 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 5). On October 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny her application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on October 5, 2009; answered it on October 21, 
2009; and requested determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received her 
response on October 26, 2009. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
written case on November 23, 2009. On November 24, 2009, a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on December 1, 2009. She did not respond. 
The case was assigned to me on February 4, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old computer programmer employed by a federal 
contractor since June 2002. She served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from June 1989 
to May 1997. She married in September 1989 and divorced in August 2005. Four 
children were born during the marriage. She received a security clearance in June 
2003. 
 
 Applicant and her husband filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 
1996, and they received a discharge in April 1997 (SOR ¶ 1.a). The record does not 
reflect the amount or sources of indebtedness that were discharged.  
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling about $22,383. In her answer to 
the SOR, she admitted all the debts. The table below summarizes Applicant’s 
responses to DOHA interrogatories in June 2009 and her answer to the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Responses  
June 09 
Answer to SOR  
1.b Unpaid rent $1,387 Paying $50 per 
month 
Will pay by Dec. 2010 
1.c Telephone/cable $1,091 Will pay by Dec. 09 Will pay by Dec. 2010 
1.d Telephone/cable $867 Will pay by Dec. 09 Will pay by Dec. 2010 
1.e Collection account $581 None Payment agreement; 
will pay by Nov. 09 
1.f  Auto repossession $8,687 Will pay by  
Dec. 2010 
Admits; no payments 
or promise to pay 
1.g Auto repossession $1,428 Will pay by Dec. 09 Admits; no payments 
or promise to pay 
1.h-1.j Student Loans $8,160 None Loans consolidated in 
July 09 and creditors 
paid  
1.k Car Insurance $143 None Will pay by Jan. 2010 
1.l Payday loan $50 Will pay by Sep.09 Will pay by Jan. 2010 
 
 Applicant submitted no documentation of the payment agreement for the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e or payments on any of the debts. She submitted a copy of her 
 3
student loan consolidation agreement, but she produced no evidence of any payments 
on the consolidation loan. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 4
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), shifting the burden to her to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
ongoing, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
has not submitted any evidence that the delinquent debts were caused by conditions 
 5
beyond her control. Her divorce in August 2005 may have been a circumstance beyond 
her control, but she produced no evidence that it caused her financial problems. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant produced no evidence, other 
than the Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1996, that she has sought or received financial 
counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant produced evidence to show that 
her student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.j were resolved by a consolidation loan. She 
claimed that she was paying $50 per month on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, but produced no 
documentary evidence to support her claim. Similarly, she claimed she had a payment 
agreement for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but she produced no documentary 
evidence of an agreement or any payments pursuant to the agreement. She has made 
successive promises to pay her delinquent debts but has not kept her promises. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.j, but not for 
the remaining delinquent debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 6
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult. She served in the U.S. Navy for almost eight years, 
and she has been employed by a federal contractor for almost eight years. She has a 
long history of financial problems. She has made repeated promises to resolve her 
debts, but has not done so. She has made claims of payments and payment 
agreements but has not supported her claims with documentation. She has resolved the 
three delinquent student loans, but in doing so she has incurred a substantial new debt, 
and she has not produced any evidence that she is making timely payments on her 
consolidation loan. She has been unable to pay the deficiencies on her two vehicle 
repossessions and has no concrete plan to resolve them. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1-g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
