 See also Tr. 21.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01925
SSN: --------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jeffrey M. Scafaria, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed a security clearance application (e-QIP) dated January 6,
2009. On August 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline
H (Drug Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended,
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005,
which are effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
In a March 6, 2009, response, Applicant substantially admitted five of the six
allegations set forth in the SOR and requested a hearing on the matter.  DOHA1
assigned the case to me on December 1, 2009. Department Counsel and Applicant
agreed to a hearing date of January 21, 2010. A notice of hearing was issued to that
effect on December 16, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant gave
 Applicant used marijuana about 40 times over 10 years, mostly in college. He described his use as      2
“experimental and recreational. . . . None of it ever affected my quality of life, or my home life, or my family,
in any way.” Tr. 22, 32-33.
 Applicant has not purchased marijuana since about 2003.      3
 Id., Tr. 39.      4
 Tr. 39.      5
 Id.      6
 Applicant has “sort of an open-ended prescription at this time, and he is being treated [medically for kidney      7
stones].” Tr. 54.
2
testimony and offered five documents, accepted into the record without objection as
exhibits (Exs.) A-E. Applicant was given through February 4, 2010, to submit any
additional documentation. Department Counsel offered two documents, admitted as
exhibits (Exs.) 1-2 without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received
on January 29, 2010. On January 27, 2010, Applicant submitted three additional
documents through Department Counsel, who forwarded the materials without objection
on February 26, 2010. They were accepted into the record as Exs. F-H and the record
was  closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find
Applicant met his burden regarding the drug involvement security concerns raised.
Security clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old staff mechanical engineer working for a government
contractor. He has worked for his present employer since 2001. His performance
reviews indicate excellent professional skills. In completing his e-QIP, he completely
disclosed his past drug use and reviewed his answers for accuracy prior to its
submission. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering and is
working on a graduate degree. He is married and has one young child. 
While a college student in 1998, Applicant began using marijuana, an illegal
substance, with varying frequency.  He obtained marijuana either through purchase2
from friends or through shared use with friends, but he never sold the substance.  He3
graduated from college in 2000. In January 2001, he twice “experimented” with ecstasy,
an illegal psychoactive amphetamine which he was given.   A month later, Applicant4
started his present position. In the summer of 2003, he tried hallucinogenic mushrooms,
prohibited substances he was once given by a friend.  He describes his experience as5
“strictly experimental.”  6
Applicant’s father suffers from kidney stones, a condition from which Applicant
also suffers. Today, Applicant mostly manages pain related to this condition by drinking
water and using Ibuprofen.  Between 2005 and January 2009, however, he used7
prescribed and unprescribed Percocet to help manage related pain on about 30
 Tr. 36. Evidence of a post-emergency room visit and Percocet prescription from December 2005 were      8
accepted as Ex. G.
 Tr. 37. Because the onset of pain was irregular, one prescription “would last a very long time.” See also      9
Ex. F (Letter of legal counsel).
 Tr. 57-58.      10
 Tr. 27-31.      11
 Tr. 34, compare Tr. 41 (Applicant no longer associates with those from whom he bought marijuana).      12
 Tr. 43, 49.      13
 Tr. 44, 49. (The couple jointly agreed to clean “up their acts” and focus on their marriage).      14
 Tr. 47; Ex. H (Statement).      15
3
occasions.  He did not use the medication for recreational purposes. Applicant was not8
on a regular dosage regimen and bouts of pain were irregular. While prescribed
Percocet, he used pills prescribed to his father about 10 to 15 times to address pain
commencing when he visited his parents, and he did not have his own pills with him.  In9
light of his prescription and his medical condition, Applicant never considered whether
using his father’s Percocet might be illegal.  He never used illegal drugs or illegally10
used Percocet during the work day.
In 2007, Applicant was entertaining some friends. A friend who suffered from
migraines asked Applicant if he could have one of the Percocet pills that Applicant kept
in his medicine cabinet. Applicant granted the request.  
Ultimately, Applicant quit using marijuana in June 2008, after becoming a father
in May 2007 and getting married in July 2007.  His marijuana use after college was11
sporadic. During the summer he was married and eventually quit using marijuana, he
used marijuana socially with high school friends and his wife a couple of times. Today,
he rarely associates with these friends, all of whom are now married.  Their contact is12
minimal, mostly through play dates for their children. He does not know if they still use
drugs. 
When Applicant quit using marijuana, he did so by quitting “cold turkey.” He had
no difficulty with the process of eliminating his increasingly minimal use. He chose to do
so for a variety of reasons. Having reached age 30, he realized he needed to comport
his behavior to his level of maturity. The birth of his child and the rush toward marriage
two months later had been a “crash course on reality,” emphasizing his need to get
himself “in line and start being responsible for the other people in [his] life.”  In light of13
their situation, and their fast acquisition of a home in a new area, the couple decided to
commit themselves to their marriage and child, forego drugs in the future, and make a
“fresh start.”  Both are committed to staying drug-free. Applicant has executed a14
document indicating his willingness to have a security clearance revoked should he
ever again abuse drugs.  He has never been referred for drug counseling or felt the15
 Exs. A-D (References).      16
 Tr. 45.      17
 Tr. 45-46.      18
 Tr. 62.      19
 Tr. 50.      20
 Tr. 52. Before his marriage, Applicant used to go out on weekends and imbibe alcohol. Today, he has      21
an alcoholic beverage “every few weeks,” usually with dinner or with friends Tr. 52. He partly attributed his
minimal drinking of alcoholic beverages on the fact that “everybody has kind of gotten into the parenthood
thing. So it is not really, it is not around.” Tr. 53.
 Tr. 51.      22
 Tr. 53.      23
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 24.      24
4
need to seek counseling. He has been drug-free since June 2008, nearly 21 months
ago. 
At work, Applicant is a trusted and valued employee.  He has not had any16
unexcused absences, and he has not been cited for any violations of company rules or
policies.  His present employer conducts drug screening. Applicant passed the one17
drug test he was administered while working for his current employer.  He has received18
“a broad spectrum of [drug] awareness training.”19
Applicant’s social life has radically changed since starting a family. He spends
most of his time with his wife and daughter. Any available free time is spent working on
his house and chaperoning play dates for his child. He plays golf when he can, but
“partying” with friends is a social aspect of his life that had diminished by the late
2000s.  His current use of alcohol is “almost non-existent.”  His current peers are20 21
mostly professional colleagues or fellow parents of young children who lead settled
lives.  Applicant’s wife is a social worker who has worked for the same employer for22
about three years. She does not have a criminal record or any dependency issues.
They socialize about once a month.23
Analysis
Under Guideline H, use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior24
altering substances, and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and
 Id. at ¶ 24(a)(1-2).      25
 Id. at 24(b).      26
5
inhalants and other substances.  “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a25
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.  26
Applicant admitted using and purchasing marijuana, using ecstasy and
hallucinogenic mushrooms, and using Percocet prescribed for someone other than
himself. These admissions are sufficient to raise Drug Involvement Disqualifying
Condition (DI DC) AG ¶ 25(a) (“any drug abuse”). With a disqualifying condition raised,
it is Applicant’s burden to mitigate security concerns.
With regard to Applicant’s relatively isolated use of ecstasy and his
experimentation with hallucinogenic mushrooms, those substances were used in 2001
and 2003, respectively, and he has not again abused those drugs. When he “borrowed”
Percocet from his father, he did so knowing he had a prescription for the medication of
his own at his own home, but the onset of pain occurred when he was visiting his
parents. At the time, he did not understand that treating their prescriptions as fungible
could have legal consequences. Today, he understands the repercussions. With regard
to the ecstasy, mushrooms, and borrowed Percocet, Drug Involvement Mitigating
Condition (DI MC) AG ¶ 26(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) applies. To a
lesser degree, it also applies to the 2007 incident when he permitted a friend to have
one of his personally prescribed Percocet. The incident was not recent, and, in light of
Applicant’s credible testimony, it is clear he did not understand the legal nuance of
granting permission to his friend, who had a migraine, to use one of his prescription
medications. This mitigating condition does not, however, apply to Applicant’s use of
marijuana.
Although Applicant quit using marijuana about 21 months ago, the circumstances
under which he foreswore the drug are significant. In short order, Applicant went from a
socially active bachelor to father and husband in what he concedes was a rushed
arrangement. Within a year, the reality of his new situation became apparent. He
recognized that he was older, more mature, and that, even though his use of marijuana
had become minimal, it was time for him to comport his behavior to that which was
appropriate for a professional adult. Of equal importance was the joint decision by
Applicant and his wife to genuinely work on becoming responsible adults, spouses, and
parents. Although this decision was made a year after the birth of their child and their
marriage, their circumstances were unique and not traditional. They jointly committed to
give up all drugs and have stayed drug-free for nearly two years. 
During that time, Applicant shifted his focus to his family and his home. He no
longer focuses on a bachelor’s lifestyle or the buddies with whom he used to use drugs.
In the interim, most of those friends have also matured, married, and become parents.
Today, he has little to no contact with those who use drugs or circumstances in which
drugs may be present. Moreover, Applicant has signed a statement of intent with
6
automatic revocation of clearance for any future drug use. These efforts are significant,
as are the facts related to Applicant’s minimal use of marijuana at the time he quit
drugs, the intervening period since he used other illegal substances, and his
understanding of the legalities and responsibilities associated with prescription
medication. Such understanding and efforts are further fortified by the interdependent
support offered between Applicant and his wife in their attempts to work on building a
family and serving as role models for their child. Therefore, DI MC AG ¶ 26(b) (a
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future such as: (1) disassociation
from drug-using associates and cotnacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment
where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) apply.
There is no evidence that Applicant abused drugs, such as Percocet, prescribed to him,
nor is their evidence treatment at a prescribed drug treatment program or facility was
warranted. Consequently, none of the remaining mitigating conditions are applicable.
Applicant has been drug-free for approximately 21 months. He quit using drugs
“cold turkey” without difficulty. He and his wife maintain a drug-free home and socialize
in drug-free venues. Neither drugs, alcohol, or suspect influences remain in their lives
as they endeavor to work on their marriage and their roles as responsible, professional
parents. Drugs are no longer compatible with their lifestyle. Applicant credibly and
unequivocally expressed his intent not to use drugs in the future. As a safeguard, he
has signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation
concerning illegal or improper drug use. His place of employment utilizes drug testing to
check for drug abuse. Drug involvement security concerns are mitigated.
.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the
guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors.  Here, Applicant used illegal drugs and used his father’s prescription drugs
7
illegally in his 20s, slowly phasing out his drug use until he was only a minimal
marijuana user in his very early 30s. His drug abuse was social and he knew it was
proscribed. As he matured, however, his drug use diminished. When he suddenly found
himself a father and husband, the reality of his new situation took about a year to
accept. Ultimately, he and his wife made the affirmative decision to quit drugs, eschew
their use in the future, and focus on their new family. They have changed their lifestyle
and their priorities. Neither has used drugs in nearly 21 months. 
In his efforts to stay drug free, Applicant has more than self resolve for support.
The decision to quit drugs was jointly made with his wife. His employer utilizes drug
screening. Additionally, he has signed a letter of intent with automatic revocation of his
security clearance should he waver and return to drugs.
Applicant’s past use and abuse of Percocet presents a somewhat distinct
subcategory of drug abuse. Here, Applicant was initially prescribed the medication for
pain associated from chronic and recurring kidney stones, a condition that apparently
runs in his family. For the most part, this condition is now managed through legally
available substances. Still, Percocet was prescribed and used. Not having specialized
knowledge as to whether prescribed medications were fungible amongst family
members and similarly situated patients, he did not think twice about using one of his
father’s Percocet with his father’s permission when kidney stone pain commenced while
he visited his parents and his own Percocet supply was unavailable. He similarly did not
give thorough thought to permitting a friend suffering from a migraine to take one of his
own Percocet for pain. Today, Applicant understands the legality of using medications
prescribed for others, regardless of whether one has their own prescription for the same
medication. Understanding such legalities, and in light of his current methods for
dealing with kidney stone related pain, there is no evidence that such past sharing of
prescription medication will be repeated. With security concerns regarding his drug
involvement mitigated, I conclude it is clearly consistent with national security to grant
Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
