                                                              
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-01331 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin R. Hancock, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of alcohol consumption and received inpatient 
alcohol-related treatment on about ten occasions from 1997 to 2007. In 2002, he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. On December 4, 2007, he stopped consuming 
alcohol. Because of his long history of excessive alcohol consumption and multiple 
relapses, one more year of abstinence is needed to provide sufficient assurance that he 
will not return to alcohol consumption. Applicant failed to fully mitigate security concerns 
arising from alcohol consumption. Security concerns relating to personal conduct are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 27, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 28, 
2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended and modified; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
and modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) 
and E (personal conduct) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 4). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On September 1, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (HE 5). 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On September 28, 2009, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on his case. On September 29, 2009, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to another administrative judge. The case was 
scheduled for a hearing on October 29, 2009; however, the hearing was cancelled due 
to excessive snow at Applicant’s location (HE 3). On November 10, 2009, the case was 
transferred to another administrative judge, and on January 7, 2010, the case was 
transferred to me. On January 25, 2010, DOHA issued a hearing notice setting the 
hearing for February 9, 2010 (HE 2). The February 9, 2010, hearing was cancelled 
because of heavy snowfall in the Washington D.C. area. On February 19, 2010, DOHA 
issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for March 3, 2010 (HE 1). Applicant’s 
hearing was held on March 3, 2010. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three 
exhibits (GE 1-3) (Tr. 13-14), and Applicant offered four exhibits (Tr. 109, 145-146; AE 
A-D). Applicant did not object to the admissibility of GE 1-3 (Tr. 14). Department 
Counsel did not object to my consideration of AE A-D (Tr. 110, 146). I admitted GE 1-3 
(Tr. 14), and AE A-D (Tr. 110, 146-147). Additionally, I admitted three hearing notices, 
the SOR, and the response to the SOR (HE 1-5). On March 10, 2010, I received the 
transcript. No post-hearing exhibits were offered or received (Tr. 159).   
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
diagnosis of major depressive disorder, dysthymic disorder, social phobia (social 
anxiety disorder), and avoidant personality disorder as discussed in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) 
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 2000 (Administrative Exhibits 
(Admin. Ex.) I-III) (Tr. 13). Applicant objected to admission on grounds of lack of 
relevance (Tr. 16-17). I overruled the objection; however, the documents were admitted 
for the limited purpose of showing detail and context for these diagnoses as they relate 
to alcohol consumption (Tr. 18-19). They were not admitted to raise an independent 
security concern under the psychological conditions guideline (Tr. 18-19).  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a to 1.d, and he denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a (HE 5). His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 49 years old (GE 1).2 He received a high school diploma in 1978. He 
earned a certificate of completion for computer programming from a trade school (Tr. 
90). He began his employment with his current employer in October 2007. He has been 
employed in information technology as a software engineer and senior programmer for 
several years (Tr. 91-93). He has never married, and is not currently dating anyone (Tr. 
117). He has one brother. He has never served in the military. In March 2006, he left 
employment under adverse circumstances. He has no reportable illegal drug use, 
delinquent debts, or criminal offenses listed on his SF 86.   
 
Alcohol consumption and rehabilitation treatment 
 
Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was 15 years old at parties and after 
football games (Tr. 94-95; SOR ¶ 1.a; HE 5). He continued drinking alcohol for several 
years (Tr. 95). When he turned 25, he began traveling extensively for his employer, and 
his alcohol consumption increased (Tr. 95). Applicant missed work because he was 
hung over in 1996 or 1997 (Tr. 97). In about 1995 or 1996, Applicant first went to 
alcohol rehabilitation treatment (Tr. 96). He attended a few Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings, and he stayed sober for a year (Tr. 97-98). He did not complete AA step three 
(Tr. 137). From about 1997 to about 2002, Applicant consumed alcohol, but not 
excessively (Tr. 98-99). In 2002, he realized he needed alcohol “to feel normal” (Tr. 99). 
He began drinking alcohol at lunchtime during the duty day (Tr. 124-125). From 2002 to 
2007, he received alcohol treatment about ten times (Tr. 100; SOR ¶ 1.b; HE 5).  
 
In 2006, Applicant missed work on Mondays due to alcohol consumption, and 
had already been to alcohol-related treatment several times (Tr. 127; SOR ¶ 1.d). In 
March 2006, he was fired for absenteeism (Tr. 126-127; SOR ¶ 1.d; HE 5). Applicant 
was unemployed from March 2006 until December 2007 (Tr. 127). He drank alcohol 
often between March 2006 and December 4, 2007, and sometimes he drank a fifth of 
bourbon in one day (Tr. 128, 129). 
 
Applicant has never been arrested for any alcohol-related conduct (Tr. 96). 
Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption caused him to be estranged from his parents 
and brother (Tr. 101). Applicant did not hide or conceal his alcoholism from his 
coworkers (Tr. 102-105). Although he attended AA meetings five times per week 
several years ago, Applicant was not that serious about changing, and was just “along 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2 Applicant’s SF 86 (GE 1) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
for the ride” (Tr. 141). He attended the meetings; however, he did not actively 
participate in the AA meetings (Tr. 142). In December 2007, he really did change and 
he stopped drinking alcohol (Tr. 52-53, 57, 142).  
 
W has known Applicant for 18 years (Tr. 44). W dated Applicant for a year (Tr. 
44). They have maintained a friendly relationship over the years (Tr. 44-45). They work 
out at the gym twice a week (Tr. 53). W’s father was an alcoholic, and she understands 
and recognizes this disease (Tr. 46). At first, Applicant’s alcohol consumption was at a 
responsible, social level (Tr. 46-47). Later, his alcohol consumption increased, and he 
started missing work (Tr. 47). Applicant received alcohol treatment on several occasions 
(Tr. 49). Applicant is shy, quiet, and not social, even at social affairs (Tr. 50, 59). He 
was socially isolated (Tr. 58). Most of his alcohol consumption was at his home (Tr. 51). 
He has had intervals where he abstained from alcohol (Tr. 51). For example, about four 
years ago, he did not drink alcohol for 18 months (Tr. 51). Previously he abstained from 
alcohol consumption for one year before he resumed his alcohol consumption. In the 
last 27 months, he has made important changes. He has lost weight, stopped smoking, 
and is now in excellent physical condition (Tr. 54). He has more friends from the gym 
and AA (Tr. 55). He attends church with his brother (Tr. 55). He has a good relationship 
with his parents and brother; whereas, when he was drinking alcohol, his relationship 
with family was estranged (Tr. 56). Applicant was always honest about his alcohol 
consumption and his alcohol-related treatment (Tr. 61, 62). 
 
Applicant ended his alcohol consumption on December 4, 2007, because he was 
tired of drinking alcohol (Tr. 102, 107, 111, 129, 143). His life was not progressing and 
“it wasn’t fun anymore” (Tr. 107, 129). He decided he needed to change or he would die 
(Tr. 108). He used up his savings and borrowed $18,000 from his parents (Tr. 129-130). 
He has paid his parents $6,000 and will repay the rest in two years (Tr. 130). He 
checked himself into an alcohol rehabilitation treatment program, where he stayed for 
three weeks (Tr. 108, 111). His follow-up treatment at AA had a very positive influence 
on his life (Tr. 113). He became less fearful and more confident (Tr. 113-114). He is 
now an avid runner and hiker (Tr. 115). He has lost 30 pounds (Tr. 118). He is not 
comfortable going to bars (Tr. 117). He is much more comfortable being in a social 
setting and meeting people (Tr. 136). His outlook is more positive, and his life is much 
happier (Tr. 136). He attends AA meetings four to seven times per week (Tr. 114, 135). 
Applicant recently received a two-year chip for his AA attendance and abstention from 
alcohol consumption (Tr. 115). He recently learned he was diabetic (Tr. 118). 
Consumption of alcohol risks potential adverse side affects because of his other 
medications (Tr. 119).  
 
On October 21, 2009, a Doctor of Osteopathy (DO) signed a letter indicating 
Applicant was diagnosed with alcoholism (AE A). Applicant successfully completed 
inpatient rehabilitation treatment and required aftercare (AE A). There have been no 
relapses since December 2007 (AE A). Applicant continues to be an active member of 
AA (AE A). He has not seen the DO for medical or alcohol-related treatment since 
December 2007 (Tr. 112). 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant has been taking medication for his anxiety for the last four to five years 
(Tr. 132). His fears and social phobias have been reduced since he stopped consuming 
alcohol (Tr. 133). Applicant believes there is less than a five percent chance he will 
return to alcohol consumption (Tr. 145). 
 
Applicant’s older brother (B) discovered Applicant was having problems coping 
with his alcohol consumption in the mid-1990s (Tr. 67). They lived in different states and 
communicated with each other about once a month (Tr. 67). Once they lived in the 
same state, their contact became much more frequent (Tr. 68, 69, 71). B took Applicant 
to an alcohol-rehabilitation clinic on several occasions (Tr. 68, 69). Their relationship 
was strained because of his alcohol consumption (Tr. 73). Their relationship has 
dramatically improved since Applicant stopped his alcohol consumption (Tr. 72). B and 
Applicant attend church together every Sunday (Tr. 71). Applicant is more friendly and 
sociable now (Tr. 72, 76, 77). He is more physically fit (Tr. 74, 75). His outlook is more 
positive and hopeful, and he is happy (Tr. 75, 88). He has significantly changed for the 
better over the past 30 months (Tr. 74). Applicant was always open and honest about 
his alcohol consumption and treatments (Tr. 78). Applicant previously returned to 
alcohol consumption after being abstinent for 18 months (Tr. 81-82). B thought 
Applicant hit rock bottom in late 2007, and he was finally serious about ending his 
alcohol consumption (Tr. 84-85). He made amends with others, and he never did that 
before when he was abstinent (Tr. 85-86). He learned that he does not need alcohol as 
a social crutch (Tr. 87). Although B could not absolutely rule out Applicant’s return to 
alcohol consumption, he did not believe he would return to alcohol because of all the 
positive changes in his life (Tr. 79-80).  
 
Applicant’s friend describes him as sober, generous, dependable, and caring. 
She recommends reinstatement of his security clearance (AE B).  
 
Applicant’s operations manager, a retired U.S. Army major general, indicates 
Applicant has worked for him since April 7, 2008 (AE C). Applicant “has been a primary 
implementer of some of our most innovative products .  .  .  . [He is] a both a competent 
developer and presenter for the software that he builds and maintains” (AE C). 
Applicant is an intelligent, reliable, and responsible person (AE C). He recommends 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance (AE C). 
 
Applicant’s program manager has known Applicant since April 2008 (AE D). He 
lauds Applicant’s work performance as diligent and dependable. Applicant has excellent 
fitness and trustworthiness. His conduct shows conscientious responsibility (AE D). He 
has observed Applicant’s abstinent behavior—specifically, Applicant has rejected offers 
of alcohol at social events (AE D). His program manager has worked for the Department 
of Defense as a Marine and contractor for more than 30 years, and he recommends 
approval of Applicant’s security clearance (AE D). 
    
Medical records 
 
 On July 12, 2002, Applicant was admitted for inpatient alcohol treatment (GE 3 at 
64). His history indicates Applicant was detoxified from alcohol three times over the 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
previous summer (of 2002) (GE 3 at 64). In July 2002, his physician diagnosed 
Applicant as alcohol dependent (GE 3 at 62, 66; SOR ¶ 1.c; HE 5). His July 16, 2002, 
discharge summary states: 
 
[H]e has been unable to maintain any sort of prolonged sobriety. He has 
been detoxed at [redacted] multiple times and has been in the intensive 
outpatient programs but continues to relapse and experience ongoing 
difficulties.  .  .  .  He certainly does have ongoing difficulties with severe 
alcohol dependency that is complicated by what appears to be an 
avoidance/social phobic combination that makes it even more difficult for 
him to manage when he is sober. (GE 3 at 62). 
 
 Applicant was most recently an inpatient for alcohol treatment from December 4-
14, 2007 (GE 3 at 12). The admission notes indicated that he most recently completed 
alcohol detoxification in May 2007 (GE 3 at 14). Applicant is drinking alcohol on a 
regular basis. The history states, “he will drink a quart to a half gallon per day, has to 
drink in the morning, cannot stop because of withdrawals. He’s had significant 
withdrawal difficulties in the past with deliriums, agitation, nausea, although he’s not 
reported seizures” (GE 3 at 14). His blood alcohol on admission was .210 (GE 3 at 15). 
His discharge summary notes: 
 
Unfortunately, his alcohol dependency is complicated by an avoidant 
personality disorder that makes it difficult for him to integrate into a 12-
step program. Over the last few years, [Applicant] has been able to 
maintain longer and longer sobriety.  .  .  . I am hoping he is inching his 
way toward longer term recovery and it certainly appears that this is a 
possibility.  
 
Axis I states, “Alcohol withdrawal – severe, Alcohol dependency – depressive 
disorder NOS. Mixed anxiety disorder” (GE 3 at 13). 
 
Axis II states, “Avoidant personality disorder” (GE 3 at 13).  
 
Axis III includes, “Alcoholic hepatitis” (GE 3 at 13).      
 
Applicant’s Alcoholics Anonymous sponsor’s statement  
 
Applicant’s Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) sponsor (S) has a distinguished 
educational and corporate background, including two masters degrees, and he has held 
a top secret clearance (Tr. 21-22, 25). S is an alcoholic; however, S has been abstinent 
from alcohol consumption for 11 years (Tr. 22). S has been involved with AA for 20 
years (Tr. 23). S stayed sober for brief periods of time and then relapsed before finally 
stopping his alcohol consumption 11 years ago (Tr. 23). S’s alcohol dependency is not 
cured and never will be; however, it is currently in remission (Tr. 23-24).  
 
S has known Applicant as part of AA meetings for three or four years (Tr. 22, 30). 
S believes Applicant has changed (Tr. 25). When he first met Applicant, Applicant was 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
depressed, withdrawn, defeated, had low self-esteem, and appeared to be unhealthy 
(Tr. 26, 32, 33). Applicant attended AA meetings, and then he left AA for awhile (Tr. 38). 
Applicant would then return to AA attendance (Tr. 38). Applicant’s confidence, 
emotional awareness, and self-awareness of his alcohol dependence have increased 
since December 2007 (Tr. 25, 28). He has lost weight, and he has a better relationship 
with his family and friends (Tr. 35). He is healthier now (Tr. 26, 33, 34). He used to meet 
with Applicant on a daily basis, then it was weekly, and now it is “bi-weekly-ish” (Tr. 27). 
He believed Applicant attended meetings five days a week (Tr. 36). Applicant has some 
AA chips to show his continued sobriety (Tr. 37). He is now at an AA maintenance level 
(AA steps 10-12) (Tr. 37). He believed Applicant has been abstinent for 27 months (Tr. 
27). The probability that Applicant would return to alcohol consumption was low—less 
than a one-in-four probability (Tr. 42). He recommended approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance because he believes Applicant is honest and trustworthy (Tr. 29).    
 
Falsification of security clearance application 
 
On February 27, 2009,3 Applicant completed his security clearance application 
(SF 86) (GE 1) (Tr. 121). Section 25 asks, “In the last 7 years has your use of alcoholic 
beverages (such as liquor, beer, wine) resulted in any alcohol-related treatment or 
counseling (such as for alcohol abuse or alcoholism)?” Applicant answered, “Yes,” and 
disclosed treatment in December 2007 at a nearby alcohol treatment program, and he 
provided the name of his counselor (GE 1). He did not disclose that he had received 
alcohol-related treatment on about ten other occasions (Tr. 105-106).  
 
On May 7, 2008, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant and Applicant disclosed that he received alcohol-related treatment 
at a nearby treatment facility on “five or seven occasions over the last seven years” (Tr. 
107; GE 2 at 3). He explained that he did not list the additional treatments on his SF 86 
because of lack of space on his SF 86 (Tr. 105-106, 107). He did not notice the 
Additional Comments section after Section 30 of his SF 86 (Tr. 121). He believed that 
he may have mentioned to his security officer that he was unable to fully disclose his 
alcohol-related treatment because of lack of space on his SF 86 (Tr. 122). He believed 
the security officer advised him to tell the investigator when he was interviewed (Tr. 
122). He understood even before he completed his SF 86 that he had to disclose all 
information requested (Tr. 105).  
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
3An Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant on May 7, 2008, 
and October 22, 2008 (GE 2 at 3-14). He disclosed his prior alcohol treatments in detail to the OPM 
investigator (GE 2). Applicant believed the reason his SF 86 was dated after his OPM interview was 
because he provided the copy at GE 1 to his security officer on February 27, 2009 (Tr. 137-141; GE 1).  
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and E (personal conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 22 provides:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(e), and 22(g) do not apply. Applicant did not have any alcohol-
related incidents involving police intervention or arrest. A licensed clinical social worker 
did not diagnose Applicant as alcohol dependent. Applicant has not failed to comply 
with a court order not to consume alcohol. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b), 22(c), 22(d), and 22(f) apply. Applicant missed work due to 
excessive alcohol consumption and was fired in March 2006. His alcohol consumption 
problem was diagnosed as alcohol dependent4 “by a duly qualified medical professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist).” He had multiple relapses after 
diagnosis of alcohol dependence, detoxification, and treatment. In the past, Applicant 
habitually consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment. His binge alcohol 
consumption over many years and repeated relapses after treatment raise profound 
security concerns.     
 
  “Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990)). Because the government has met its initial burden 
 
4The well-respected psychiatric reference, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 2000, 
has defined “alcohol dependence” to be a psychiatric condition that meets the following diagnostic 
criteria:  
  
A maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or 
distress, as manifested by three (or more) of the following, occurring at any time in the 
same 12-month period:  
 
(1) Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: (a) a need for markedly increased 
amounts of the alcohol to achieve intoxication or desired effect; or (b) markedly 
diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the alcohol.  
 
(2) Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: (a) the characteristic withdrawal 
syndrome for the alcohol; or (b) the same (or a closely related) alcohol is taken to relieve 
or avoid withdrawal symptoms.  
 
(3) The alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was 
intended.  
 
(4) There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.  
 
(5) A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the alcohol (e.g., visiting 
multiple doctors or driving long distances), use the alcohol or recover from its effects.  
 
(6) Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced 
because of alcohol use.  
 
(7) The alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent 
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by 
the alcohol (e.g., continued drinking despite recognition that an ulcer was made worse by 
alcohol consumption). 
 
Available at http://www.rma.gov.au/SOP/08/017.pdf. 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
concerning alcohol consumption security concerns, the burden now shifts to Applicant 
to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
  Four Alcohol Consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d) apply; however, AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(c) do not apply. 
Applicant began consumption of alcohol at age 15 and he continued to consume alcohol 
with periods of abstinence of up to 18 months for the next 32 years. Applicant was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependency in July 2002. He received alcohol treatment on 
about ten occasions, and always had a relapse, until his December 2007 treatment. He 
acknowledges his alcohol dependency. He has now been abstinent from alcohol 
consumption for 27 months (since December 4, 2007). He completed the December 
2007 alcohol treatment. He completed the 12-step AA program. He attends AA 
meetings at least five times a week, and he received a positive prognosis from a 
physician, who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. He is 
making satisfactory progress in his alcohol rehabilitation program. He has established a 
pattern of abstinence. Despite these very positive developments, his extensive pattern 
of alcohol abuse, rehabilitative treatment, and relapse continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Alcohol consumption concerns are 
not fully mitigated for the reasons stated in the whole person concept, infra. 
 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his alcohol-related treatment before December 2007 
on his February 27, 2009, SF 86 (SOR ¶ 2.a). AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply. AG ¶ 
17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(f) fully apply to the allegation that 
Applicant falsified his answer to the question on his SF 86 about his alcohol-related 
treatment before December 2007. He admitted preparing his February 27, 2009, SF 86. 
He provided derogatory information that placed the Department of Defense (DoD) on 
notice of his alcohol-related problems. He provided information about being fired in 
March 2006, and his alcohol-related treatment in December 2007. He did not add 
additional information about his alcohol-related treatment because he did not see space 
on his SF 86 for this information. He fully disclosed his alcohol treatment to an OPM 
investigator in 2008.5 He signed medical privacy waivers permitting DoD to obtain his 
alcohol-treatment records. I found his statement at the hearing to be credible. At the 
time he provided this particular incomplete information to security officials on his SF 86, 
he thought that the answer he provided met requirements. He did not intend to violate 
the rules, and did not have the necessary intent to deceive to establish the disqualifying 
conduct. Applicant has provided sufficient information to unsubstantiate the allegation in 
SOR ¶ 2.a.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
5The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although there is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance, 
the mitigation evidence is insufficient to resolve security concerns at this time. Applicant 
contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. There is no evidence of any 
disciplinary problems unrelated to alcohol-consumption, arrests or convictions, or any 
drug abuse. There is no evidence of financial problems, disloyalty, or that he would 
intentionally violate national security. His character and good work performance show 
some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. His supervisors evidently support him 
or he would not have been able to retain his employment after his security clearance 
was called into question. He provided supportive statements from his project manager 
and operations manager, two very credible and impressive witnesses, who support 
retention of his security clearance. Applicant knows the consequences of excessive 
alcohol consumption. He has not had any alcohol-related offenses involving the police 
or the courts. He acknowledges his alcohol dependency. He has now been abstinent 
from alcohol consumption for 27 months (since December 4, 2007), which is a very 
positive development. He recognizes the importance of overcoming his alcohol 
problems and has established a pattern of abstinence.6 He completed the December 
2007 alcohol treatment program and the 12-step AA program. He attends AA meetings 
at least five times a week, and he received a positive prognosis from a physician, who is 
a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. He is making satisfactory 
progress in his alcohol rehabilitation program.   
 
 
6For example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”  In ISCR Case No. 
05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a 
clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most 
recent DUI was in 2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol consumption was 
not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 
04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three 
years before hearing, and reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has had a problem with alcohol use beginning when he was 15 
years old. He ended his alcohol consumption when he was 47. He has consumed 
alcohol at times to excess, with some periods of abstinence, for 32 years. On December 
4, 2007, when he began his most recent alcohol treatment his entry blood alcohol level 
was .210. A physician diagnosed him with being severely dependent on alcohol. He 
received intensive, inpatient alcohol detoxification therapy on about ten occasions; 
however, he had a relapse after all of those treatments except for the most recent 
session. His two longest periods of abstinence from alcohol consumption after the age 
of 15 are 18 months and 27 months, the current period of abstinence. His severe 
alcohol dependence and alcohol consumption is described in the alcohol-treatment 
notes, admission, and discharge summaries of his alcohol-treatment program.7 
Statements from colleagues, friends, his AA sponsor, and a family member about his 
alcohol consumption and rehabilitation as well as changes in his social circumstances 
were very helpful and corroborated Applicant’s statements.  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that full mitigation of security concerns is not possible unless there was a 
fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption.8 Applicant’s alcohol 
consumption is not recent; however, his past excessive alcohol consumption was 
frequent, extreme, and of long duration. His extensive rehabilitative efforts and changes 
in behavior are important manifestations reducing concerns. However, his history of 
alcohol consumption is extensive, and his relapses after about ten inpatient treatments 
are not infrequent. Accordingly, the likelihood of recurrence of alcohol consumption is 
still sufficiently probable to require more time with continued abstinence. Lingering 
doubts remain concerning his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. One 
more year of abstinence (from the date of this decision) is needed to provide sufficient 
assurance that he will not return to alcohol consumption. 9 
 
I conclude Applicant has not fully mitigated the security concerns pertaining to 
alcohol consumption. He has mitigated security concerns relating to personal conduct. I 
 
7See Federal Rule of Evidence 803(4) and commentary explaining why statements made to 
obtain medical treatment are deemed reliable. 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).   
 
9Of course, my recommendation to approve Applicant’s clearance in the future is not binding on 
the government. If Applicant’s company sponsors him for a clearance one year after the date of this 
clearance, approval of a clearance at that time will be based on all the facts and circumstances at that 
point in time. An administrative judge does not have authority to commit the government to approval of a 
clearance at some future date. See generally ISCR Case No. 08-07540 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2010); 
ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant 
[a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security clearance to allow [him or] her the opportunity to have a 
security clearance while [he or she] works on [his or] her financial problems.” and citing ISCR Case No. 
03-07418 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 13, 2004)).   
 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”10 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
10See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
