1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-06307
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffmann, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On October 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
 
On November 2, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
DOHA received the request and assigned the case to me on December 17, 2009. On
January 22, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, scheduling the hearing for
February 25, 2010. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel
submitted four exhibits (GE) 1-4, without objection. Applicant presented exhibits (AE) A
and B, without objection. She testified on her own behalf. At Applicant’s request, I kept
the record open until March 21, 2010. Applicant did not submit additional information.
2
The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 3, 2010. Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.e, 1.i,
1.l, and 1.o of the SOR. She admitted the remaining allegations in the SOR, with
explanations. 
Applicant is a 56 year old who is sponsored for a security clearance by a defense
contractor. She obtained her undergraduate degree in 1976. In May 1979, Applicant
received her Juris Doctorate. She is licensed to practice law. She held an interim
security clearance in 2004 (GE 1; Tr. 43). 
Applicant married in 1993. She has two sons. Her husband is disabled. He has
not been employed since 1999. Applicant is the sole source of income for the family (Tr.
30). Her husband has many medical and pharmaceutical bills. There have been times
when she did not have health insurance (Tr. 23).
Applicant left her previous full-time job to start a business as a consultant in 2006
(Tr. 16). She had been asked by former employers to start a consulting firm. Applicant
researched her prospects before leaving her permanent position (Tr. 27). The contracts
did not materialize due to the economic situation, and Applicant did not have any real
income from the newly developed business (Tr. 16).
Applicant has not had full-time employment since September 30, 2008. She has
taken various temporary positions. She also was an independent contractor for home
decor items in 2008-2009. She was an adjunct instructor for a college for one semester
in 2009. The contract with the defense contractor that was scheduled to begin in March
2009 was delayed (Tr. 28).She received some unemployment benefits between the
temporary positions until May 2009 (Tr. 117). She continues to search for permanent
work.  
Applicant promises to pay all her delinquent accounts when she is financially
solvent. She realizes that the collection accounts or those that are charged-off are still
her responsibility. She acknowledged that she always paid her bills when she was
working full-time. She believes she is in a vicious cycle with unemployment and
underemployment, and she stressed that is the reason for lack of progress in paying her
delinquent debts. She paid her bills when she was gainfully employed with a steady
salary and benefits. By her own admission, Applicant’s financial difficulties began in
2006, when she left her full-time permanent employment. 
She would like to make arrangements for a payment plan, but she does not have
the income at the present time. When her creditors or collection agents call, Applicant
answers the phone, and tells them her situation has not changed (Tr. 52). Applicant was
3
emphatic that she does not hide from creditors, and she does not deny that she has
delinquent debts (Tr. 104). She was as accurate as she could possibly be in completing
her security clearance application. 
The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts, including medical accounts, a tax lien, two
unpaid judgments, and an automobile repossession. The approximate total for
Applicant’s debts is $32,400 (GE 3). The credit reports establish Applicant’s delinquent
debts. The current status of Applicant’s delinquent debts is described below.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $12,930 is unpaid. Applicant admits this debt,
which is the result of a credit card collection (Tr. 50).
Applicant admits, and at the same time, disputes the medical collection bills
($400 total) in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.o. Some of the accounts are her husband’s
and others are co-pays which she believes she does not have to pay (Tr. 64). They
remain unpaid. She did not provide any information to clarify the dispute.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a 2002 federal tax lien for $5,977. Applicant’s
wages were garnished in November 2007 for the lien. Her entire pay was garnished
except $467 a week (Tr. 67). The garnishment stopped in June 2008, when her full-time
employment ended. Her income tax refunds were also intercepted. She believes there
was an error and does not owe the money. She contacted the IRS but was not able to
resolve the issue (Tr. 72). She intends to hire a representative to work with the IRS (Tr.
73). She believes the actual amount of the lien is less than $5,977 at this point in time.
She did not provide any additional information to clarify the issue. 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,155) and 1.g (1,765), are charged-off
accounts. Applicant admits that they are not paid (Tr. 76). 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h ($4,712) is the result of a 2007 vehicle
repossession (Tr. 80). After five years of payments, she could not continue to make the
payments due to her decreasing income.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1. i ($536). Applicant claims this is a duplicate
account (SOR 1.k). She did not provide any information to substantiate her belief.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,449) is a collection account. This is unpaid.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l ($1.085) is an unpaid judgment. Applicant denies
this judgment. She does not recognize it. She did not provide additional information
about the judgment.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m ($283) is an unpaid judgment from 2005.
Applicant believes this is the result of an electric bill that was not paid by someone who
was living in her old house (Tr. 92).
4
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n ($57) is a collection account. Applicant admits the
debt but stressed that it was paid. She did not have documentation to support her claim.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p ($75) is the result of a book club contract.
Applicant claims she returned the books. She believes she called them a while ago, but
it is still in dispute (Tr. 98).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q ($1,645) is a collection account. Applicant admits
this debt, and acknowledges that it is unpaid (Tr. 102).
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $2,821. This amount includes
her husband’s disability check ($1,352), his pension ($369), and $700 for her young
son. She earns $400 a month playing the organ at church (Tr. 124). She has no car
payment. Applicant participates in a food co-op because she does not have enough
money for food each month. She is behind on her utility bills. (Tr. 134). Her husband
does not always have sufficient money for his medical needs.
 
Applicant is active in her church and her community. She teaches Sunday school
classes. She works with young people in the neighborhood. Applicant is a person of
great faith. She is described as temperate in all activities. She shows self-restraint,
steadfastness, and has a stable family situation. She is noted for her personal integrity
(AE A).
Applicant works tirelessly for the benefit of others (AE B). She is a diligent
worker, who has been faced with ordeals in the past few years. She is an asset to her
company. She is reliable. She “always goes the extra mile” (AE B).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
5
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. By Applicant’s own admission, she accumulated delinquent debts on
many accounts for several years. Her credit reports confirm the debts. She has an
unpaid tax lien. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions,
requiring a closer examination.
6
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant
acknowledged that she has not been financially stable since 2006. She still has
unresolved delinquent debts. She has not been able to pay on those debts for the last
few years. She continues to search for permanent employment. She does not have the
finances to start a payment plan. The issue is current and ongoing. This mitigating
condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), financial considerations security concerns may be mitigated
where Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.@ Before 2006, Applicant did not have financial difficulties.
When she left her permanent employment to start a consulting business on her own in
2006, the contracts did not materialize as she had planned. This was beyond her
control. The economic downturn was also beyond her control. Her husband is disabled
and she is the sole income for the family. However, Applicant chose to leave her
permanent position. She also has yet to resolve the tax lien from years ago. She does
not have to be debt-free, but she must show a financial track record. This mitigating
condition applies in part.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received formal financial counseling. She
had her wages garnished for the tax lien, but it is still not resolved. She has not resolved
her smaller debts. Her efforts are insufficient to carry her burden in this case. I conclude
these mitigating conditions do not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant disputed some accounts, a
judgment, and the tax lien. However, she has not provided documentation for her
assertions. I conclude this mitigating condition does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
7
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are insufficient to
overcome the government’s case. Applicant is a loyal, law-abiding citizen who has
worked all her adult life. She is supporting her family due to her husband’s disability.
Applicant is educated and intelligent. She is active in her church and in her community.
She does not ignore her creditors’ phone calls. She did not have financial difficulties
when she was working in a permanent position. In 2006, she started a consulting
business and contracts did not materialize. She tried to provide for her family and
continues to search for employment. She is respected by her community and her
church.
Applicant has not sought financial counseling. She did not provide additional
information concerning the tax lien and other accounts that she disputed. She still has
unresolved debts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: through 1.q: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
