 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04371 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire on April 16, 2009. On 
August 26, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 26, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that her 
case be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on October 13, 2009. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
October 15, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on October 30, 2009. She had 30 days 
to submit a response to the FORM. She timely submitted a response to the FORM. On 
November 30, 2009, Department Counsel submitted a reply to Applicant’s response to 
the FORM. Department Counsel attached a copy of Applicant’s bankruptcy filing. (Item 
 
2 
 
 
9) On December 1, 2009, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office. The FORM 
was assigned to me on December 14, 2009.   
 
 Department Counsel did not serve Applicant with a copy of her bankruptcy filing 
which was attached to Department Counsel’s reply to Applicant’s response to the 
FORM. On January 27, 2010, I issued an order with an attached copy of the bankruptcy 
filing giving Applicant until March 1, 2010, to comment on the additional document. I 
also allowed Applicant the opportunity to provide evidence that her bankruptcy was 
discharged and to provide a copy of a post-bankruptcy budget. On February 22, 2010, 
Applicant provided a five page document which was marked as Item 10 and contained 
proof of her bankruptcy discharge. On March 2, 2010, Department Counsel responded 
to Applicant’s response to the Order indicating they had no objection to Item 10.    
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in SOR. (Item 
3) 
 
 Applicant is a 43 year old quality assurance supervisor with a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking to maintain a security clearance.  She has been employed 
with the company since April 1989. She is a high school graduate and has an 
associate’s degree. She is single and has no children. (Item 4)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed the following 
delinquent accounts:  a $3,100 credit card account that was charged off in November 
2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 4 at 20; Item 6 at 1; Item 7 at 4); an $8,368 credit card account 
that was charged off in February 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 21, 38; Item 6 at 1-2; Item 
7 at 13); a $7,320 credit card account charged off in August 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 
20, 42-43; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 4); an $802 credit card account that was charged off in 
October 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 4 at 22, 39; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 8); and a $547 
department store credit card account that was charged off in November 2008 (SOR ¶ 
1.e: Item 4 at 23; Item 6 at 2). 
 
 Additional delinquent accounts include: a $6,807 credit card account that was 
charged off in September 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 4 at 40-41; Item 5 at 19; Item 6 at 2; 
Item 7 at 4); a $22,805 credit card account that was charged off in September 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 4 at 32-33; Item 5 at 19; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 4); a $1,045 home 
improvement store credit card account charged off in August 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 4 at 
24, 35; Item 7 at 13); a $454 cell phone account that was placed for collection in 
January 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 4 at 44-45; Item 7 at 7); and a $983 hospital account 
placed for collection in February 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 4 at 36-37; Item 5 at 7). 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant began to have financial problems after she purchased a house in 2004. 
She spent a lot of money repairing the house. She also incurred gambling debts. She 
went to a casino about four to six times a year. She would lose approximately $700 
each time.  She began taking cash advances on her credit cards to cover her losses. 
She states that the last time she gambled was in June 2008. She does not intend to 
gamble in the future. Applicant states that she was unable to recover from her financial 
problems as a result of the economy in 2008 because of rising fuel and gas prices as 
well as the downturn in the real estate market.  In response to interrogatories, dated 
July 29, 2009, Applicant indicated that she consulted a bankruptcy attorney and 
intended to file for bankruptcy. (Item 5 at 5, 7-8, 12; see also Item 4, section 26) 
  
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on October 14, 2009. Her total assets 
were listed as $188,017. Her total liabilities were listed as $270,849. Of that amount, 
$213,120 consisted of Applicant’s mortgage. Most of the debts were consumer 
accounts. The total amount of her unsecured nonpriority claims listed on Schedule F of 
the bankruptcy was $52,221. On Schedule I of the bankruptcy, she listed her average 
monthly income as $4,141.92. She listed $4210.49 for her monthly expenditures on 
Schedule J. Her monthly expenses were more than her monthly income. Applicant 
attended financial counseling in conjunction with her bankruptcy filing. (Item 9)  
 
Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged on January 12, 2010. Applicant 
reaffirmed her mortgage during the bankruptcy proceedings. (Item 10) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
when evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent 
debts. The SOR alleged ten delinquent accounts, an approximate total of $52,231.  
 
FC DC ¶ 19(f) (financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, 
gambling problems, or other issues of security concern) applies.  Applicant admits that 
her gambling debts contributed to her financial problems.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Though 
Applicant has a history of not meeting her financial obligations, she demonstrated good 
judgment when she stopped gambling in 2008. When she realized that she could not 
pay her creditors, she demonstrated good judgment by filing for bankruptcy. This 
mitigating condition is given less weight because Applicant recently received a 
bankruptcy discharge. It is too soon to conclude that Applicant will maintain a financially 
stable lifestyle.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. The record evidence 
indicates Applicant’s financial problems were partially caused by gambling losses. Most 
of the debts consisted of expenses related to Applicant’s purchase of a house in 2004.  
Applicant had no circumstances that were beyond her control which affected her ability 
to pay her bills.  
 
     FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies. Applicant attended financial counseling as part of a requirement when 
she filed for bankruptcy. The bankruptcy court discharged her debts in January 2010. 
Her financial situation has stabilized. She stopped gambling in June 2008. 
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies because Applicant resolved her delinquent 
debts by filing for bankruptcy. Filing for bankruptcy is a legitimate way to resolved one’s 
debts.  Applicant also reaffirmed her mortgage debt during the bankruptcy proceedings.  
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While I have some concern that 
Applicant only recently resolved her delinquent debts by filing for bankruptcy, I 
considered Applicant’s 20 year career with her employer. Applicant stopped gambling in 
June 2008 and appears to have learned a lesson. She is warned that any future 
financial irresponsibility will raise additional security concerns. Applicant mitigated the 
financial considerations concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a -1.j:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
