                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03388 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) listed nine delinquent debts totaling 
$26,833. His salary increased by about $40,000 early in 2009. However, he provided 
proof of only about $500 in payments, which he used to resolve four SOR debts. He 
failed to make sufficient effort to resolve five of his delinquent debts. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 26, 2009, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions (SF 86) (Item 5). On November 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant (Item 1), pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended and modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
(Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked (Item 1). 
 
On December 10, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and on 
January 27, 2010, he elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing (Items 3, 4). A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated 
February 2, 2010, was provided to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 On February 
22, 2010, Applicant provided a telefax cover sheet and 12 pages of documents (FORM 
response). Department counsel did not object to consideration of the FORM response. 
The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted responsibility for the nine debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.i (Items 1, 2).3 The nine SOR debts total $26,833 (Items 1, 2). He 
also described his resolution of several debts. His admissions are accepted as findings 
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor.4 He has been 
employed in information technology for at least five years. In 2000, he married, and he 
has three children who are ages seven, seven (twins), and five. His wife was medically 
discharged from the military in 2000 (Item 7 at 3-4). She was unemployed from 2002 to 
2007 and from 2008 until about August 2009 (Id.; Item 6 at 2). Applicant has never 
served in the military.   
 
Applicant did not disclose any unpaid liens, garnishments, illegal drug use, 
alcohol-related offenses, or felonies on his January 26, 2009, security clearance 
application. He disclosed he left employment under unfavorable circumstances in 
November 2004; he had an unpaid judgment for $8,234 that occurred in June 2003; and 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated February 2, 2010, and Applicant’s receipt is not part of the 
file. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit 
information (file).  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
July 8, 2009, SOR response (Item 4). 
 
4Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
January 26, 2009, SF 86 (Item 5). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
he had one debt currently over 90 days delinquent or over 180 days delinquent in the 
last seven years (the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h relating to a vacation time share).      
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant said his spouse’s unemployment, medical bills, and variations in 
Applicant’s salary caused him to fall behind on his debts (Item 7 at 3-4, FORM response 
at 1-2). He was unemployed for about a month in December 2006 (Item 5). He did not 
provide supporting documentation to corroborate these assertions of unexpected 
circumstances causing financial problems. 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists nine delinquent debts totaling $26,833. Applicant said he 
plans to pay off the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h after he pays off some other 
debts. A detailed description of the status of those debts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($16,346)—DEBT UNRESOLVED. In June 2003, a judgment for this 
credit card account was entered against Applicant (Items 1, 2, 7 at 3). There is no 
evidence Applicant contacted the creditor in the most recent 12 months or attempted to 
establish a payment plant to resolve this debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($50)—RESOLVED. Applicant had a television-type account, and it 
was transferred to a collection company (Items 1, 2). On December 3, 2009, the debt 
was transferred back to the television company (Item 2, FORM response at 5). The 
creditor said the delinquent account would be removed from his credit report. Id. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($240)—PAID. Applicant had a debt owed to a credit union. On 
December 7, 2009, he paid $240 resolving this debt (Item 2, FORM response at 6).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d ($411)—PAYMENT PLAN, BUT NO PROOF OF ANY PAYMENTS. 
Applicant had a debt to a telecommunications company, which was transferred to a 
collection company (Items 1, 2). On December 3, 2009, he settled the debt for $127 
(FORM response at 7). The payment was due on December 3, 2009. He said he paid it; 
however, he did not provide any proof he paid this debt (FORM response at 1, 7).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($60)—PAID. Applicant’s medical debt for $60 was paid on December 
4, 2009 (Items 1, 2, FORM response at 8).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f ($825)—PAYMENT PLAN, BUT NO PROOF OF ANY PAYMENTS. 
Applicant had a debt owed to a home improvement center (Items 1, 2). A February 18, 
2010, payment plan indicates payments of $413 are due on February 18, 2010, and on 
March 18, 2010 (FORM response at 9). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,218)—PAYMENT PLAN, BUT NO PROOF OF ANY 
PAYMENTS. Applicant had a debt to a collection company (Items 1, 2). A February 18, 
2010, payment plan indicates five payments of $256 are due on the 18th of each month 
beginning on February 18, 2010 (FORM response at 10). Applicant set up an automatic 
allotment to pay this debt in accordance with his payment plan (FORM response at 11). 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
SOR ¶ 1.h ($7,566)—DEBT UNRESOLVED. Applicant had a debt to a collection 
company resulting from a time-share account (Items 1, 2, 7 at 8). There is no evidence 
Applicant made any payments to the creditor in the last year. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i ($117)—PAID. Applicant had a debt to a collection company (Items 1, 
2). On December 10, 2009, he made an $85 payment to the creditor (Item 2, FORM 
response at 12). 
 
Applicant is using the Dave Ramsey debt resolution plan, which involves paying 
off the smaller debts first (Item 2). Then, one-by-one, the other debts are paid using the 
extra money that becomes available when the lesser accounts are paid and no longer 
require monthly payments (Item 7 at 6). Applicant said he is currently making payments 
on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. The Dave Ramsey plan includes some financial 
counseling.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, responses to interrogatories, Office of Personnel Management interview, 
his SOR response, and his FORM response. His delinquent debts include a large credit 
card debt for $16,346, and a time-share debt for $7,566. His largest delinquent debt 
became delinquent in 2003, establishing a history of delinquent debt. The government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Additional inquiry 
about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions is required.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether Applicant is fully committed to resolving his delinquent 
SOR debts and is making adequate steps to do so.  
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by his 
own brief period of unemployment in December 2006, and his spouse’s years of 
unemployment, as well as his family’s medical problems. However, there is insufficient 
evidence about these circumstances to show their effect on his financial situation, and 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is insufficient evidence he 
maintained contact with his creditors on several of his SOR debts.5  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant learned about how to resolve his 
delinquent debts using the Dave Ramsey plan. He understands what he must do to 
establish his financial responsibility. Although he did not provide a copy of his budget, I 
have credited him with satisfaction of the financial counseling requirement in AG ¶ 
20(c). However, Applicant cannot receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) because he has 
not paid, established payment plans (by making payments), adequately disputed, or 
otherwise resolved five of his SOR debts.  
 
There are some initial, positive “indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control.” He has admitted responsibility for nine SOR debts, and documented 
his resolution of four of them. Although he has payment plans on three debts, he did not 
provide documentation showing any payments to these three creditors. He also 
established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) by showing some good faith6 in the 
resolution of his SOR debts by admitting responsibility for his SOR debts, paying four 
SOR debts, and promising to resolve his remaining delinquent SOR debts. AG ¶ 20(e) 
is not applicable because Applicant did not dispute any of his SOR debts.  
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He has had steady employment for the last 
five years, except for one brief period of unemployment. He noted that he received a 
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
$40,000 salary increase in early 2009, and his spouse returned to employment in 
August 2009. However, he only provided proof of $467 in payments to his SOR 
creditors, and the $467 in payments were all made in December 2009. He has not 
shown significant progress on five of his SOR debts. His steps are simply inadequate to 
fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant is 37 years old. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He has been an expert in 
information technology and networks for many years. He deserves substantial credit for 
volunteering to support the Department of Defense as an employee of a defense 
contractor. There is no evidence that he has ever violated security rules. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States, the Department of Defense, and his 
employer. There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. His brief 
period of unemployment, his spouse’s unemployment over several years, and his 
family’s medical problems contributed to his financial woes. He paid four debts for $50, 
$240, $60, and $177. He communicated with three creditors and made payment 
arrangements. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He began to have financial 
difficulties in 2003 when a credit card became delinquent for several thousand dollars, 
and the creditor obtained a judgment in June 2003. When he completed his security 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
clearance application on January 26, 2009, he disclosed his two largest SOR debts. He 
was fully aware that his debts raised security concerns when he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories, and on December 12, 2009, when he responded to the SOR. He had 
ample notice of his delinquent SOR debts, and sufficient opportunity to contact his 
creditors. He did not make sufficient progress in the resolution of his SOR debts. He did 
not pay, start payments, document and justify any disputes, or otherwise resolve five 
SOR debts. He did not prove he lacked sufficient income to make greater progress 
resolving his debts. Applicant has not proven that he has an established payment plan 
on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g because he has not provided documentary 
evidence of any payments. His promises to pay the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 
and 1.h are insufficient to mitigate these debts because there is insufficient evidence to 
explain why he has not done more to address these five debts after becoming aware 
that they raised a security concern.    
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person and Adjudicative Process factors and supporting 
evidence, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.h:  Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
