                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05830 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory Smith, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On November 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 28, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 1, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 2, 2010. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on February 24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through O, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open 
until March 9, 2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. She submitted 
AE P through W. Department Counsel had no objections and the exhibits were admitted 
and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 3, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 
1.h. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and has worked as a contract specialist for a federal 
contractor since April 2009. She is a high school graduate and has earned some college 
credits. She is not married and has no children. She is the eldest of three children of a 
single mother. She has a 23-year-old brother and a 12-year-old sister. In the past, 
Applicant has assisted her mother and siblings financially, sometimes to her own 
financial detriment.1  
 
 Applicant worked for a federal agency from June 2004 to January 2006. She 
worked part-time for approximately eight years for a delivery company until she began 
her present job. When working for the delivery company, she started out as a temporary 
employee and later became a part-time permanent employee. She used her income to 
support herself and help her family. She was living with her mother during this time. 
Since she began her present employment she is earning more money and addressing 
some of her past debts. She intends to repay all of her delinquent debts.2 
  
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($275) and 1.b ($208) are for medical bills that 
Applicant believed her father’s medical insurance covered. She contacted the creditor 
and has made arrangement to pay the debts. She credibly testified she was unaware of 
the debts until June 2009, because she never received a bill. She stated the debts are 
consolidated and she paid $140 to the collection company at one time and she also 
paid $50 towards the debts in September 2009.3 She intends to pay the remaining 
balance by the end of March 2010.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a medical debt ($1,189) incurred in 2006. Applicant was 
a full-time student at the time and was unaware of the debt. She contacted the credit 
1 Tr. 161-168. 
 
2 Tr. 26-27, 48-54. 
 
3 AE K, GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 31-41.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
bureau to determine the creditor. She is not sure what insurance she may have had at 
the time. She intend to satisfy the debt by April 2010.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,134) is for an auto loan incurred in 2005. Applicant 
was led to believe by her father and uncle that they were going to help pay the loan. 
The loan was in her name only. The original debt was $9,000. She made regular 
payments until sometime in 2007, when she stopped because she could not afford to 
make the payments. She stated she had an agreement with the creditor to make partial 
payments because she had “gap” insurance on the loan, but the company refused to 
accept partial payments. She attempted to make partial payments four times. She was 
initially told they would accept a partial payment and then they rejected her attempts. 
She again contacted the creditor and was told they would only accept a lump-sum pay-
off amount on the debt. Appellant attempted to obtain a loan to pay this debt, but was 
declined. At one point, she believed her car was stolen and reported it to the police, but 
later learned it had been repossessed.6  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($5,152) is for a loan related to ¶ 1.d. Applicant explained 
that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was for the interest on this loan and ¶ 1.j is the principal on 
the car loan. Appellant understands she is responsible for repaying these debts. She 
plans to resume paying the debts in June 2010, as part of her overall payment plan.7 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are student loans that were past-due. She 
disputed that the debts were delinquent and her credit report shows she is making 
monthly payments on the debts.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g is for unpaid car insurance. The debt is about two years 
old. Applicant made a payment of $60 on February 16, 2010. She intended to make 
another payment of $100 in February 2010, and another the following month.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h is for telephone services. Applicant stated she disputed 
this account with the creditor. She provided proof she settled and paid the debt.10  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($5,045) was a loan for a school Applicant attended and 
then withdrew from it.. The original loan was for $8,000. She stated she contacted the 
school and plans to make payments. She never received the money, but rather it went 
5 Tr. 42-44; GE 5. 
 
6 Tr. 44-47, 58-73; GE 3. 
 
7 Id. Tr. 97-98. I am unfamiliar with a loan that splits the principal and interest into two separate loans. 
 
8 Tr. 73-77; GE 5 at 2, GE 6; AE N, O. 
 
9 Tr.77-79; AE L. The record was held open until March 9,2010. Applicant did not provide documentary 
proof that she made this additional payment. 
 
10 Tr. 79-86; GE 7; AE R. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
directly to the school. She stated she learned that she actually owes $4,000 to a 
collection company. She plans to repay this debt, but has not made any payments yet.11  
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($2,628) is a line-of-credit Applicant obtained in 2006. She 
agreed that she would take out the line-of-credit for $6,000, and her mother would use 
$3,000 and she would repay that amount. Applicant would use the other $3,000 and 
repay her share. Her mother cosigned the loan. Applicant was making her own 
payments, but her mother fell behind in making her payments. They defaulted on the 
loan in 2006. Applicant stated that she satisfied the debt with payments to the current 
collection company, through a settlement agreement. Applicant provided proof she 
made payments to a collection company and it appears the debt is paid.12 
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.l ($3,088) is a debt for rent on an apartment that 
Applicant cosigned for a friend. Applicant agreed to take on the financial responsibility of 
obtaining an apartment for a friend, who had experienced a tragedy. Her friend stayed 
in the apartment for 6 of the 12 months leased, and then notified Applicant that she was 
falling behind in paying the rent. The friend then vacated the apartment without 
providing proper notice to the landlord. Applicant contacted the landlord and told him 
she would make the payments. She attempted to make arrangements to pay the debt, 
but could not afford the payments. She has since arranged a payment plan to pay $127 
a month. She has made six payments since August 2009.13 
 
 Applicant has other delinquent debts that were not included in the SOR that she 
is making payments on. She owes a phone bill in her name for approximately $1,000 
that her mother was to pay, but did not. She has been making payments since 
November 2009. She also has moved out of her mother’s house and is sharing rent on 
an apartment.14  
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling. She understands she needs to 
take care of her own debts and not spend her resources helping others when she does 
not have enough money for her needs. She intends to pay all of her delinquent debts. 
Post-hearing, she provided a copy of a spreadsheet with a plan for repaying her 
delinquent debts.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
11 Tr. 87-97. 
 
12 Tr. 98-113; 123-138; AE C, D, F, H, I, Q, S, T, U, V.  
 
13 Tr. 113-122; GE 5 at 2; AE E. 
 
14 Tr.140-150. 
 
15 Tr. 139; AE P, W. 
 
5 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a history of being unwilling or unable to meet her financial 
obligations. She has debts that remain unpaid and delinquent. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because her delinquent debts remain unpaid. She 
has resolved some delinquent debts, is paying others, and has plans to institute 
payments on others in the future. At this point, it is too early to conclude that her 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has assisted relatives and friends financially to her detriment. She has 
made some poor financial choices that have affected her overall financial stability. 
These matters were within her control. She believed her father and uncle were paying 
for her car and medical bills and that she was covered by her father’s medical 
insurance. These matters were marginally outside of her control. These facts raise the 
application of mitigating condition (b). In order for that mitigating condition to be fully 
applicable, Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. In this 
case, Applicant has made some effort to make payments to resolve some of her 
delinquent debts. She has others that she has not addressed because she does not 
have the money. When Applicant purchased a car in her name she should have been 
more diligent in what her financial responsibility was for satisfying that debt. This is also 
true for ensuring she was properly covered under her father’s insurance plan. I find 
mitigating condition (b) only partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, although she 
has put together a budget. She has paid some debts, is paying others, and intends to 
pay the remainder of her delinquent debts in the future. At this juncture, it is too early to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. By her own estimation, 
she has approximately $14,800 in delinquent debts that are included in the SOR. She 
admitted she has other delinquent debts that were not listed. I find mitigating conditions 
(c) and (d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant graduated high school and 
has completed some college courses. She has assisted her mother, siblings, and 
others, financially. Unfortunately, she cosigned for financial obligations that were 
beyond her means to pay. When the person she cosigned with defaulted on the 
obligation, she incurred an additional financial obligation. She is working hard to pay all 
of her delinquent debts and has plans to resolve all of them in the future. Applicant 
needs more time to resolve her delinquent debts, implement her intended repayment 
plan, and establish a record of being fiscally responsible. Once she does this, she is 
likely to be a viable candidate for a security clearance. However, at this time, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph   1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
