FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: A Judge is not required to discuss every piece of evidence. The Judge had to consider
Applicant’s explanation in light of the record as whole.  The Judge reasonably explained why the
Applicant’s mitigating evidence was insufficient to overcome all the government’s security
concerns.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 03-27045.a1
DATE: 08/31/2007
DATE: August 31, 2007
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 03-27045
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
M. Jefferson Euchler, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
The Judge found in Applicant’s favor with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.c, 1.d, 2.a, 2.d, and 3.b.  Those1
favorable findings are not at issue on appeal. 
2
clearance.  On June 23, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 28,
2007, after the hearing,  Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred as to certain
findings of fact; whether the Judge erred in concluding that Applicant deliberately falsified his 
security clearance application; whether the Judge’s adverse clearance decision under Guidelines H
and J is arbitrary, capricious or contrary to law.1
(1) Applicant contends that the Judge failed to reference in his decision: (a) Applicant’s work
for the Navy from 1978 to 1980, and (b) the fact that another employee who was charged for the
same 1994 incident in which Applicant used cocaine in the presence of subordinates, still works for
the Navy.  Applicant’s contention does not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence unless
he specifically states otherwise, and the Judge is not required to cite or discuss every piece of record
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-01961 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2007).  Moreover, even if it
were assumed for the purposes of this appeal that the Judge’s failure to mention the aforesaid facts
was error, such error would be harmless.  An additional allegation of error will be discussed later in
the context of one of the falsifications. 
(2) Applicant contends that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance application
by failing to disclose that he had previously used marijuana and cocaine.  In support of this
contention, he argues that his omissions were the result of a reasonable misreading of the
application’s questions. Applicant also argues that the Judge omitted making a finding that in 2005
an inexperienced investigator never asked him any questions about the 1994 incident in which
Applicant used cocaine in the presence of subordinates and that the purpose of the interview was
limited to financial matters.  Again, Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.   The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or
reject Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge had to consider Applicant’s explanation in light of the
record evidence as a whole, in reaching his conclusion as to whether Applicant’s omissions were
deliberate and intentional.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11175 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 2007).
Applicant offers a rational alternative interpretation of the record evidence.  However, that
alternative interpretation of the record evidence is insufficient, as a matter of law, to render the
Judge’s interpretation arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-19101
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 13, 2006).  On this record, the Judge’s findings with respect to the Guideline E
allegations are sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3
3
(App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).
(3) Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns
raised under Guidelines H and J had not been mitigated.  In support of that contention, Applicant
argues that his 30-year history of marijuana and cocaine use—which included  use while holding a
security clearance—actually amounted to a series of isolated incidents, and that his most recent use
in 2003 was not recent.  The Board does not find this contention persuasive.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the security concerns raised by his disqualifying conduct had not been mitigated.  Although
Applicant disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those conclusions are
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole-person
factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a
case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record
evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the
presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security
clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
nature and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole-person factors.  The Judge found in favor of the Applicant
with respect to some of the factual allegations.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the
evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all of the
government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).
Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guidelines H and J is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple      
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
