KEYWORD: Alcohol; Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: The Applicant has had seven alcohol-related arrests and convictions between 1978 and
2005, and is currently on probation for his last conviction.    He was also convicted for an offense
involving a physical altercation with his wife in 2002.  He has attended several alcohol education
and alcohol treatment programs, and has abstained from alcohol use for six months as of the time
the record closed.  However, the evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the case against him.  He is
not currently eligible for a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 04-12164.h1
DATE: 08/29/2007
DATE: August 29, 2007
In Re:
----------------------------
SSN: ------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-12164
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
WILFORD H. ROSS
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
The Applicant has had seven alcohol-related arrests and convictions between 1978 and 2005,
and is currently on probation for his last conviction.    He was also convicted for an offense involving
a physical altercation with his wife in 2002.  He has attended several alcohol education and alcohol
treatment programs, and has abstained from alcohol use for six months as of the time the record
closed.  However, the evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the case against him.  He is not currently
eligible for a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On October 11, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on December 6, 2006, and requested a
hearing.  The case was received by the undersigned on February 5, 2007, and a Notice of Hearing
was issued on February 16, 2007.
A hearing was held on March 15, 2007, at which the Government presented ten documentary
exhibits.  Testimony was taken from the Applicant, who also submitted five hearing exhibits and two
post-hearing exhibits.  The transcript was received on April 5, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 51, married (but separated) and has a high school diploma.  He is employed
by a defense contractor as a mechanic, and he seeks to retain a Secret-level DoD security clearance
previously granted in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a continued security clearance, based
upon the allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings of fact are
entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR.  They are based on the Applicant's Answer
to the SOR, the exhibits and the live testimony.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol abuse).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants to excess.
The Applicant admitted subparagraphs 1.b. through 1.m. under this Paragraph.  Those
admissions are hereby deemed findings of fact.
Transcript at 62-63, 66, 69.  Including his current marriage, the Applicant has been married four1
times.
Transcript at 59.2
Transcript at 85.3
Transcript at 100.4
Government Exhibit 9 at 2.5
Government Exhibit 9 at 2.6
Government Exhibit 8.7
Government Exhibit 9 at 2.8
Government Exhibit 5.9
Government Exhibit 2.10
Transcript at 79-81, Government Exhibit 10, Applicant’s Exhibit D.11
Transcript at 96-97.12
Government Exhibit 3, Applicant’s Exhibit D, Applicant’s Exhibit F at 5.13
3
The Applicant has had an alcohol abuse problems for many years.  The Applicant began
drinking around the time he entered the Army, in 1973.  The Applicant testified that he often drank
to excess because he was involved in two bad marriages.   According to the Applicant, he stopped1
drinking for about nine years after his March 1994 arrest (further discussed below).   He resumed2
drinking in about 2001, because of marital problems he was undergoing.  He stopped drinking
between January and June 2006.   He further testified that he last drank alcohol on September 9,3
2006.4
Beginning in 1978, the Applicant was arrested eight times for Driving Under the Influence
of Alcohol.  Seven of the arrests resulted in convictions: they were in October 1978 (1.b.),5
December 1986 (1.c.),  January 1994 (1.d.),  March 1994 (1.f.),  September 2004 (1.j.),  October6 7 8 9
2005 (1.k.),  and November 2005 (1.l.).10 11
The sentences the Applicant received for these convictions included various fines, jail time
of various lengths, and terms of probation.  He was also required to attend First Offender Alcohol
Education programs several times.  The Applicant is currently on five years probation for his last
arrest, in November 2005.  He was also sentenced to attend an 18 month alcohol program, which will
be completed in November 2007.          12
The Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence in September 2002 (1.I).  The
District Attorney rejected the matter and no criminal charges were filed against the Applicant.   This13
subparagraph is found for the Applicant.
Transcript at 82, Applicant’s Exhibit D at 2.14
Transcript at 68.15
Transcript at 100-104, Applicant’s Exhibit F at 2, Applicant’s Exhibit G at 2-3.16
Transcript at 89-91; Government Exhibits 4, 6 and 7.17
Transcript at 92-93, 98; Applicant’s Answer at 2.18
Applicant’s Exhibit A.19
Applicant’s Exhibit F at 4, 6; Applicant’s Exhibit G at 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16.20
4
The Applicant attended alcohol treatment from 1994 through 1996 (1.e.).  He attended a
different program after his last conviction, successfully completing the outpatient program in
February 2007 (1.m.).   He was also hospitalized in 2002 for alcohol abuse (1.h.).  The Applicant14
has attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) on a fairly regular basis since 1994.  He testified, “I went
to the meetings partially because I had to, and because I wanted to try and understand what is was
about, going to AA.”   When he can, the Applicant continues to attend two to three AA meetings15
a week.  16
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal conduct).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in criminal acts.
2.a.  The information set forth above concerning allegations 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.i., 1.j., 1.k.,
and 1.l., will be considered under this Paragraph as well.
2.b.  The Applicant admitted that he got into a verbal argument with his spouse in June 2002.
The story is somewhat confusing, but it appears that the Applicant and his wife go into a fight and
he grabbed a telephone out of her hand.  She alleged at the time that he scratched her when he took
the phone away from her.  The Applicant denies intentionally hurting his wife, but he was arrested
anyway and charged with Inflicting Corporal Injury on Spouse and Preventing/Dissuading Witness
to Report.  He plead nolo contendere to an amended count of Challenge to Fight in Public.  He was
fined, given two years probation and sentenced to attend a 52 week anger management course.  The
Applicant has successfully completed the course.17
2.c.  The Applicant admitted that he accidentally missed a court date in April 2006.  When
he next returned to court in October 2006, he was asked about why he missed the prior date and he
explained the circumstances.  The bench warrant was subsequently removed.18
Mitigation.
The Applicant is described by his co-workers as a hard-working, responsible and dedicated
employee.   He has received recognition from his employer with regards to his work.   The19 20
Applicant’s Exhibit E; Applicant’s Exhibit F at 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17 and 18.21
5
Applicant also has received Honorable Discharges from the Army and his State’s National Guard,
as well as other recognition.21
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline.  However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.  Because each security clearance case presents
its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm
of human experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth above,
the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case will be set forth under CONCLUSIONS,
below.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, “In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following
factors [General Factors]:
(1) The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
(2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation
(3) The frequency and recency of the conduct
(4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
(5) The voluntariness of participation
(6) The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent
behavior changes
(7) The motivation for the conduct
(8) The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
(9) The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
6
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may be involved in alcohol related incidents or other criminal acts that
demonstrates poor judgement, untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future."  The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
CONCLUSIONS
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the continued holding of a
security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the Applicant to go
forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or
outweigh the Government's case.  The Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial evidence that
the Applicant has a long history of alcohol-related criminal incidents (Guidelines G and J); and that
he had other criminal incidents as well (Guideline J).
The Applicant, on the other hand, has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case against him, except
in part.  Under Paragraph 1 (Guideline G), as set forth above, subparagraph 1.i. is found for the
Applicant.  Subparagraph 2.c. under Paragraph 2 (Guideline J) is also found for the Applicant
because he missed the court date do to an inadvertent error and not through an intentional act.
The Applicant has an almost 30 year history of alcohol related arrests and convictions.  Four
of these convictions occurred before 1994, and under other circumstances could be mitigated.
However, the fact remains that his last three convictions occurred in September 2004, October 2005
and November 2005.  He last drank alcohol in September 2006, meaning he only had about six
7
months of sobriety at the time the record closed in this case.  Given the fact that he has previously
had extended periods of sobriety followed by continuing alcohol abuse, it is simply too soon to say
that his abuse of alcohol is behind him.  
The following Disqualifying Conditions under Guideline G are applicable to this case: 22(a)
Alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child
or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 22(c) Habitual or binge
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  None of the Mitigating Conditions are
applicable.  The evidence shows that the Applicant’s conduct was not infrequent, that it did not occur
under unusual circumstances and it does cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and
good judgement.  I have considered the fact that the Applicant has attended and successfully
completed several alcohol education and/or treatment programs.  However, he has returned to
alcohol abuse after attending prior treatments, and as of the time of the hearing it had only been one
month since he had completed his last treatment.  Paragraph 1 is found against the Applicant.
Turning to Guideline J, Paragraph 2 is found against the Applicant.  His seven arrests and
convictions for alcohol-related offenses, plus his arrest and conviction for a case involving a physical
dispute with his wife, puts him squarely within Disqualifying Conditions 31.(a) A single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses and 31(c) Allegations or admission of criminal conduct, regardless
of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  In addition, the
Applicant remains on probation for his last conviction, bringing his case within Disqualifying
Condition 31.(d) Individual is currently on parole or probation.  None of the Mitigating Conditions
apply to this paragraph.  Not enough time has passed to show that the conduct will not occur again,
I am not convinced that he was pressured into the acts, nor is there sufficient evidence of
rehabilitation at this point in time.
The Applicant's efforts at reform are noted, and he is commended for his decision to refrain
from further alcohol use.  If he continues to maintain his sobriety he may be eligible for a clearance
in the future.  He is not eligible now.  Under the particular circumstances of this case, this evidence
does not overcome the adverse information that has been presented by the Government.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the Government's
information opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding against the Applicant as to the conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of
the Government's Statement of Reasons. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by
Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant.
8
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.i.: For the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against the Applicant.
Subparagraph 2.c.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Wilford H. Ross
Administrative Judge
