KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant filed for bankruptcy in August 2005. Her debts were discharged in December
2005. Post-bankruptcy, four additional delinquent debts showed up on her credit report, an
approximate total of $4,715. She and her husband owe the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
approximately $17,157 for delinquent income taxes for tax years 1996-2001 and 2003.  They
recently entered into a repayment plan with the IRS but provided no evidence pertaining to the
additional delinquent accounts.  Applicant deliberately failed to list her delinquent debts on her
questionnaire for public trust position. She has not mitigated the security concerns raised under
financial considerations and personal conduct. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 05-13451.h1
DATE: 08/29/2007
DATE:  August 29, 2007
In re:
----------------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 05-13451
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ERIN C. HOGAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2,1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
 Item 4.2
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant filed for bankruptcy in August 2005. Her debts were discharged in December 2005.
Post-bankruptcy, four additional delinquent debts showed up on her credit report, an approximate
total of $4,715. She and her husband owe the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) approximately $17,157
for delinquent income taxes for tax years 1996-2001 and 2003.  They recently entered into a
repayment plan with the IRS but provided no evidence pertaining to the additional delinquent
accounts.  Applicant deliberately failed to list her delinquent debts on her questionnaire for public
trust position. She has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial considerations and
personal conduct. Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF CASE
On September 22, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating they were unable to find that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a a position of public trust.  The SOR, which is in1
essence the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense effective September
1, 2006.
In a sworn statement, dated December 5, 2006, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations
and elected to have her case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel
submitted the government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on May 30, 2007. The FORM was
mailed to Applicant on June 4, 2007, and received on June 18, 2007. Applicant was afforded an
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on August 20, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In her SOR response, Applicant admits to all of the allegations. Her admissions are
incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits,
I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 35-year-old woman employed with a Department of Defense contractor who
is applying for a trustworthiness position. She is married and has two sons, ages 15 and 12.2
 Item 4.3
 Item 5.4
 Item 10.5
 Item 5. 6
 Item 13.7
 Item 5 at 1-2. 8
3
On May 11, 2004, Applicant completed a questionnaire for public trust position, Standard
Form 85P (SF 85P).   She answered "No" in response to question 22(a) Your Financial Record, "In3
the last 7 years, have you, or a company over which you exercised some control, filed for bankruptcy,
been declared bankrupt, been subject to a tax lien, or had a legal judgment rendered against you for
a debt? If you answered, "Yes," provide date of initial action and other information requested
below." She did not disclose a federal tax lien filed against her in May 2002 for nonpayment of tax
debt for tax years 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999.  Applicant claims that she was not aware of the tax
lien at the time she filled out the SF 85P.  Her husband handled all of the financial affairs for the
family.  4
Applicant also answered, "No" in response to question 22(b) on her May 11, 2004, SF 85P
which reads, "Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial obligation? Include
loans or obligations funded or guaranteed by the Federal Government." A credit report, dated May
25, 2004, was obtained during Applicant's background investigation. The credit report listed 26
delinquent accounts, an approximate total of $18,257. Most of the delinquent accounts were over
180 days delinquent.  Applicant claims that she was not aware of the extent of her financial problems5
when she filled out her questionnaire for a public trust position. However, she admits that she was
aware that there were some outstanding delinquent accounts, yet did not indicate any delinquencies
on her trustworthiness questionnaire.  6
On August 29, 2005, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7.  She listed assets of
$2,150 and liabilities of $47,888. Her debts were discharged on December 22, 2005 and the
bankruptcy case was closed on December 29, 2005.7
Post-bankruptcy, Applicant admits to owing the IRS approximately $17,157 in federal
income taxes for tax years 1996-2001 and 2003. Her husband handled the family financial matters.
She later discovered they did not withhold enough money from their paychecks to cover the tax
obligations.8
Two additional credit reports, dated July 19, 2006, and May 22, 2007, revealed the following
outstanding accounts: a $1,463 student loan account, placed for collection in November 2003 (SOR
¶ 1.d), a $2,960 judgment was entered against Applicant in January 2005 on behalf of a vocational
training institute (SOR ¶ 1.g); a $197 delinquent account, placed for collection in August 2000 (SOR
¶ 1.b); and a $95 retail store account related to insufficient funds checks, placed for collection in
September 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.h). The student loan debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was also alleged in SOR
 Item 9.9
 Item 5 at 2. 10
 Id. at 9. 11
 Item 8. 12
  See Items 12 and 13. 13
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). 14
4
¶ 1.e).  I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 1.e since it is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.d as indicated
by the identical account numbers.
  
Applicant states her family's financial problems began in August 1999 after she, her husband
and their two small children moved to the state where her parents resided due to her father's poor
health.  She and her husband had difficulty finding employment.  They did not have jobs lined up
prior to moving.   The family finances were further aggravated by additional expenses incurred9
related to two hip replacement surgeries her husband had in September 2001 and July 2002.   The10
family's income was also reduced from April to December 2002 because Applicant was on medical
leave during much of this period.11
In February 2006, Applicant and her husband entered into a payment plan with the IRS,
agreeing to pay $200 per pay period towards their IRS debt.  Applicant provided no evidence to12
indicate that timely payments are being made towards this payment plan. She provided no evidence
that she took steps to resolve the debts listed under her most recent credit reports (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d,
1.g and 1.h).  13
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position …
that will give that person access to such information.”  In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding14
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information and determining trustworthiness within the
executive branch. 
To be eligible for a security clearance or access to sensitive information, an applicant must
meet the security guidelines contained in the Directive.  The revised Adjudicative Guidelines,
approved by the President on December 29, 2005 and implemented by the Department of Defense,
effective September 1, 2006, sets forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions under each guideline.  The adjudicative guidelines at issue in
this case are: 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations: Failure or inability to live within one's
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control,
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 18. 15
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 15.16
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 2(a). 17
 Id.18
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14.19
 Directive ¶ E3.1.15.20
Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 2(b).21
5
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.15
Guideline E - Personal Conduct: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.16
Conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying, as well as
those which could mitigate security concerns pertaining to these adjudicative guidelines, are set forth
and discussed in the conclusions below.
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”   An administrative17
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available,
reliable information about the person.  An administrative judge should consider the following
factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4)
the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7)
the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
(9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  18
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR
that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified
information.  Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,19
extenuate, or mitigate the facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.20
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”  The same rules apply towards trustworthiness21
determinations for access to sensitive positions.
6
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. I make the
following conclusions.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant's poor financial history raises a security concern. She has encountered financial
problems since 1999. Prior to filing for bankruptcy, she had over 26 delinquent accounts, totaling
approximately $18,257.  She and her husband also owed the IRS for overdue taxes for tax years 1996-
2001 and 2003, an approximate total of $17,157. Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition
(FC DC) ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC ¶19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant's case.
FC DC ¶19(e) (consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by excessive
indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial
analysis) applies due to Applicant's excessive indebtedness and her inability to meet her financial
obligations to include her federal income taxes. 
The financial considerations concern can be mitigated.  Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
potentially could be applied.  Applicant and her husband have suffered from medical problems which
prevented them from working in the early 2000s. Applicant considered her options and decided to
file for bankruptcy which is a legal way of resolving one's debts. However, she has since incurred
several delinquent accounts after the bankruptcy and provided no evidence that she has taken steps
to resolve these accounts.
 FC MC 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolved debts ), applies, in part, because the majority of Applicant's debts were discharged
after her bankruptcy.  Applicant recently entered into a repayment plan with the IRS to repay the tax
debt. I give this mitigating condition less weight due to the fact that Applicant has not provided
evidence that she is making regular payments towards the tax debt, and provided no evidence to
indicate that she is repaying her student loans and the other accounts that were not discharged in
bankruptcy.
Applicant provided no information as to her current financial status.  A question remains as
to whether she will be capable of making regular payments towards the tax debt. There is no evidence
that she received financial counseling which would be helpful given her past history of financial
 Item 9 at 2. 22
 Item 5. 23
7
irresponsibility.  For these reasons, Applicant has not provided sufficient information to mitgate the
concerns under Guideline F.    
Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
Personal conduct under Guideline E is always a security concern because it asks the central
question if a person's past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly safeguard
classified and/or sensitive information. Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a
material fact in any written document or oral statement to the government when applying for a
security clearance or in other official matters is a security concern.  It is deliberate if it is done
knowingly and willfully.  
The SOR alleges Applicant falsified her public trust position application, dated May 11, 2004,
in response to questions 22(a) and 22(b).  She allegedly deliberately falsified her response to question
22(a) because she failed to list a tax lien filed against her in May 2002. Applicant states that she was
not aware of the tax lien at the time of she filled out the security clearance application because her
husband handled the finances. With respect to omitting the tax lien, I find that Applicant did not
deliberately falsify her response to question 22(a). However, I find that she did deliberately falsify
her response to question 22(b) which asked whether applicant was over 180 days delinquent on any
loan or financial application.  Applicant may not have been aware of all of her delinquent accounts
but she does admit that she knew there were some outstanding debts at the time she completed her
SF 85P.   She answered "No" to question 22(b) although she was aware that she had delinquent22
accounts.  In an affidavit dated September 16, 2004, Applicant provided further details about her
delinquent debts,  supporting the premise that she was aware that she had some delinquent debt at the
time she filled out the SF 85P.23
With respect to Applicant's deliberate false answer to question 22(b) on her Questionnaire for
Public Trust Position, Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition (PC MC) 16(a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, of falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness,
or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies.  I find that none of the personal conduct mitigating
conditions apply.  Applicant's decision to deliberately omit information about her delinquent debts
on her SF 85P raises questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  She has not
mitigated the concerns raised by her conduct.  I find against Applicant under personal conduct
concern.  
I considered all the evidence provided and also considered the “whole person” concept in
evaluating Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests. I find Applicant
failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under financial considerations and personal
8
conduct. Therefore, I am persuaded by the totality of the evidence in this case, that it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of public trust. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the evidence presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to find Applicant suitable for a position of public trust. Applicant's request
to be granted a position of public trust is denied.
Erin C. Hogan
Administrative Judge
