FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A decision by another Hearing Office Judge is not legally binding on that Judge’s
colleagues in other cases.  Nor are Hearing Office cases binding on the Board. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 05-12532.a1
DATE: 08/10/2007
DATE: August 10, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-12532
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmonds, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 30, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
The Judge left the record open for two weeks for the submission of additional evidence.1
2
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On January 31, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Specifically, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in weighing the
evidence and that the Judge should have mitigated the negative financial information in the case.
In support of his contention, Applicant submits financial documents, some of which were submitted
at the hearing or immediately thereafter  and some of which constitute new evidence.  Applicant also1
cites several Hearing Office decisions, which Applicant considers comparable to his situation, in
which a favorable decision was rendered.
The Board may not consider new evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Therefore, the Board
may not consider evidence Applicant now submits regarding steps Applicant took subsequent to the
hearing to improve his financial position.  With regard to the evidence Applicant submitted during
the hearing or during the two weeks immediately thereafter, there is a rebuttable presumption that
the Judge considered all the record evidence unless the Judge specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 03-07245 at 4 (App. Bd. May 20, 2005).
Applicant’s citation to other decisions by Hearing Office Judges, for the proposition that
other applicants in situations similar to Applicant’s have received favorable security clearance
decisions, does not demonstrate error on the part of the Judge in this case.  A decision by another
Hearing Office Judge is not legally binding precedent on that Judge’s colleagues in other cases, even
if an applicant establishes close factual similarities between the cited case and the instant case.  The
cited decisions are not binding precedent on the Board in any event.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-
30535 at 5 (App. Bd. May 4, 2005).
Moreover, the application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply
on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Thus, the presence of
some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance
decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement
with the weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a
manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-02471 at 2
(App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions.  She articulated a rational basis for not applying any mitigating
conditions and reasonably explained why the evidence Applicant had presented in mitigation was
insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de
novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate that the
3
Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-04874 at
2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007).  Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable
clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin      
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
