KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant did not timely file federal and state taxes for the years 2001, 2002 and 2003 until
April 2007. Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state tax return has been mitigated due to his
wife’s serious health conditions, his diagnosis of cancer, and his move. Applicant has maintained
a security clearance for more than thirty years without incident. Under the whole person analysis, he
has mitigated the financial considerations security concern and the personal conduct security
concern. Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-09519.h1
DATE: 08/30/2007
DATE:  August 30, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance 
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-09519
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
NOREEN A. LYNCH
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Dustin N. Thomas, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant did not timely file federal and state taxes for the years 2001, 2002 and 2003 until
April 2007. Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state tax return has been mitigated due to his
wife’s serious health conditions, his diagnosis of cancer, and his move. Applicant has maintained
a security clearance for more than thirty years without incident. Under the whole person analysis, he
has mitigated the financial considerations security concern and the personal conduct security
concern. Clearance is granted.
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
Applicant’s Answer to SOR, dated May 2007.2
GX 1 (Application for Security Clearance (SF 86), dated December 19, 2003).3
Id.4
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On April 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant.  The SOR alleges  security concerns under Guideline F (Financial1
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense effective September
1, 2006. The revised guidelines were provided to Applicant when the SOR was issued. The SOR
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary finding under the Directive that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked.
On May 2, 2007, Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR allegations, and
elected to have his case decided at a hearing. On June 18, 2007, the case was assigned to me. A
Notice of Hearing was issued on July 12, 2007. At the August 1, 2007 hearing, the Government
introduced Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4  into evidence without objections. Applicant testified and
introduced Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-D into evidence without objections from Department
Counsel. DOHA received the transcript on August 10, 2007. At Applicant’s request, I held the record
open until August 8, 2007. Applicant timely filed a packet of documentation. This submission was
marked and entered into the record as AX E. Department Counsel had no objection.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted all allegations in his SOR response under Guideline F. He denied the
allegation under Guideline E.  After a complete review of the evidence in the record and upon due2
consideration, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is a-75-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After graduation from college,
he served in the military from 1953 until his honorable discharge in 1973. While in the military, he
had a top-secret security clearance. Applicant received a graduate degree in business in 1972. He has
worked for his current employer since January 2002. Applicant is married with two adult children.3
On December 19, 2003, he completed his security clearance (SF 86) application.4
Applicant worked for a number of defense companies throughout his career, spanning more
than thirty years. He maintained a security clearance throughout the years  with no problems. In 2001
Tr. 32.5
Id.6
At that time, Applicant also was dealing with his 2000 taxes and a tax lien. He owed the IRS an unspecified7
amount. He paid the taxes. 
AX A (Chronology - Medical history)8
Tr. 56; 57.9
Tr. 34.10
Tr. 39.11
4
Applicant left his employment and moved to another state.  Since that time, he has worked for his5
current employer as a project manager.6
Applicant did not timely file his federal and state taxes for the years 2001, 2002 and 2003.
In 2000, his wife developed a serious blood condition.  In 2001, she also fell and broke her wrist.7
She then had surgery and developed an infection. She has had more medical problems since then in
2003, 2004 and 2005. After unsuccessful eye surgery, she was blind in one eye. She was in a nursing
home for some time because Applicant could not attend to all her medical needs.  She is living at8
home but is not ambulatory. 
When Applicant moved in 2001, he needed time to sort out his files and papers after they
arrived in January 2002.  His computer files contained his financial information, but the computer9
hard drive failed and he lost that data in 2002. He normally prepared his own taxes using a computer
program. That same year, Applicant was diagnosed with prostrate cancer.  However, he continued10
to work part-time. He is presently on medication for the cancer.11
In 2002, Applicant was gathering his financial records in order to complete his federal and
state taxes. He filed for several extensions, and paid $2,000 in 2002. His wife’s health continued to
deteriorate and he spent a great deal of time attending to her needs. In 2004, he then consulted a CPA
to assist him with the filing of the taxes. However, Applicant was diverted due to his wife’s medical
condition. During this time Applicant’s wife was hospitalized for pneumonia. She remained
hospitalized for a period of time and then entered rehabilitation. For several months in 2005, she was
in a nursing home. She developed fevers and her health worsened. During Hurricane Katrina, she
was in the hospital for approximately one month.
An agent investigated Applicant  as part of the security investigation. He was open with them
about his situation and the fact that he was still in the process of getting things in order to file the
federal and state taxes. He explained that when his wife became ill, he stopped and did not attend
to the paperwork. Not only did the 2001 and 2002 medical problems impact his organizational
abilities, but Hurricane Katrina (2005) hindered his ability to collect his financial papers and
Applicant’s wife was in the hospital during Katrina for a few weeks. Due to the disruption in daily life after12
the devastation, his wife could not return to the nursing home because it was filled with hurricane victims. Applicant had
to find a place for her where her acute needs could be met. This caused more upheaval in his life.
AX E (Federal and State Tax Returns for 2001, 2002, and 2003). 13
Tr.49.14
Tr. 52.15
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  16
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.1.17
5
complete the process.  He told the investigators that he needed a bit more time to complete the12
filings.
 
Applicant filed his federal and state taxes for 2001, 2002 and 2003 in April and May, 2007.13
His CPA prepared his federal taxes for the year 2001. Applicant prepared the taxes for 2002 and
2003.  He filed his federal and state taxes for 2005 in May of 2006.  He paid his taxes in 2007.  His14
returns reflected that he owed $6,602 and $5,656. His 2003 filed return resulted in a refund for
Applicant.
Applicant acknowledged that he was embarrassed by his not filing his taxes in a timely
fashion. He understands his responsibility and obligation to do so. However, he was honest in
detailing the events that slowed him down and prevented him from filing sooner. He even
acknowledged that part of this involved some procrastination on his part. He was candid in the fact
that he was less than totally organized given the medical condition of his wife, the move and his own
medical condition.15
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position …
that will give that person access to such information.”   In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding16
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information and determining trustworthiness within the
executive branch. 
To be eligible for a security clearance or access to sensitive information, an applicant must
meet the security guidelines contained in the Directive.  The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth
potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline.
Additionally, each security decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative
process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive, and AG ¶ 2(a).
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”    An administrative17
 Directive, Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 2 (a)(1)-(9).18
 Id.19
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14.20
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).22
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.23
AG ¶ 18.24
6
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available, reliable
information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider the following factors: (1)18
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.   19
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR
that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified
information.  Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,20
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is21
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”  Any doubt22
as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be
resolved in favor of the national security.23
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this Decision should
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied
determinations as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. I reach the
following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
 
Guideline F:Financial Considerations 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations,
all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds.24
 AG ¶ 15.25
7
Based on all the evidence, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), FC DC 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations), and FC DC 19(g) (failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same) apply in this case. Applicant did not timely file his
federal and state tax returns for 2001, 2002, and 2003, and did not pay his required taxes for 2001 and
2002 until 2007. 
With the government’s case established, the burden shifts to Applicant to present evidence of
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against him. I considered the Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) 20(a), (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), FC MC 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation)
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances), FC MC 20 (c) (the person has received
or is receiving counseling for the problem and/ or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or under control), and FC MC 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
Applicant filed his federal and state taxes for 2001, 2002, and 2003 in 2007.  Applicant
indicated the failure to file timely was partly due to the myriad medical problems that his wife has had
beginning in 2000 until the present and his financial records being disrupted during the 2001 move.
He also admitted some procrastination on his part. However, his computer hard drive failed during that
period, and he also was diagnosed with cancer. He sought out his CPA to help him. The combination
of events that occurred were beyond his control. He was slow in his tax filings but asked for extensions
and paid $2,000 in 2002. He acknowledged that after the move, it took him awhile to get everything
together and start the process. In some cases, Applicant was owed a refund. 
The issue is whether Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of extenuation, mitigation or
changed circumstances to warrant a favorable security determination. Applicant has mitigated the
government’s concerns under Guideline F for the reasons stated above.
Guideline E: Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.25
Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks the central question does the
persons’s past conduct justify confidence the person can be trusted to properly safeguard classified
information. Not filing taxes in a timely fashion is the type of personal conduct which causes security
concerns. 
8
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among
which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. Financial stability that reflects good judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely
to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. Having found for Applicant as to the
financial considerations concern, I find for Applicant as to personal conduct.
Whole Person
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern. The
objective of the trustworthy determination process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of a
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for assignment to sensitive
duties. Indeed, the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in considering
the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts,
omissions, motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis.
I have considered all the evidence and the “whole person” in evaluating Applicant’s security
clearance determination.  Applicant served his country for 20 years, and during that time he maintained
a top secret clearance. His entire civilian career was devoted to the defense industry. He has never had
any difficulty maintaining his clearance. A combination of events occurred in 2001 that conspired to
slow Applicant down, and thus, he did not focus completely on filing taxes. He has now paid his taxes.
Applicant was completely cooperative and responsive in the security process. It is clear from
Applicant’s demeanor and actions that he takes this matter seriously and strongly desires to put this
behind him. Applicant has now filed his federal and state taxes for 2001, 2002, and 2003. He is current
with all tax payments. Significantly, he took action to resolve the issue before the initiation of this
action. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
9
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Clearance is granted.
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
