KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried with two minor children.  She works as a claims
processor for a defense contractor who provides health care services to Department of Defense
employees.  Applicant has 20 listed delinquent debts that she is addressing by her recent filing of
Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Applicant mitigated the financial considerations’ trustworthiness concern.
Her eligibility for assignment to sensitive positions and for eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is
granted.
CASENO: 06-01074.h1
DATE: 08/27/2007
DATE:  August 27, 2007
In re:
-----------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-01074
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
PHILIP S. HOWE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried with two minor children.  She works as a claims
processor for a defense contractor who provides health care services to Department of Defense
employees.  Applicant has 20 listed delinquent debts that she is addressing by her recent filing of
Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Applicant mitigated the financial considerations’ trustworthiness concern.
Her eligibility for assignment to sensitive positions and for eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is
granted.
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended1
and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive).
Adjudication of trustworthiness cases for ADP I, II, and III positions are resolved using the provisions of DoD2
Directive 5220.6, pursuant to the memorandum from Carol A. Haave, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Counterintelligence and Security to DOHA Director, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases (Nov. 19, 2004)
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
position of trust for Applicant.  On December 11, 2006, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons1
(SOR) detailing the basis for its decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29,
2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense effective September 1, 2006 .  Applicant2
answered the SOR in writing on January 17, 2007, and elected to have a hearing before an
administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2007.  On June 28, 2007, I convened
a hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue
a security clearance for Applicant.  The Government and the Applicant submitted exhibits that were
admitted into evidence.  I left the record open for the submission of additional exhibits by Applicant.
She submitted them within the time period allowed.  The Government had no objection to them, and
I admitted them as Exhibits B to D.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 12, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant's admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated here as findings of fact.  After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and full consideration of that
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried, and has two minor children.  She works for a defense
contractor in the health care management business as a claims processor.  She started this job in
October 2003.  She earns about $2,100 a month, net income being $1,730 monthly.  Her monthly
expenses are about the same.  She is owed about $15,000 in child support from the father of her
children.  Their relationship broke up sometime in the past two years.  Before her current
employment, Applicant had a series of clerk and cashier positions, paying minimum wage or slightly
higher. (Tr. 14, 16, 17, 37; Exhibits 1, 6, A)
Applicant is now working on a budget for herself.  She admits she had children before she
was financially secure, but now has a full-time job and depends only on herself to take care of her
two children.  Her current monthly expenses are paid on time and are not in a delinquent status.(Tr.
26-30; Exhibits 1, 6)
Applicant has 11 medical delinquent debts listed in the SOR (subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d, 1.f
and 1.g, 1.k to 1.m, 1.p and 1.q.)  These debts total $7,919.11.  Applicant claims she had medical
insurance at her former employment positions and thought it paid these bills.  Applicant also has 9
non-medical delinquent debts (subparagraphs 1.e, 1.h to 1.j, 1.n, 1.o, 1.r to 1.t) which total
$4,286.43.  The total of debts listed in the SOR is $12,205.54.  On June 20, 2007, Applicant filed
4
Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  The total amount of her 30 listed debts in the bankruptcy is $26,140.
Applicant has not yet been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Some of these debts dated from
1998 with the latest referral for collection being January 2006.  She attended and completed the
mandatory financial counseling required under the latest amendments to the Federal Bankruptcy
Law. (Tr. 13, 19; Exhibits 2-6, A-D)
POLICIES
As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . . . control access to information
bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position . . . that will give that person access to such information.” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that
it is clearly consistent the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information with Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960).  By direction of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Counterintelligence and Security, adjudications of cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense
Security Service or the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) for a trustworthiness determination
shall be conducted under the provisions of the Directive.  Eligibility for a position of trust is
predicated upon the applicant meeting the guidelines contained in the Directive and a finding it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so. See Directive ¶ 2.3.  An applicant “has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue his trustworthiness determination.” See Directive ¶ E3.1.15
The adjudication process is based on the whole person concept.  Enclosure 2 of the Directive
sets forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) under each guideline that must be carefully considered in making the overall
common sense determination required.  The decision to deny an individual eligibility to occupy a
position of trust is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  See Exec. Or.
10865 § 7.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a such a determination.
In evaluating the trustworthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also assess
the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶2 of the Adjudicative Guidelines.  Those assessments
include:  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding
the conduct, and the extent of knowledgeable participation; (3) how recent and frequent the behavior
was; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of
participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes;
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence (See Directive, Enclosure 2).  Because each case
presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it should not be assumed that the factors exhaust
the realm of human experience or that the factors apply equally in every case.  Moreover, although
adverse information concerning a single condition may not be sufficient for an unfavorable
determination, the individual may be disqualified if available information reflects a recent or
recurring pattern of questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or other behavior specified in the
Guidelines.
5
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal
or professional history of the applicant that disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being
eligible to occupy a position of trust.  The Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the disqualifying conditions listed in the guidelines and an
applicant’s trustworthiness suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).
All that is required is proof of facts and circumstances that indicate an applicant is at risk for
mishandling classified information, or that an applicant does not demonstrate the high degree of
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons handling classified information.  ISCR
Case No. 00-0277, 2001 DOHA LEXIS 335 at **6-8 (App. Bd. 2001).  Once the Government has
established a prima facie case by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate
burden of demonstrating that is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his
trustworthiness determination. ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 2002).  “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved
in favor of the national security.” Directive ¶ E2.2.2
Based upon a consideration of the evidence as a whole, I find the following adjudicative
guidelines most pertinent to an evaluation of the facts of this case:
Guideline F: Financial Considerations: The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which could raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security
concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
CONCLUSIONS
Financial Considerations:  The Government established by substantial evidence and
Applicant’s admissions each of the allegations in the SOR.  Applicant’s debts arose from medical
expenses, telephone bills, and miscellaneous expenses.  Her income was and is insufficient to repay
these delinquent debts in a timely manner.  The disqualifying conditions applicable are Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition ¶19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and ¶19.c.
(a history of not meeting financial obligations).
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on June 20, 2007, eight days prior to the hearing.
While tardy in doing so, the magnitude of Applicant’s debts, the separation from the father of her
two children and whatever income he had, and her series of low-paying jobs, together made it
unlikely she could never repay these debts without using bankruptcy.  Chapter 7 bankruptcy is the
classic solution provided under Federal law for such situations.  The Financial Considerations
Mitigating Conditions applicable are ¶20.b (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under
6
the circumstances), and ¶20.d (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts). 
Whole Person Analysis
In evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process factors listed in
the AG ¶ 2(a) under the “whole person concept.”  The majority of Applicant’s financial problems
arose from medical bills she thought her health insurance coverage from her jobs between 1998 and
2007, should have paid.  She knew she was not paying these bills, and the non-medical bills, but had
no income to pay them beyond her monthly expenses for her family.  Applicant was in her early and
mid-20s when these debts were incurred.  She exhibited a lack of maturity in having her children
before she could afford to do so, as she admitted.  Now she realizes her responsibility better and
depends only on herself to take care of her family.  She did not deliberately fail to pay these
delinquent debts, but expected some to be paid by her medical insurance.  She seems to have learned
to verify payments and not spend more than she earns.  Thus, there is minimal likelihood she  would
engage in this conduct again.  With the Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing, there is no potential for duress
or coercion because her debts will be eliminated.  Applicant is credible in her explanations of the
changes in her life and her acceptance of increased individual financial responsibility.  Her testimony
and actions demonstrate a greater maturity on her part as she raises two children alone, working full-
time, and paying her debts on time.
Therefore, I conclude the financial responsibility trustworthiness concern for Applicant.  I
conclude the “whole person concept” for Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.t: For Applicant
DECISION
7
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for assignment to sensitive duties.  Her
application for eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
     
Philip S. Howe
Administrative Judge
