KEYWORD: Alcohol
DIGEST: Applicant is an employee of a defense contractor.  Applicant had three off-duty, alcohol-
related incidents, specifically: driving under the influence of alcohol in 1997; driving under the
influence of alcohol in 2002; and negligent driving after consuming alcohol in 2003.  She completed
a court-ordered alcohol treatment program, but she did not present any evidence of a favorable
prognosis or an established pattern of responsible drinking.  Considering all the evidence, I conclude
Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant her a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-19339.h1
DATE: 08/29/2007
DATE: August 28, 2007
In re:
-----------------             
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-19339
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MICHAEL J. BRESLIN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Emilio Jaksetic, Esq. Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is an employee of a defense contractor.  Applicant had three off-duty, alcohol-
related incidents, specifically: driving under the influence of alcohol in 1997; driving under the
influence of alcohol in 2002; and negligent driving after consuming alcohol in 2003.  She completed
a court-ordered alcohol treatment program, but she did not present any evidence of a favorable
prognosis or an established pattern of responsible drinking.  Considering all the evidence, I conclude
Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant her a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On November 18, 2004, Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance.  The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry
(Feb. 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992) (the “Directive”), as amended; and the new
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and implemented
by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  On February 28, 2007, DOHA issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its decision: security concerns raised under the
Directive, Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 9, 2007.  She elected to have the matter
decided without a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the government’s case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM)
dated May 22, 2007.  On May 24, 2007, Department Counsel mailed a complete copy of the FORM
to Applicant, along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute,
extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  On June 14, 2007, Applicant received
the FORM.  She did not submit any additional materials within the specified 30-day period.  The
case was assigned to me on August 15, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant denied the allegation in ¶ 1.a, and admitted the remaining allegations in the SOR.
(Item 3.)  Those admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.  After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence in the record, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 55 years old.  (Item 4 at 1.)  She is a janitor for a defense contractor.  (Id. at 2.)
She has two adult children, and is currently separated from her second husband.  (Id. at 3-4.) 
Police officers arrested Applicant in August 1997 and charged her with Driving Under the
Influence.  (Item 3 at 1; Item 5 at 3.)  She pleaded guilty to the charge.  The court sentenced her to
12 months probation and ordered her to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) classes.  (Item 3 at 1.)
Applicant attended the required treatment classes.  (Item 5 at 2.) 
3
On August 24, 2002, local police officers arrested Applicant and charged her with operating
a motor vehicle with a blood-alcohol content more than .08%, and driving, or attempting to drive,
while under the influence of alcohol.  (Item 3 at 1-2.)  The court found her guilty of the offense.  Her
sentence included 18 months probation, and she was required to install an interlock device on her
vehicle for 12 months.  (Item 3 at 2.)  Complying with the court-order, Applicant began an intensive,
36-week, alcohol counseling program in about September 2002.  (Item 3 at 2; Item 5 at 2.)  
In early 2003, authorities arrested her for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol.  (Id.)  She
had consumed alcohol before driving that day.  The authorities later charged her with the lesser
offense of Negligent Driving.  (Id.)  The case was resolved when the Motor Vehicle Administration
ordered her to install an interlock device for an additional six months and to continue alcohol
counseling.  (Id.)  
She completed the court-ordered program in about June 2003.  Applicant did not provide
evidence of successful rehabilitation, or a favorable prognosis by a treating health-care provider.
Applicant admits that she continues to consume alcohol on a monthly basis, that she drinks
to intoxication occasionally, and that she last drank to the point of intoxication in November 2006.
(Item 5 at 1.)  She no longer attends meetings of AA or a similar organization, nor does she take
medication to help her abstain from alcohol.  (Id.)  
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position …
that will give that person access to such information.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 527 (1988).  In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry
(Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified
information within the executive branch. 
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security guidelines
contained in the Directive.  Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel security guidelines, as
well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions under each guideline.  Conditions that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which could mitigate
security concerns pertaining to this adjudicative guideline, are set forth and discussed in the
conclusions below.
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”  (AG, ¶ 2.)  An
administrative judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the
available, reliable information about the person.  (Id.)  An administrative judge should consider the
following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of
the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
4
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  (Id.) 
Initially, the government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR
that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified
information.  (Directive, ¶ E3.1.14.)  Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  (Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.)  An applicant “has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue his security clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “Any
doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.”  (Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special relationship with the
government.  The government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those
individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  The decision to deny an individual
a security clearance is not a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  (Exec. Ord. 10865, §
7.)  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for issuing a clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
I considered carefully all the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.  I
reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
Paragraph 21 of the new adjudicative guidelines explains the security concerns relating to
alcohol consumption.  “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability
and trustworthiness.”  (AG, ¶ 21.)  
The adjudicative guidelines set out some potentially disqualifying conditions that could raise
security concerns.  Under ¶ 22(a), it may be disqualifying where the evidence reveals “alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence . . . regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  The evidence
reveals three alcohol-related incidents away from work: driving under the influence of alcohol in
1997; driving under the influence of alcohol in 2002; and negligent driving after consuming alcohol
in 2003.  The available evidence raises this potentially disqualifying condition. 
Paragraph 22(c) may arise where there is evidence of “habitual or binge consumption of
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  The available evidence indicates Applicant’s excessive use
of alcohol is sporadic–not habitual.  Similarly, the evidence does not establish that her alcohol intake
rises to the level of “binge consumption.”  I conclude the evidence does not raise this potentially
disqualifying condition.
5
The guidelines also set out conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising because
of alcohol consumption.  Paragraph 23(a) is a factor for consideration where, 
so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
The available evidence shows alcohol consumption excessive enough to generate security concerns
between about 1997 and 2003–a period of about six years.  By comparison, it has only been about
four years since her last off-duty alcohol related incident, and less than one year since her last
reported incident of intoxication.  I am not persuaded that a sufficient amount of time has passed to
raise this potentially mitigating factor.  Furthermore, Applicant had off-duty alcohol-related incidents
on several occasions over several years.  I conclude the behavior is not “infrequent,” nor has
Applicant presented any evidence indicating the behavior is unlikely to recur.  I conclude this
potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
Under ¶23(b), it may be mitigating where “the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism
or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”
Applicant admitted the specific allegations regarding off-duty, alcohol-related incidents, but she did
not address the larger question of whether she is alcohol dependent or an alcohol abuser.  She
indicated she attended the 36-week alcohol treatment program, but did not provide evidence
indicating she has established a pattern of responsible drinking.  The available evidence does not
raise this potentially mitigating condition.
Paragraph 23(d) provides that security concerns may be mitigated where:
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or
rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with
treatment recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
As noted above, Applicant completed the court-ordered treatment program, but she did not provide
proof that she established a pattern of modified consumption or that she received a favorable
prognosis from a qualified care provider.  This potentially mitigating condition is not a factor for
consideration.  
Whole Person Concept
I considered carefully all the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in this case
in light of the “whole person” concept, keeping in mind that any doubt as to whether access to
classified information is clearly consistent with national security must be resolved in favor of
national security.  I considered the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct.  Applicant’s
admissions reveal a pattern of excessive alcohol consumption, covering a period of about six years
6
when she was between about 46 and 52 years old.  Apparently she completed an alcohol treatment
program, but she did not present any evidence of a favorable prognosis or an established pattern of
responsible drinking.  For this reason, I cannot assess the extent of her rehabilitation of another
pertinent behavioral change, or determine the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  Considering
all the evidence, I conclude Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant her a security clearance. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
My conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Michael J. Breslin
Administrative Judge
