KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved in the case
and the intelligence gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides
context for all the other evidence of record and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate
conclusions.  Favorable decision remanded.
CASENO: 06-18400.a1
DATE: 08/02/2007
DATE: August 2, 2007
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-18400
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Thomas M. Abbott, Esq., Virginia M. Gomez, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 31, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On December 14, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Martin H.
2
Mogul granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Administrative Judge
erred by finding that Guideline B, Mitigating Condition 1 was applicable in this case, and whether
the Judge’s whole-person analysis was unsustainable.  We remand the case to the Administrative
Judge.
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A. Facts
 
Th Judge made the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 25 years old. He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1981.  He moved to the United States in 1998, with both
of his parents, and he became a naturalized United States citizen in July 1, 2004. When Applicant
received his United States citizenship, he petitioned to change his name to a more American
sounding name.
Applicant is unmarried and has no children.  He received a Bachelor of Science degree in
Electrical Engineering from a United States university in 2005.  He is in the process of applying to
United States universities to pursue a Masters of Business Administration degree.
Applicant's mother and father have also become naturalized United States citizens, residing
in the United States.  His mother is a retired housewife and lives with Applicant. His father works
in the motel industry for Applicant's two uncles in the United States.
Applicant 's sister and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. His sister is a
stay-at-home mother, and his brother-in-law owns and manages a private auto body shop. Neither
of them belong to, participate in, or are active with any government agency of Taiwan, or receive
any benefits from the Taiwanese Government. Their daughter was born in the United States and is
a dual United States and Taiwanese citizen. Applicant speaks to his sister once a month, and sees
her once a year, when she visits the United States. His sister and brother-in-law are in the process
of applying for United States residency and citizenship.
Applicant visited Taiwan from December 2004 to January 2005, to see his sister and
brother-in-law. He testified that during this trip, he saw no one else whom he knew, except these
family members
Applicant does not have any financial interest in Taiwan. At this time he has limited financial
holdings, but what he has is only in the United States.
Applicant submitted five letters from individuals who know him in different capacities in
his place of employment. These letters all discussed Applicant in extremely positive terms as a hard
working, conscientious and trustworthy individual. He also introduced his 2005 Employee
One of the pertinent exhibits was discussed at length in a recent Appeal Board case, ISCR Case No. 03-214341
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007).  That exhibit, entitled Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and
Industrial Espionage (dated 2000), was one of several stipulated to by both parties in the instant case, so notice and
admissability are not properly at issue here as they were in that case.
3
Performance Review for his first year of employment. This first evaluation was fairly positive as
all of his assessments met or exceeded expectations.
Applicant testified as to his strong feelings for the United States and his desire to remain
here. He also stated that he has registered, as required, for Selective Service.
B. Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s finding of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to his credibility determinations. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Department Counsel challenges
the Judge’s findings as inadequate.  The Judge failed to make any findings regarding the nature of
the foreign country at issue, Taiwan.  This failure will be discussed in context of the Judge’s
conclusions.
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions.
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  We review matters of law de
novo.
The Board has established that: “In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign
government involved in the case and the intelligence gathering history of that government are
important evidence that provides context for all the other evidence of record and must be brought
to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No 04-07766 at 3
(App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006).
In the instant case, the Judge’s decision is completely silent as to the evidence  of record1
regarding Taiwan’s history of intelligence gathering and industrial espionage.  The Judge’s omission
in that regard renders his decision arbitrary and capricious, in that it affected his ability to evaluate
properly the significance of Applicant’s relatives’ citizenship and residency in Taiwan, and to
evaluate  properly the applicability of the guidelines including the Guideline B mitigating factors.
4
In light of the forgoing error and the overall state of the record otherwise, the Board concludes that
remand for correction of the error is the appropriate disposition for this case.  Therefore, it is
premature to address the other appeal issues.
Order
The decision of the Administrative Judge granting Applicant a clearance is REMANDED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
