KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a mail clerk for a defense contractor.  She presented insufficient information
to explain, refute, or mitigate 15 delinquent debts totaling almost $15,000.  She noted that she would
file bankruptcy to resolve the debts.  She has yet to file a bankruptcy action.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-19880.h1
DATE: 08/31/2007
DATE:  August 31, 2007
In Re:
-----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-19880
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
THOMAS M. CREAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Rita C. O’Brien, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a mail clerk for a defense contractor.  She presented insufficient information to
explain, refute, or mitigate 15 delinquent debts totaling almost $15,000.  She noted that she would
The Government moved to delete SOR allegation 1.b and the reference to allegation 1.b in SOR allegation 2.a1
because Applicant presented sufficient information in response to the SOR that the $5,487 judgment had been satisfied
by garnishment.  See, Item 3, attachment 1.  The motion is granted and allegation 1.b, and the reference to allegation 1.b
in allegation 2.a are deleted.
Item 9.2
Item 12.3
2
file bankruptcy to resolve the debts.  She has yet to file a bankruptcy action.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its decision to deny a security clearance for Applicant.  The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1990), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), using the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  Applicant acknowledged receipt
of the SOR on March 19, 2007.  The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Directive.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 2, 2007.  She admitted the sixteen allegations
under Guideline F, noting that two of the delinquent debts had been satisfied.   She denied the1
allegation under Guideline E with an explanation.  She elected to have the matter decided on the
written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 13, 2007.  Applicant
received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on June 19, 2007, and was provided the
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying
conditions.  Appellant was granted an extension until August 19, 2007 to reply.  Her reply, dated
August 16, 2007, was received by Department Counsel on August 28, 2007.   On August 28, 2007,2
Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s response and noted no objection to consideration of the
response.   The case was assigned to me on August 15, 2007.3
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 36 years old and has been a mail clerk for a defense contractor since January
2006.  She was married with three children.  Her husband left the family leaving her a single mother
raising the children.  As part of her employment with the defense contractor, Applicant submitted
Item 4.4
Items 6 and 7.5
See, Item 3.6
Item 9.7
Item 3.8
Item 5.9
Item 10.  10
Item 9.11
Item 11.12
3
a security clearance application on January 24, 2006.   Subsequent investigation reveals Applicant4
has delinquent debts.5
Delinquent debt 1 (SOR 1.a) is a judgment for $3,484.  Applicant presented sufficient
information to establish that her former husband’s wages were garnished to pay the judgment.  All
but about $600 of the judgment had been paid.   Since the judgment was being paid by garnishment6
of her husband’s wages, and they were not communicating, she was not aware the judgment had not
been satisfied.  7
Applicant admitted to all of the remaining delinquent debts.  These debts included a medical
account for $62 (SOR 1.c); a telephone debt to SPRINT for $631 (SOR, 1.d); a cable bill to
COMCAST for $239 (SOR 1.e); a telephone bill to Bell South for $882 (SOR 1.f); an account with
First Bank more than 180 days delinquent for $588 (SOR 1.g); an account with Miraglia for $237
more than 180 days delinquent (SOR 1.h); an account with Washington Mutual more than 180 days
delinquent for $455 (SOR 1.i); another cable debt with COMCAST more than $180 days delinquent
for $255 (SOR 1.j); an account with AAC for $527 (SOR 1.k); an account with Natcreadj for $325
(SOR 1.l); an utility account with PG&E for $96 (SOR 1.m); an account with Palisades for $661
(SOR 1.n); an account with Drivefin for $10,311 more than 180 days delinquent (SOR, 1.o); and an
account with First Premier more than 180 days delinquent for $411 (SOR, 1.p).   8
In her response to the FORM, Applicant noted that her debt problems arose because she
became a single mother caring for three children.  Her husband was responsible for much of the
delinquent debts.  He would purchase items, lose his job, and not able to pay for the items.  He left
the family placing the burden on her to pay the debts.  However, all she was able to do was provide
her children with the necessities of living.  In response to an interrogatory, Applicant stated that she
would file for bankruptcy for these debts.   Applicant contacted an attorney in 2006 to file9
bankruptcy for her, but the action was terminated because she could not pay the lawyer’s fees.10
When she has the funds, she will again try to file a bankruptcy action.  She wants to lower the
amount of her debt.   She recently contacted a credit counseling agency through her employer for11
some assistance in resolving her debts.12
See, Item 3.13
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).14
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.15
AG ¶ 2(a).16
Id.17
See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.18
4
Applicant responded “NO” to question 27(d) on her January 2006 security clearance
application asking if there were any unpaid judgments against her.  Approximately $600 is still owed
on a judgment entered against she and her husband.  Garnishment of her husband’s wages paid most
of the judgment.  Applicant thought the entire judgment was paid by the garnishment.13
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . .
that will give that person access to such information.”   Eligibility for a security clearance is14
predicated upon the applicant meeting the security guidelines contained in the Directive.15
The Directive sets out the adjudicative guidelines for making decisions on security clearances.
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines for determining eligibility for access
to classified information, and it lists the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions for each
guideline.  The adjudicative guidelines for this case are the guidelines promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  Each
clearance decision must be fair, impartial, and a commonsense decision based on the relevant and
material facts and circumstances, and the whole person concept.16
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.  An administrative
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available, reliable
information about the person.  An administrative judge should consider: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the applicant’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation of
recurrence.17
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special relationship with the
government.  The government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those
individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   It is merely18
an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of
Directive ¶ E3.1.14.19
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); see Directive ¶ E3.1.15.20
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 21
ISCR Case No. 99-0597 (App. Bd. Dec 13, 2000).22
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (quoting DISCR Case No. 92-1106 (App. Bd. Oct. 7,23
1993))
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).24
AG ¶ 18.25
AG ¶ 15.26
5
Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR that
disqualify or may disqualify the Applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.19
Thereafter, Applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts.   An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the20
national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”   The government is under no duty to21
present evidence to disprove any Adjudicative Guideline mitigating condition, and an Administrative
Judge cannot assume or infer that any particular mitigating condition is applicable merely because the
government does not present evidence to disprove that particular mitigating condition.   “[T]he22
Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.”   “Any doubt as to whether access to23
classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”24
Based upon a consideration of the evidence, I find the following adjudicative guidelines most
pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case:
Guideline F - Financial Considerations: A security concern exists because a failure or
inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.25
Guideline E - Personal Conduct: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process.26
6
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which
would mitigate security concerns, pertaining to the adjudicative guidelines are set forth and discussed
in the conclusions section below.
CONCLUSIONS
I carefully considered all of the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.  I
reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Applicant’s delinquent debts noted in credit reports and admitted by Applicant bring the matter
within Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶ 19(a) (Inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (A history of not meeting financial obligations).  Since Applicant
admitted fourteen of the fifteen alleged delinquent debts, I conclude the above disqualifying conditions
have been established.
Appellant’s answer to the SOR only questions one of the debts, a judgement almost completely
paid by garnishment of her husband’s wages.  This debt still has a remaining balance that neither
Applicant nor her husband satisfied.  Applicant was made aware of the remaining amount of the debt
but presented no information on any efforts to pay the debt once advised the debt was still outstanding.
Applicant stated that she became a single mother raising three children after her husband left
the family.  Most of the debts were incurred by her former husband who lost jobs and left her to pay
the debts.  She raised Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) ¶ 20(b) (The conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).  While the issue was raised by
Applicant’s response, she presented no additional information concerning any efforts to make
arrangements to pay some of the debts.  The debts are basically for small amounts and not for
necessities of life for her or her children.  None of the 15 debts, no matter how small or large, have
been addressed.  She has not shown that she acted responsibly under the circumstances.
Applicant’s proposed solution to resolving the 15 debts was to file a bankruptcy petition.
Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving debt problems.  However, promises to take
an action in the future is not sufficient to establish a good-faith intent to resolve debts.  FC MC ¶ 20(d)
(The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does
not apply.  
Applicant’s response also does not raise FC MC ¶ 20(a) (The behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement).  The debts have not
been paid, so the failure to resolve debts is recent.  There are 15 debts so her debt accumulation is
frequent, and there are no known circumstances that would indicate that her financial problems would
not recur. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a
person may behave in other aspects of life.  A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private
matter until evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under
10 U.S. C. § 1001.27
7
agreed upon terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent with the
holding of a security clearance.  An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is required to manage
her finances in such a way as to meet her financial obligations.  Applicant admits to 15 delinquent
debts totaling over $15,000.  Applicant stated she would file for bankruptcy to pay these debts, but has
yet to fileor take other action to resolve them.  She presented no proof of any inquiries on the debts or
attempts to make payments. 
Applicant’s failure to list a judgment not fully paid in response to question 27(d) on her
security clearance application raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (the
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from the personal
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations . .
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness).  Personal conduct is always a security
concern because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence the
person can be trusted to properly safeguard classified information.  The security clearance system
depends on an individual providing correct and accurate information.  If a person conceals or provides
false information, the security clearance process cannot function properly to ensure that granting access
to classified information is in the best interest of the United States Government.  A deliberate omission
or false statement on a security clearance application is a criminal offense under federal law.27
The judgment was entered against both Applicant and her husband.  Applicant knew her
husband’s wages were garnished for the judgment.  Almost all of the over $3,000 judgment, except
for about $600, had been paid by the garnishment.  She never received a notice that the garnishment
had not completely paid the judgment.  Her explanation that she believed the entire judgment had been
satisfied is reasonable under the circumstances.  The question on the security clearance application
asks if there were any judgments in the last seven years that were not paid.  It is conceivable for
Applicant to believe the judgment was paid and her answer of “no” was correct.  This is even clearer
since the other judgment initially listed as a security concern by the government had been paid in full
by garnishment.  I find Applicant did not intentionally fail to provide correct information in response
to question 27(d) on the security clearance application.
I carefully considered all of the circumstances in light of the “whole person” concept.  I
conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to classified information.  Applicant has shown an
irresponsible attitude toward her debts.  She presented insufficient information to explain the debts or
mitigate the disqualifying conditions.  She failed to carry her burden to refute, extenuate, or mitigate
the fifteen delinquent debts.  I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns for financial
considerations.  She did mitigate security concerns raised under the guideline for Personal Conduct.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by Section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
8
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Deleted by Government
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national security to grant or continue access to classified information for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Thomas M. Crean
Administrative Judge
