KEYWORD: Alcohol; Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant has a history of excessive consumption of alcohol, which includes six alcohol-
related incidents when he was arrested and charged with drunk driving. His most recent offense
occurred in August 2005. He has reduced his consumption of alcohol, but he continues to drink
about once a week. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate
the security concerns. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
CASENO: 06-26662.h1
DATE: 08/30/2007
DATE:  August 30, 2007
In re:
---------------------
SSN: --------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-26662
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MICHAEL H. LEONARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
 Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended (Directive).
 See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (December
29, 2005). 
2
Applicant has a history of excessive consumption of alcohol, which includes six alcohol-
related incidents when he was arrested and charged with drunk driving. His most recent offense
occurred in August 2005. He has reduced his consumption of alcohol, but he continues to drink
about once a week. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate
the security concerns. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a security
clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of1
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on April 27, 2007.
The SOR—which is equivalent to an administrative complaint—details the factual basis for the
action and alleges security concerns under Guideline G for alcohol consumption and Guideline J for
criminal conduct.  
In addition to the Directive, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by
the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense
Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending formal amendment.2
The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.  
On May 15, 2007, Applicant replied to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned for hearing on July 9, 2007. The hearing took place as scheduled on August 14, 2007. At
hearing, the SOR was amended, without objections, in two ways:
• Subparagraph 1.m was added to Guideline G as follows—In August 2005, you were arrested
for DUI in [county], [state]. You entered a plea of guilty.
• Subparagraph 2.a under Guideline J was amended to include a reference to subparagraph
1.m.
DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 22, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plain that thereth
is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
3
Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline G. He did not respond to the sole
allegation under Guideline J, which refers to the criminal conduct (drunk driving) alleged under
Guideline G. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established. 
Applicant is a 46-year-old production technician with an associate’s degree awarded by a
technical institute. He has worked for his current employer since September 2005. His work involves
assembling and testing equipment for military weapons. He has never married and he has no
children. He loves his job, describes himself as a hard-working employee who is treated with respect
by the company, and he desires to continue his employment with the benefit of a security clearance.
In August 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with his sixth drunk-driving offense.
His history of drinking-and-driving includes arrests and charges for driving under the influence
(DUI) in 1988, 1992, 1994, 1999, 2004, and 2005. For the 2004 incident, he was convicted of
reckless driving; otherwise, he was convicted of DUI. The most recent incident in August 2005 was
resolved by a plea agreement wherein Applicant pleaded guilty to the DUI offense. The outcome was
Applicant driver’s license was suspended for six months, and he was ordered to receive alcohol
treatment, serve community service, and serve probation.
He has a valid driver’s license issued by his state of residence (R. 48–50). It was issued in
February 2004, and it has an expiration date of December 2009. Also, it reflects that an ignition-
interlock device was imposed on him until February 27, 2007. This condition, now expired, stemmed
from his August 2005 DUI offense.  
His history of drinking alcohol includes alcohol counseling and treatment in 1993, 1995, and
2005. During the 1993 counseling or treatment, he was assessed as suffering from mild alcohol
dependence, but the qualifications of the person who made that assessment are unclear. He has
continued to consume alcohol since his 1998 arrest to present. He reduced his level of consumption
after his arrest in August 2005. He now limits his beer drinking to one day per week when he is at
home working around the house and yard. He intends to continue drinking alcohol at his current
level. He does not participate in Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar group or organization. He has
developed a relationship with God that he practices by talking to God like he would speak with a
friend. This has helped him to reduce his level of drinking. Other than his testimony, Applicant did
not present any other evidence. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AND POLICIES
No one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in Department3
of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
4
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes any existing security5
clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level and retention of any existing
security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for access
to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting evidence to establish facts7
alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An applicant is responsible for presenting evidence8
to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an9
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan,10
the Supreme Court said that the burden of proof is less than the preponderance of the evidence.  The11
agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are
reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access
to classified information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access
to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met the strict13
guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
Because the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct allegations in the SOR are factually
interrelated, they are discussed together. The government contends that Applicant’s history of
 Revised Guidelines at 15–16 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 14
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 15
Guideline G DC 1 (“alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,16
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent”) ; Guideline G DC 3 (“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol
to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent”); and Guideline J DC 1 (“a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”). 
5
alcohol consumption and alcohol-related incidents raises security concerns under Guidelines G and
J. Applicant concedes his past mistakes, but contends that he is not a bad person and that he would
never reveal classified information. The question is whether Applicant’s history of alcohol
consumption and drunk-driving offenses, the most recent of which was August 2005, is consistent
with eligibility for access to classified information under the clearly-consistent standard.  
The general concern under Guideline G is that excessive alcohol consumption often leads
to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses. It can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  Under Guideline J, criminal conduct is a14
security concern because criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. It calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules,
and regulations.  15
Here, based on the record evidence as a whole, security concerns are raised under Guidelines
G and J. The record evidence shows Applicant has a history of excessive alcohol consumption and
alcohol-related incidents. His drinking-and-driving resulted in six arrests and five convictions for
DUI. His most recent DUI offense occurred in 2005. The evidence reveals a firmly ingrained pattern
of drinking-and-driving despite adverse legal consequences as well as alcohol counseling and
treatment. His history of excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related incidents raises security
concerns under the applicable DCs of the guidelines.  16
All of the MCs under both guidelines have been given due consideration and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. He has a well-established history of alcohol-related incidents and alcohol
counseling or treatment, and he continues to drink alcohol at least once a week. Given these
circumstances, it is too soon to tell if Applicant will establish a pattern of responsible alcohol use
that does not result in yet another alcohol-related incident. 
In addition, this case has been considered in light of the whole-person concept and that
analysis does not support a favorable decision. Based on the record evidence as a whole, Applicant
did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the alcohol consumption and
criminal conduct security concerns. Likewise, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision.
FORMAL FINDINGS
SOR ¶ 1–Guideline G: Against Applicant
6
Subparagraphs a–m: Against Applicant
SOR ¶ 2–Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge
