KEYWORD: Alcohol
DIGEST: The Applicant’s last alcohol related incident, Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol
with a blood/alcohol content of .08% or more (DUI), occurred nearly three years ago, in October
of 2004.  Since his last DUI, he has “considerably cut down on . . . [his] consumption of
alcohol.”  A Clinical Psychologist avers that the Applicant’s “potential for substance dependency
is relatively low.”  A retired Navy Captain testified most favorably on behalf of the Applicant. 
The Applicant Facility Security Officer (FSO) also recommends that the Applicant “regain his
clearance.”  Mitigation is shown.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-22534.h1
DATE: 08/28/2007
DATE: August 28, 2007
In Re:
-------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-22534
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire, Applicant’s Counsel
2
SYNOPSIS
The Applicant’s last alcohol related incident, Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol with
a blood/alcohol content of .08% or more (DUI), occurred nearly three years ago, in October of 2004.
Since his last DUI, he has “considerably cut down on . . . [his] consumption of alcohol.”  A Clinical
Psychologist avers that the Applicant’s “potential for substance dependency is relatively low.”  A
retired Navy Captain testified most favorably on behalf of the Applicant.  The Applicant Facility
Security Officer (FSO) also recommends that the Applicant “regain his clearance.”  Mitigation is
shown.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On November 29, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
Applicant filed an Answer to the SOR on January 3, 2007.
The case was received by the undersigned on March 29, 2007.  A notice of hearing was
issued that same date, and the case was heard on April 25, 2007.  The Government submitted
documentary evidence.  Testimony was taken from the Applicant, who also submitted documentary
evidence, and called one witness to testify on his behalf.  The transcript (TR) was received on May
4, 2007.  The issues raised here are whether the Applicant's past Alcohol Consumption militates
against the granting of a security clearance.  [The Applicant admits the underlying factual basis of
all of the allegations; but denies excessive alcohol consumption subsequent to his last DUI, and
admits to receiving only 96 hours of community service as a result of that last DUI.]
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the documents
and the live testimony.  The Applicant is 27 years of age, and is employed by a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance on behalf of the Applicant.  After a complete and thorough review
of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same, I make the following
additional Findings of Fact.
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption
1.a.  Prior to his last arrest for DUI in October of 2004, the Applicant consumed alcohol on
“four to five nights a week, five to six beers on an outing, if not more” (TR at page 36 lines 10~18).
Subsequent to this last arrest, the Applicant attended a “DUI Program,” and now consumes alcohol
“once a week, two beers on an outing” (TR at page 37 lines 8~11).  He may have consumed “three
3
beers on an outing since – since 2004,” but he has not consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication
(TR at page 37 lines 12~22).
1.b.  In October of 2004, the Applicant was arrested, and subsequently charged, in part, with
DUI (Government Exhibit (GX) 2).  He pled no contest to the charge; and as part of his sentence,
he performed 96 hours of community service, and attended a DUI Program (Id, and TR at page 30
line 20 to page 31 line 14).
4
1.c.  In November of 2003, the Applicant was arrested, and subsequently charged, in part,
with DUI (GX 2).  He pled no contest to the charge; and as part of his sentence, he was fined $1,700,
and attended a DUI Program (Id, and TR at page 31 line 15 to page 33 line 25).
In April of 2007, the Applicant was evaluated by a Clinical Psychologist (Applicant’s Exhibit
(AppX) M).  That Clinical Psychologist avers, in part, the following:
The results of the psychological questionnaires utilized to provide more objective
information regarding . . . [the Applicant’s] substance abuse potential strongly
suggests his potential for substance dependency is relatively low.  Additionally,
the absence of any familial history of substance abuse reduces . . . [the Applicant’s]
risk of addiction.  [The Applicant’s] use of alcohol was likely supported by the
“positive social interactions” which he experienced when drinking, and he apparently
is now aware of that co-occurrence.
. . . The potential for his becoming a security risk on the basis of substance abuse or
dependency is not viewed, on the basis of the information available, to be any greater
than that for any other person using alcohol appropriately and socially (Id,
emphasis supplied).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the 1992 Directive set forth both policy factors and
conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern.  Furthermore, as set forth in the Directive,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense determination based upon
consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent criteria and adjudication
policy in Enclosure 2, including as appropriate:
a. Nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct, and surrounding
circumstances.
b. Frequency and recency of the conduct.
c. Age and maturity of the applicant.
d. Motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct
was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of
the consequence involved.
e. Absence or presence of rehabilitation.
f. Probability that circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in
the future.
5
The Administrative Judge, however, can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have
a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.
The Government must make out a case under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) which
establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational
connection, or nexus, must be shown between an applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to
effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational
connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation,
explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
The Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance
holder to abide by all security rules and regulations at all times and in all places.  If an applicant has
demonstrated a lack of respect for the law in his private affairs, there then exists the possibility that
an applicant may demonstrate the same attitude towards security rules and regulations.
CONCLUSIONS
The Applicant’s admitted Alcohol Consumption is evidenced by two DUI’s, one in
November of 2003, and the last one in October of 2004.  The first disqualifying condition under
Alcohol Consumption is therefore applicable he has had “alcohol-related incidents away from work,
such as driving while under the influence, . . . disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  The
third disqualifying condition is also applicable, as there was “binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser
or alcohol dependent.”  However, these are countered the first and second mitigating conditions as
“so much time has passed [nearly three years] . . . that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” and “the individual
acknowledges his . . . issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this
problem, and has established a pattern of . . . responsible use.”
Furthermore, I am not limited to the mitigating conditions, delineated in the Directive, in
deciding if an Applicant has demonstrated extenuation or mitigation.  Here, his former supervisor,
a retired Navy Captain, his FSO, and a colleague speak most highly of his character, credibility and
trustworthiness (TR at page 20 line 24 to page 28 line 5, and AppXs J and N).  The totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and circumstances, as set forth at length above, clearly warrants a favorable
Decision under the “whole person concept.”  Mitigation is shown.  Guideline G is found for the
Applicant.
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has rebutted the Government's case regarding his
Alcohol Consumption.  The Applicant has thus met the mitigating conditions of Guideline G, and
6
of Section E.2.2. of the Directive.  Accordingly, he has  met his ultimate burden of persuasion under
Guideline G.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings required by paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: FOR THE APPLICANT
a. For the Applicant.
b. For the Applicant.
c. For the Applicant.
Factual support and reasons for the foregoing are set forth in FINDINGS OF FACT and
CONCLUSIONS, supra.
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
