KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Applicant was born and raised in Ecuador to parents of Ecuadorian descent.  Since
immigrating to the U.S., Applicant has become a naturalized U.S. citizen, and established himself
as a reliable and trusted production machinist with a U.S. defense contractor.  Applicant’s birth
parents and two sisters are citizens of Ecuador, reside in Ecuador, and are demonstrably close to
Applicant.   None of his immediate family members remain in a position that could realistically
make them vulnerable to coercion or pressure that could implicate Applicant and compel him to
make decisions about competing loyalties.  Applicant mitigates potential risks to undue foreign
influence concerns caused by the status of his parents and siblings being citizens and residents of
Ecuador.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-25391.h1
DATE: 08/31/2007 
DATE:  August 31, 2007
In re:
---------------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25391
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROGER C. WESLEY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant was born and raised in Ecuador to parents of Ecuadoran descent.  Since
immigrating to the U.S., Applicant has become a naturalized U.S. citizen, and established himself
as a reliable and trusted production machinist with a U.S. defense contractor.  Applicant’s birth
parents and two sisters are citizens of Ecuador, reside in Ecuador, and are demonstrably close to
Applicant.   None of his immediate family members remain in a position that could realistically
make them vulnerable to coercion or pressure that could implicate Applicant and compel him to
make decisions about competing loyalties.  Applicant mitigates potential risks to undue foreign
influence concerns caused by the status of his parents and siblings being citizens and residents of
Ecuador.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or
revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 17, 2007, and requested a hearing.  The case was
assigned to me on June 12, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on July 24, 2007.  A hearing was
convened on July 24, 2007, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At
hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses
(including himself) and three exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on August 3, 2007.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of five documents:
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs,  Background Note: Equador
(January 2007), U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Consular Information Sheet
on Ecuador (June12,2006);  Excerpt from, U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator of
Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2-Country Reports: Western Hemisphere
Overview (April 30, 2007);  U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and
Labor, Ecuador: Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2006 (March 6, 2007); and  U.S.
Department of Defense, Defense Security Service Training Office, Recent Espionage Cases:
Summaries and Sources (July 1997). 
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named
background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Ecuador.  Administrative notice was
extended to the documents themselves in accordance with the provisions of Rule 201 of F.R. Evi.
Administrative notice was accorded the documents themselves, but the notice did not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing Ecuador’s current state.  
3
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
At the outset of the hearing, Department Counsel requested leave to strike sub-paragraphs
1.d and 1.e of the SOR.  There being no objections, and good cause being demonstrated, Department
Counsel’s request was granted.
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged (a) to have a father (who currently serves in the
Ecuadorian Army with the rank of Sub-officer first), mother and two sisters who are citizens and
residents of Ecuador, (b) to have a friend who is a citizen of Venezuela and resides in the U.S., and
(c) to have traveled to Mexico in 2005.  For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the
allegations in the SOR without any explanation.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 34-year old production machinist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant are incorporated herein
by reference and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant is married with two adopted children (ages and 7).  His wife and children are U.S.
citizens by birth.  After completing three years of college in Ecuador, Applicant emigrated from his
birth country Ecuador to the U.S. in February 2000 following his marriage in February 1999 to his
current spouse (see ex. A; R.T., at 46-47, 52-53).  Upon establishing residency in the U.S., he
immediately applied for U.S. citizenship.  He was granted U.S. citizenship in April 2005, and was
given an interim clearance with his current employer the same month.
Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of Ecuador (see ex. 2).  His father
serves in the Ecuadoran Military Academy as a supervisor with the rank of sub-officer first (R.T.,
at 32-35, 55)  His mother is a homemaker (R.T., at 34, 54). Applicant regularly stays in touch with
his parents.  His contacts vary from weekly to monthly, but mostly bi-weekly (R.T., at 34).
Applicant’s parents are in good shape financially and receive no financial assistance from him.
Applicant’s father (age 54) is a member of his Army volleyball team and has no Ecuadoran security
clearance (R.T., at 35, 55).  The father expects to retire soon and is eligible to receive both retirement
and medical benefits (R.T., at 56).  While Applicant’s parents are generally aware of the former’s
employment by his current defense contractor and his work on missiles, they are not aware of any
of the specifics of his work or that possesses a security clearance (R.T., at 57).  
Besides a brother who is a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant has two sisters who are citizens
and residents of Ecuador (ex. 2).  One sister is married and a homemaker; her husband works in the
transportation sector.  This sister has never been in the U.S.  Applicant speaks to twice a year and
has e-mailed her on a couple of occasions (R.T., at 58).  
4
Applicant’s other sister is a college student majoring in mathematics.  She, too, has never
traveled to the U.S., and is unmarried.  Applicant and this sister exchange e-mails several times a
year (R.T., at 59).
Applicant traveled to Ecuador on one occasion since immigrating to the U.S. in 2000.  He
traveled to Ecuador in 2004 on his Ecuadoran passport, which has since expired (R.T., at 59-60).
Both his wife and children accompanied him on this trip to Ecuador, using their U.S. passports (see
ex. C; R.T., at 62-63).  He has sent money to both sisters on a couple of occasions.  His remittances
vary in amounts, ranging from $60.00 to $150.00 (R.T., at 67-68)).  Applicant has since applied for
a U.S. passport and awaits a State Department response (R.T., at 60).  Neither Applicant nor any of
his U.S. based family members have traveled to Ecuador since their last trip in 2004, and they have
no current intentions to do so in the future.
Applicant’s wife applied for Ecuadoran citizenship in 1999 and was granted her citizenship.
She has never applied for or received an Ecuadoran passport (R.T., at 64-65).  Applicant’s parents
plan to visit Applicant in Summer 2007, following the father’s retirement from the Ecuadoran
military (R.T., at 65-66).
Applicant has no intent to return to Ecuador to live and has no reason to believe any family
member in Ecuador is at risk to pressure, coercion, or compromise (R.T., at 68). Among his U.S.
located assets is his established 401(k) retirement account with a reputable U.S. investment firm (see
ex. C).   Neither he nor his wife have any assets in Ecuador (R.T., at 51).
Applicant regularly attends church with his local friends (R.T., at 73-75).  He is credited by
one friend, with whom he has attended church with over the past two years, with exceptional
character and willingness to assist others (R.T., at 74).
Ecuador’s country status
Ecuador is a constitutional republic with a population of 13.5 million (see U.S. Department
of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Ecuador: Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices-2006, at p. 1  (March 6, 2007)).  The government is democratically elected and
includes a president with 15 cabinet ministers, a unicameral legislature, and a court system that
includes a supreme court and provincial courts (see State Department Background Note: Ecuador,
pps. 1-4 (March 2007)).  Ecuador’s political parties have historically been small, loose organizations
that depend more on populist, charismatic leaders to retain support than on programs or ideology (see
id., at p. 4).  Of political interest, none of the last three democratically elected presidents finished
their terms because of political instability.  Ecuador’s most recent president (Rafael Correa), running
on  an anti-establishment reform platform bested his opponent (Gustavo Noboa) in a second round
presidential runoff in November 2006 that is generally considered to have been free, fair and
transparent by election observers (see id., at p. 3).  Correa was sworn in as Ecuador’s new present
in January 2007 (id.)  
By Latin America standards, Ecuador has a fairly decent  record for respecting human rights
(see State Department Country Report on Human Rights Practices in Ecuador-2006, pps. 2-15
(March 2007)).  Ecuador’s constitution bars torture and similar forms of intimidation and
punishment, as well as arbitrary arrest and detention.  Its constitution also provides for an
5
independent judiciary.  And the country’s laws prohibit incommunicado detention (see id.; R.T., at
42).  Still, human rights organizations report incidents of police torture and other cruel, inhumane,
or degrading treatment or punishment. Criminal kidnaping for profit has continued to be a problem
in certain regions of the country, and there have reported cases of arbitrary arrest and detention.
Political and economic pressures and corruption in the national police and the courts have also been
reported and remain a source of continuing U.S. concern.  These reports cover specifically cited
instances of human right deprivations, including improper conduct by security forces, criminal
activity in the National Police, corruption, and due process denials in the courts (see id).
Ecuador has a mixed record, too, on its historical protection of foreign property rights.  Twice
in the last half-century, it has nationalized the property of U.S. firms.  In 1970, it nationalized the
local interests of an ITT subsidiary, and more recently (in May 2006), it seized the assets of
Occidental Petroleum (at the time the country’s largest U.S. investor).  Ecuador, though, has
historically been a party to bilateral investment treaties with the U.S. that include dispute
mechanisms for resolving commercial disputes through international arbitration.  With its acceptance
of arbitration of the Occidental case, Ecuador exhibits its sustaining commitment to the rule of
contract, a formative prerequisite for continuing investment partnering with U.S. firms (see
Background Note: Ecuador, supra, at pps. 4-5).        
For many years, the U.S. and Ecuador have maintained close ties based on a shared interest
in maintaining democratic institutions, combating narco-trafficking, building trade, investment and
financial relationships, cooperating in fostering Ecuador’s economic development, and participating
in inter-American organizations.  Ecuador stresses its multilateral approaches to resolving
hemispheric and international issues and is a member of both the United Nations and the
Organization of American States (OAS), along with such regional groups as the Rio Group, the Latin
American Economic System, the Latin American Energy Organization, and the Andean Pact (see
Background Note: Ecuador, id, at pps. 5-6; R.T., at 37-38). 
Despite its strong regional standing in the Americas, Ecuador has experienced major border
disputes with two of its neighbors over the past century.  A border dispute with Peru spanned over
50 years (1942 to 1997) and occasionally entailed armed hostilities between the two countries (see
Background Note: Ecuador, id, at pps. 5-6).  A significant espionage case arose out of this border
dispute that enveloped U.S. intelligence interests.  These issues have subsided, however, and appear
to have  resolved themselves.
Of more pressing security concern to Ecuador is its ongoing border conflict with Colombia
along its 450-mile-long northern border.  This conflict involves counter terrorism and security threats
from Colombian foreign terrorist organizations, frequently lined with narcotics trafficking
organizations, along its northern border (see Excerpt from U.S. Department of State, Office of the
Coordinator of Counter terrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2-Country Reports:
Western Hemisphere Overview, at p.6 (April 2007)).   Members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) were  reported to be widely present
on the Colombia side of the border and regularly entered Ecuadorian territory (generally as unarmed
civilians) for rest and resupply.  See id. 
Border instability attributable to frequent encroachment by Colombian guerillas into
Ecuadorian territory has prompted Ecuador’s army to deploy more troops to the  region (see
6
Background Note: Ecuador, supra, at p 5).  Although Ecuadorian officials have publicly deplored
Colombian guerilla activity and amassed armed forces along the border to interdict guerilla bands
from Colombia, encroaching guerillas have been known to extort and intimidate local populations,
and raises some security concerns for U.S. citizens residing in Ecuador (id).  For the record, some
10 U.S. citizens have been kidnaped near Ecuador’s border with Colombia since 1998 (see U.S.
Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Consular Information Sheet on Ecuador, at p.2
(June12,2006)..  One of these kidnaped victims was reportedly murdered by the kidnappers holding
him for ransom (see id.) 
Ecuador has continued to work closely with the U.S. and other donors, though, to promote
lawful economic activity and development in the north, and Ecuador’s Congress has ratified the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism (see Excerpt from U.S. Department of State, Office
of the Coordinator of Counter terrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2-Country
Reports: Western Hemisphere Overview, supra, at p. 6; R.T., at 38-40).  All in all, Ecuador remains
a friendly country with democratic institutions and strong inter-governmental relations with the U.S.
Historically, the country has shown little inclination to coerce or pressure U.S. citizens to provide
classified or proprietary data, or in any way attempt to compromise sensitive and classified US.
Information.
POLICIES
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of the
"Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying
Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge
to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and
mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy factors
are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided
loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person,
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure
or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered
the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Burden of Proof
7
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so
is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires Administrative Judges
to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the
relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.
Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s] alleged
in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a material bearing
to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  The required showing of
material bearing, however, does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the
applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of establishing his or
her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the
Government's case.
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant was born in Ecuador to parents of Ecuadoran descent and immigrated to the U.S.
in 2000.  He became U.S. citizen in 2005, and is a highly regarded production machinist for a U.S.
defense contractor.  Security issues of concern to the Government focus on members of Applicant’s
immediate family (his birth parents and two sisters) who are citizens and residents of Ecuador,  a
country not historically unfriendly to the U.S., but one with reported instances of human rights
abuses, destabilizing border disputes, and occasional  engagement  in economic data collection in
the U.S. 
Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s immediate family members
that are citizens and residents of Ecuador might be subject to undue foreign influence by Ecuadorian
authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s possession or control.  Because
Applicant’s birth father (who currently serves in the Ecuadorian Army with the rank of sub-officer
first), birth mother, and two siblings are citizens of and reside in Ecuador, they present potential
security risks covered by Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion) of the Adjudication Guidelines for foreign influence. 
The citizenship/residence status of Applicant’s immediate family members residing in
Ecuador pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence
that could compromise classified information under Applicant's possession and/or control.  DC 7(b)
(connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
8
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information) has
possible application due to the  presence of Applicant’s immediate family members in Ecuador, and
his father’s current service in the Ecuadorian Army.  
From what is known from the accounts of Applicant, neither Applicant nor his parents and
siblings have any (a) current financial or political affiliations with the Ecuadorian government, (b)
history of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or ©) apparent exposure to coercion or
influence.  While it is not clear whether his father’s service in the Ecuadorian Army has been as an
officer or enlistee, his rank and participation on the Ecuadorian volleyball team does not suggest any
military or political connections that could afford him any kind of special access and connections
with high level Ecuadorian political, intelligence, or military officials.
Mitigation is certainly present based on the presented record.  Both Applicant’s relationships
with his family members and political conditions on the ground in Ecuador suggest no heightened
risks of compromise that could put Applicant’s relationships with his immediate family members
at risk to a potential hostage situation.  Ecuador’s political and security conditions, while problematic
at times, considering the reports of its recurrent border disputes, data collection activities, and
human rights deprivations, remain essentially stable.  Security risks extant due to Applicant’s having
immediate family members who are citizens and residents of Ecuador remain manageable ones. 
Applicant, accordingly, may take advantage of one important mitigating condition: MC 8(a) (the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.).
Ecuador is a country that in the past has targeted the U.S. for economic and proprietary data
collection, but is a country with a long history of democratic institutions and constitutional
protections of personal and property rights.  While there have been reports of human rights violations
by the security forces and national police, nationalization of U.S. property interests, and destabilizing
border disputes with Peru and Colombia, Ecuador’s public institutions and jurisprudential
development  has generally reflected a basic respect for the rule of law by most published accounts.
Ecuador still continues to maintain strong diplomatic interests with the U.S., and has shown its
disposition to participate in multilateral institutions that include the U.S. and its hemispheric partners
and friends, and to be helpful in strategic efforts to promote security and development in the
Americas. 
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines governing collateral clearances still do not dictate per
se results or mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in general.  But they do place major emphasis on the status of the foreign country
of concern. 
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant’s immediate family
members in Ecuador, security risks of a hostage situation or undue foreign influence brought in the
hopes of eliciting either classified information or economic or proprietary data out of Applicant is
remote at present, given the demonstrated track records of Applicant and his family members and
the status of Ecuador as a constitutional democracy. 
9
Overall, considering both the guidelines and whole person assessment of Applicant in
juxtaposition to one another, potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's immediate family
members (viz., his birth parents and sisters) are sufficiently mitigated at this time to satisfy minimum
requirements for security clearance.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by Guideline B.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each of the
factors enumerated in E2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the FINDINGS OF FACT,
CONCLUSIONS and the FACTORS and CONDITIONS listed above, I make the following separate
FORMAL FINDINGS with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
 DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance.  Clearance is granted.
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
