DATE: August 24, 2007 
In Re:
-------------------------
SSN: ------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24762
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
DARLENE LOKEY ANDERSON
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s foreign influence, including his wife, step-daughter, step-daughter’s father, and
in-laws, who are all Chinese citizens and maintain close foreign family ties with China, pose a
potential security risk and have not been mitigated.  Clearance is denied.
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 1, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive),
dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 20, 2007, and requested a hearing
before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the undersigned on June 27, 2007.
A notice of hearing was issued on July 5, 2007, scheduling the hearing for July 30, 2007.  At the
hearing the Government presented one exhibit.  The Applicant presented no exhibits but did testify
on his own behalf.  The Government moved to amend the SOR to include an additional allegation
under 1(d.). (Tr. pp.59-60).  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on August 10, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the exhibit and
the testimony.  The Applicant is 36 years old and has a high school diploma.  He is employed as a
Laboratory Technician for a defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with
his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts that could create the potential
for foreign influence that could result in the compromise of classified information.
The Applicant is a native born United States citizen.  In May 2005, he married a woman who
is a native born Chinese citizen.  The Applicant’s wife has a daughter from a previous marriage who
is also a native born Chinese citizen.  The Applicant, his wife and his fourteen year old step-daughter
now live together in the United States.  His wife and step-daughter are currently waiting for their
resident cards.  (Tr. p. 32).
The Applicant’s in-laws, including his wife’s mother, father and sister, are all residents and
citizens of China.  They do not know that their daughter, the Applicant’s wife, has married a United
States citizen.  The Applicant has never met his parents-in-law, or his wife’s sister and his wife does
not want him to know them.  The Applicant explained that his wife told him that it would be a
disgrace to her parents if they were to find out that she divorced her first husband and married
without their permission.  (Tr. pp. 36-37).  He does not know how they are supported or whether they
get a pension from the Chinese government.  (Tr. p. 36).     
The Applicant initially met his wife during a business trip to China in September 2002.  They
dated for three years before they were married and communicated by telephone on a daily basis.  The
Applicant traveled to China in August 2002, October 2002, November 2002, November 2003,
November 2004, March 2005 and May 2005.  (Tr. Pp. 21-24).  Three of his trips to China he paid
3
for himself.  The others were required for business.  On each occasion, he stayed between three and
five weeks.  The Applicant states that he has never had any strange contacts with or been approached
by any Government officials seeking information from him of any type during any of his trips to
China.  (Tr. pp. 23-24).  
The Applicant’s wife maintains telephonic contact with her parents about twice a month.  She
speaks to her sister in China about twice a year.  The Applicant does not speak Chinese and does not
understand the conversations his wife has with her parents and her sister.  
The Applicant’s wife has significant assets in China.  His wife owns an apartment in China
worth approximately $75,000.00, and investments in the Chinese stock market that total
approximately $100,000.00.  The Applicant provides all of the financial support for his wife and
step-daughter.  He encourages his step-daughter to maintain regular and consistent contact with her
father who is also a resident and citizen of China.      
I have taken administrative notice of the fact that China targets the United States for the
collection of classified information.  China has a poor human rights record, including arbitrary
arrests and detentions and torture of it prisoners.  China has a highly trained military and seeks to
acquire United States technology through clandestine means, and it regularly conducts surveillance
of visitors to its country.  Based upon the political climate in China, the security risk is elevated.  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors and conditions that could
raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given binding consideration in making security
clearance determinations.  These factors should be followed in every case according to the pertinent
criterion.  However, the conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any
case, nor can they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be
assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human experience, or apply equally in every  case.
Based on the Findings of Fact set forth above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this
case are:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U. S. interests, o r is vulnerable
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is
located, known to target United States citizens to obtain classified information and/or is associated
with a risk of terrorism.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
4
7(a).  Contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; 
7(b).  Connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;
7(d).  Sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of forcing inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should consider the following general
factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics and
conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question, posed in Section 2 of Executive Order
10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request
for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period
of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted upon the individual meeting
these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number
of variables known as the whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person,
5
past and present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.   The
Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions based on evidence
which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in
Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) that establishes
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or
nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard
classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation,
explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct, is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates that he has foreign connections may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  Foreign
contacts raise legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the
interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must be able to
place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and
regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence in light of the appropriate legal standards and factors, and
having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the record, this Administrative Judge concludes
that the Government has established its case as to all allegations in the SOR, and that Applicant's
foreign contacts have a direct and negative impact on his suitability for access to classified
information.  
The evidence establishes that the Applicant’s wife and step-daughter remain close to their
family in China.  His wife maintains close and continuing contact with both of her elderly parents
and her sister in China.  The Applicant’s step-daughter contacts her father in China on a regular
basis.  Since the Applicant’s wife’s parents do not know that their daughter is married to the
Applicant and have never met him, there is an essential part to this puzzle that is missing.  The
Applicant does not know much about his parents-in-law or his sister-in-law.  He does not know
whether they are associated, if at all, with the Chinese Government.  Based upon this, the record does
not contain sufficient evidence in which to make a sound determination.  
Under Guideline B, Disqualifying Conditions 7(a) contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure or coercion; 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
6
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country
by providing that information, and 7(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless
of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement,
manipulation, pressure or coercion apply.  The Applicant’s family’s close relationship with their
foreign relatives who are citizens of and/or reside in China is a security concern for the United States
Government.  Under the particular facts of this case, none of the mitigating conditions are applicable.
In addition to the Disqualifying and Mitigating Conditions, I have considered the “whole
person” concept.  The Applicant is newly married to a Chinese citizen.  He does not speak Chinese
and does not understand the language.  His wife and her family speak Chinese on the telephone
during their regular contact with each other.  The Applicant does not understand the conversations.
The Applicant does know that his wife’s contact with China is regular, constant and continuing.  She
has significant financial assets, including property and stock market investments, in China.  The
Applicant’s wife  has not broken any foreign ties with China.  The Applicant and his family are so
closely connected to China that this situation raises a potential security risk and Guideline B (Foreign
Influence) is found against the Applicant.   
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.  Accordingly,
he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by
Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subparas. 1.a.: Against the Applicant 
1.b.: Against the Applicant
1.c.: Against the Applicant 
1.d.: Against the Applicant                                        
                                                        
DECISION
 
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
7
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
