KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Although the political situation in Burma (Myanmar) placed Applicant at heightened risk
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his limited
family connections there, he mitigated the security concerns by demonstrating that he was unlikely
to have to choose between his family interests and the interests of the U.S. Clearance granted.
CASENO: 06-24781.h1
DATE: 08/30/2007
DATE:  August 30, 2007
In Re:
-------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24781
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Although the political situation in Burma (Myanmar) placed Applicant at heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his limited family
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, dated  21
January 1992, as amended and revised—most recently in August 2006 (Directive).
2
connections there,  he mitigated the security concerns by demonstrating that he was unlikely to have
to choose between his family interests and the interests of the U.S. Clearance granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant challenges the 8 April 2007 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Statement of Reasons (SOR) recommending denial or revocation of his clearance because of foreign
influence concerns.  He answered the SOR 2 May 2007, and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned1
the case to me 20 June 2007 and I convened a hearing 27 July 2007. DOHA received the transcript
(Tr.) 8 August 2007.
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR. Accordingly, I incorporate those admissions
as findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 40-year-old quality assurance manager, employed by a defense contractor since
September 1999. He has not previously held a clearance.
Applicant was born in Burma (Myanmar) in December 1966. He came to the U.S. with his
family in May 1979, when his father was appointed an executive director of the World Bank. He
became a legal permanent resident (LPR) of the U.S. in 1990, and a naturalized U.S. citizen in
October 1998. He  obtained his U.S. passport in November 2001. He has not had a Burmese passport
since before October 1998. Applicant attended schools in the U.S. from seventh grade on. He
obtained an undergraduate degree in electrical engineering from a U.S. university, and earned a
master’s degree in business administration from a different U.S. university in June 2003.
In December 1997, Applicant married a Thai native he met in the U.S. She became a
naturalized U.S. citizen with him in October 1998. They have three children, all native-born U.S.
citizens. Applicant is a registered voter in the state where he resides (A.E. C). All his financial assets
are in the U.S. He has substantial sums in his retirement accounts as well as two §529 state college
savings plan accounts he opened for his two oldest children (A.E. B). He has no financial interests
in Burma.
Applicant traveled to Burma in December 2004 to visit his family, and while there learned
of medical issues confronting both parents. He returned to Burma in March 2005 to escort his mother
(now 80 years old) and father (now 76 years old) to the U.S. for medical treatment. When in Burma,
Applicant stays with his parents. He accompanied his parents back to Burma in 2006.
3
Applicant’s parents and three siblings are resident citizens of Burma. His father was an
executive director of the World Bank from 1979 until his retirement in 1992.  As such, he wore three
hats. He was responsible to the bank, a non-governmental organization (NGO), the government of
Burma, and the South-east Asia nations assigned to his region (Tr. 35-36). Notwithstanding this
divided responsibility, his retirement pension is paid by the World Bank. Before moving to the U.S.
with her family in 1979, Applicant’s mother was a middle school principal—a position that
nominally made her an employee of the Burmese government. However, she retired from that
position in 1979, and although she earned a pension from that position, she does not collect it
because the pension is less than the cost of traveling to the bank where she is required to collect it.
One of Applicant’s brothers is an airline pilot for a commercial airline in Burma, although
he had previously been employed by the state-owned airline. The other brother is mentally
challenged, does not work, and lives with his brother in Burma. Applicant’s sister is a doctor in a
private clinic. Applicant’s contacts with his siblings are casual and infrequent. None of Applicant’s
siblings have any affiliation with the Burmese government.
Applicant’s program manager for the last seven years—a retired career member of the U.S.
Army—praises Applicant’s work performance and integrity, and has no reservations about Applicant
holding a clearance (A.E. A).
Burma is a former British colony currently ruled by a military junta. U.S.–Burma relations
are strained. The government has an extremely poor human rights record, and is subject to a range
of trade sanctions by the U.S. The government strictly controls travel to, from, and within Burma,
and monitors the movements of foreign travelers staying in commercial establishments. U.S. citizens
involved with Burmese pro-democracy leaders have been detained, arrested, tried, and
deported—and are now subject to jail. Nevertheless, Burma is not a known collector of U.S.
intelligence or sensitive economic information. Burma is not known to target U.S. citizens to obtain
protected information.
POLICIES AND BURDENS
The Directive, Enclosure 2 lists adjudicative guidelines to be considered in evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative Judges must assess both
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each adjudicative issue fairly raised by the facts and
circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair and impartial common sense
consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3. of the Directive. The presence or absence of a
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or against Applicant. However, specific
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them, as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.
Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative
guideline is Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government must prove, by something
less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it
establishes a prima facie case against access to classified information. Applicant must then refute,
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).4
4
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the
Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with the
government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in
ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness of those
who must protect national interests as their own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.2
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and interests may
raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, 2) may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way
contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign
influence adjudications can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information requires3
careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target protected information,
and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that information, and the individual’s
susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive. More specifically, an individual’s contacts
with foreign family members (or other foreign entities or persons) raise security concerns only if
those contacts create a heightened risk or foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion.4
In this case, the government established a case for disqualification under Guideline B.
Considering first the foreign country involved, Burma and the U.S. enjoy strained foreign relations.
The government represses pro-democracy movements in Burma, and monitors foreign travelers,
especially those involved in pro-democracy activities. However, in order for Applicant’s family
members to be in a position to be used as a pressure point on Applicant—whether benign or
malevolent—there must be a government or other entity ready, willing, and able to collect protected
information and use it. Burma is not known to target protected U.S. information, nor is it known to
target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. The government’s focus appears to be on
suppressing internal opposition to the ruling junta. Nevertheless, the extent of government
surveillance poses some risk that Burma might seek protected information from Applicant.
However, examining Applicant’s personal circumstances, whatever the heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his limited family
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, . . . or the5
positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position
of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests
of the U.S.
5
contacts in Burma, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.  His main contacts in Burma have5
been with his parents, and have been related to their medical issues. There is no evidence that
Applicant or his family members have been involved with pro-democracy groups in Burma, the main
focus of the Burmese government. Further, it does not appear that Applicant stayed in commercial
accommodations while traveling to Burma, lowering the likelihood that he was monitored. In
addition, Applicant’s financial and personal ties to the U.S. are so substantial, when balanced against
having no financial interests in Burma, that he can be expected to place U.S. interests over any the
Burmese government might bring to bear.  I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
   Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR THE APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For the Applicant
Subparagraph b: For the Applicant
Subparagraph c: For the Applicant
Subparagraph d: For the Applicant
Subparagraph e: For the Applicant
Subparagraph f: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance granted.
 
John G. Metz, Jr.
Administrative Judge
