KEYWORD: Alcohol; Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He was convicted
and sentenced for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in 1991, 1992, and 2004, in three
different states. Within a month of his latest DUI arrest, he was arrested for riding a bicycle under
the influence, and has resumed alcohol consumption, at times to the point of intoxication. Applicant
submitted no evidence in extenuation or mitigation of these admitted facts, and failed to meet his
burden to mitigate security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.
Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-25151.h1
DATE: 08/07/2007
DATE:  August 7, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25151
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
DAVID M. WHITE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (August 2006) as
1
implemented by Under Secretary of Defense Memorandum of Aug. 30, 2006 for use in adjudication of all cases in which
an SOR had not been issued by Sept 1, 2006. These revised AG replaced those found in enclosure 2 of the Directive,
which is pending revision to incorporate them. Copies of the applicable AG were provided to Applicant with the SOR.
Item 3 (Applicant’s letter response to SOR dated Apr. 6, 2007).
2
The government submitted five items in support of the allegations.
3
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He was convicted and
sentenced for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in 1991, 1992, and 2004, in three different
states. Within a month of his latest DUI arrest, he was arrested for riding a bicycle under the
influence, and has resumed alcohol consumption, at times to the point of intoxication. Applicant
submitted no evidence in extenuation or mitigation of these admitted facts, and failed to meet his
burden to mitigate security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.
Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant applied for a security clearance on August 31, 2005, in conjunction with his
employment by a defense contractor as a staff engineer. On February 6, 2007, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20,
1960, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended. The SOR
detailed reasons, under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct),
of the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG),  why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative1
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether
a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a notarized letter dated April 6, 2007,
admitting the truth of all of the allegations, and elected to have his case decided on the written record
in lieu of a hearing.  Applicant did not submit any matters for consideration in extenuation or2
mitigation. At first, the case was mistakenly processed as though Applicant had requested a hearing.
When contacted by Department Counsel to confirm availability for a proposed hearing date, this
error was discovered. 
Department Counsel submitted the government's written case on June 7, 2007. A complete
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an3
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant
signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM on June 20, 2007, and returned
it to DOHA. Applicant was informed he should respond within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not respond further to the FORM, made no objection to consideration of any
Item 4 at question 30.
4
3
evidence submitted by Department Counsel, and offered no evidence in extenuation or mitigation.
In the absence of any response, the case was forwarded on July 27, 2007 for consideration by an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 2, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT             
Applicant admitted the truth of every factual allegation set forth in the SOR pertaining to
alcohol consumption under Guideline G (subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f), and by reference to the
allegations of criminal conduct under Guideline J (subparagraph 2.a). Those admissions are
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After complete and thorough review of the evidence in the
record, and upon due consideration of same, the following findings of fact are made:
Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has never been
married and has no children. He never served in the military and this is his first application for a
security clearance. He holds a master’s degree in engineering from a major national university.
Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from
approximately 1990 to at least August 2006. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) He was arrested on or about February 1,
1991, and charged with Driving Under the Influence. He was found guilty, fined approximately
$700, and ordered to attend alcohol education classes. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) He was arrested on or about
October 1, 1992, in a different state, and charged with Driving Under the Influence. He was found
guilty, fined approximately $700, sentenced to 30 days house arrest, ordered to attend weekly alcohol
classes, and his driver’s license was restricted for one year. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
Applicant was arrested on or about June 22, 2004, in a third state to which he had moved,
and charged with (1) Driving Under the Influence and (2) Driving Under the Influence with Blood
Alcohol Content .08% or Higher (.19%). He pled no contest to count 2 and count 1 was dismissed.
He was sentenced to three-years probation, which will not expire until August 19, 2007, to serve two
days in jail, ordered to attend a four-month first offenders alcohol awareness program, and fined
approximately $1,570. His driver’s license was also suspended for 30 days and restricted thereafter
for an additional 60 days. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) 
Applicant was arrested in July 2004, and charged with Riding a Bicycle While Under the
Influence of Alcohol or Drugs or Both. The district attorney rejected this case on or about September
21, 2004. (SOR ¶ 1.e.) He resumed his use of alcohol in the Spring of 2005 and continued until at
least August 2006. (SOR ¶ 1.f.) As noted above, Applicant provided no evidence in extenuation or
mitigation of his admitted conduct. He reported on his Security Clearance Application that he has
not undergone any alcohol-related treatment or counseling in the seven years preceding its
submission.  4
POLICIES            
The revised AG that replaced Enclosure 2 of the Directive set forth adjudicative guidelines
AG  ¶ 2.
5
Id., at ¶¶ 2(b), 2(c).
6
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might  accept as adequate to support
7
a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006)
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial
evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a
scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v.Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
4
which must be considered in the evaluation of security suitability. In addition to brief introductory
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines are divided into disqualifying conditions
(DC) that may raise security concerns, and mitigating conditions (MC) that may reduce or negate
security concerns. Applicable DCs and MCs under AG G: Alcohol Consumption, and AG J:
Criminal Conduct, must be considered in deciding whether to grant, continue, deny or revoke an
individual’s eligibility for access to classified information. Conditions that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are set
forth and discussed in the conclusions section below.
An administrative judge need not view the adjudicative guidelines as inflexible, ironclad
rules of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are
intended to be applied in conjunction with the factors set forth in the Adjudicative Process provision
of the Directive,  to assist the administrative judge in reaching fair and impartial, common sense5
decisions.
The entire decision-making process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole person concept.” All available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in making a meaningful decision. The
Adjudicative Process factors which an administrative judge should consider, in addition to the
applicable guidelines, are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, so the final decision in
each case must be arrived at by applying the standard that issuance of a clearance must be clearly
consistent with the interests of national security. Any doubt as to whether access to classified
information is clearly consistent with national security must be resolved in favor of the national
security.   In reaching this decision, only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on6
the evidence contained in the record were drawn, and no inferences were grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”  The7
burden of producing evidence initially falls on the government to establish a case which
demonstrates, in accordance with the Directive, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue an applicant's access to classified information. “Department Counsel is
Directive ¶ E3.1.14.
8
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.
9
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005); ?The Administrative Judge [considers] the record10
evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of
pertinent provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive
¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
AG ¶ 21.
11
5
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that
have been controverted.”   “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence8
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department
Counsel, and [Applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision.”  Once it has met its initial burden of production, the burden of persuasion (including any9
burden to disprove a mitigating condition) never shifts to the government.  10
A person seeking access to classified information seeks to enter a fiduciary relationship with
the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a relationship that transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is because of this special relationship that
the government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity,
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section
7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides that any adverse industrial security clearance
decision shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned,” so the decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not
necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication the applicant
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for
issuing a clearance.
CONCLUSIONS          
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate legal
precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly above, the following conclusions
are derived with respect to each allegation set forth in the SOR:
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the
failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness.”  The SOR alleged, and Appellant admitted to, three DUI arrests and convictions,11
in three different states. His most recent DUI involved a BAC of .19% (almost 2.5 times the legal
limit), in June 2004. Within a month after that last DUI arrest, he was arrested for riding a bicycle
while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. He also admitted drinking to excess and the point
of intoxication at times from 1990 to August 2006, and resuming alcohol consumption after his two
most recent arrests. 
AG ¶ 30.
12
6
This conduct raises security concerns under alcohol consumption disqualifying condition (AC
DC) 22(a) (“alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent”). It also raises
security concerns under AC DC 22(c) (“habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent”). There is insufficient evidence in the FORM concerning the nature and extent of
Applicant’s court-ordered alcohol education classes following each of his three DUI convictions to
find that security concerns are raised under AC DCs 22(d), (e), (f), or (g). 
Applicant submitted no evidence tending to establish any alcohol consumption mitigating
condition, and, after considering each of them, none is supported by the evidence in the FORM.
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his burden to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts he
admitted, which raise alcohol consumption security concerns.
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules
and regulations.”  Applicant admitted to four alcohol-related crimes, for three of which he was12
convicted and sentenced, over a 13-year period.
Criminal conduct disqualifying condition (CC DC) 31(a) (“a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses”) applies. Appellant admitted to, and was convicted of, three DUI offenses, the most
recent of which involved a BAC of .19%. CC DC 31 (c) (“allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted”)
also applies to raise security concerns from his admitted arrest for riding a bicycle under the
influence less than a month after his 2004 DUI arrest, even though the district attorney chose not to
prosecute that offense. This incident indicates an ongoing unwillingness or  inability to conform to
legal obligations. CC DC 31(d) (“individual is currently on parole or probation”) also applies, as
Appellant remains on probation from his 2004 DUI conviction. No other CC DC applies.
Applicant submitted no evidence tending to establish any criminal conduct mitigating
condition, and, after considering each of them, none is supported by the evidence in the FORM.
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his burden to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts he
admitted, which raise criminal conduct security concerns.
Whole Person Analysis           
Applicant submitted neither evidence nor other information from which any mitigating
condition or circumstance might be applied to lessen the security concerns raised by his pattern of
alcohol-related criminal offenses and ongoing alcohol consumption. The record gives every
indication that recurrence of this conduct is likely, and he submitted nothing to support a contrary
conclusion. Applicant is a mature and educated individual who is accountable for his choices, and
who did not alleviate security concerns in the face of his burden to do so. For the reasons stated,
7
Applicant has not demonstrated that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to
grant him access to classified information.
FORMAL FINDINGS           
Formal Findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
DECISION            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
David M. White             
Administrative Judge             
