KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant’s financial problems began in 1996.  Substantial Federal and state tax liens
were satisfied several years ago.  Other delinquent debts have been substantially paid off. 
Applicant is seeking to identify the current holders of the remaining debts and to promptly pay
them once that is done.  His current financial situation is strong and he should have no problem
doing so.  Mitigation has been adequately established.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-25045.h1
DATE: 08/20/2007  
DATE: August 20, 2007
In Re:
--------------------------
SSN: -------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25045
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
BARRY M. SAX
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s financial problems began in 1996.  Substantial Federal and state tax liens
were satisfied several years ago.  Other delinquent debts have been substantially paid off.
Applicant is seeking to identify the current holders of the remaining debts and to promptly pay
them once that is done.  His current financial situation is strong and he should have no
problem doing so.  Mitigation has been adequately established.  Clearance is granted. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant.  The
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding required
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue
a security clearance for the Applicant.  The SOR recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to conduct proceedings and determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied
or revoked.
On March 8, 2007, Applicant responded to the allegations set forth in the SOR, and
elected to have a decision made by a DOHA Administrative Judge after a hearing.  The case
was originally assigned to  another Administrative Judge, but was reassigned to me on June
11, 2007.  I issued a Notice of Hearing on June 18, 2007 and the hearing was conducted on
July 23, 2007.  At the hearing, Department Counsel introduced four (4) exhibits
(Government’s Exhibits (GX) 1-4.  Applicant testified and introduced nineteen (19) exhibits
(Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-S).  The hearing transcript was received at DOHA on August
1, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 66-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  The SOR contains eight
(8) allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  In his response to the SOR,
Applicant admits allegation 1.d. and denies all other allegations.  All specific admissions are
accepted and incorporated herein as Findings of Fact.  
After considering the totality of the evidence, I make the following FINDINGS OF
FACT as to the status of each SOR allegation.
The February 20, 2007 SOR alleges the following: 
3
1.a. Applicant was indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the amount of
$61,493.00 on a Federal tax lien entered against him on or about October 2000.  In his
response, Applicant denies this allegation and claims the actual value of the lien was
$43,775.46.  He made payments on this debt, as part of an agreement  reached on his behalf
by a “tax representative” (Tr at 41,42).   Applicant states that this debt was paid off during the
escrow process when the house was sold on April 27, 2006 (Response and Tr at 38-42).  The
escrow documents from April 2006) corroborate that this debt has been satisfied and the
Federal tax lien released (AX A and AX B).
1.b. Applicant was indebted to State B in the approximate amount of $25,933.00 on a
state tax lien entered against him in March 2000 (AX D).   Applicant denies this allegation and
claims the tax lien was settled in November 2005, when the total taxes due were paid off
during the escrow process when the house was sold on April 27, 2006 (Response and Tr at 41-
44). The attached copy of the escrow document corroborates that this debt has been satisfied
(AX A and AX D).
1.c.  Applicant was indebted to Bank C in the approximate amount of $281.00 on an
account more than 120 days past due as of July 2006.  Applicant denies this allegation and
claims the $281.00 was part of a larger amount of $9,540.00 owed to this creditor that was
paid off during the escrow process when his house was sold on April 27, 2006 (Tr at 45, 46).
The attached copy of the escrow document corroborates that this debt has been satisfied (AX
A and AX E).
1.d.   Applicant was indebted to Creditor D in the approximate amount of $2,006.00 on
an account charged off in about 2003.  He has had some difficulty tracking down the present
holder of the debt (Tr at 45).  In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits this debt and states
he will pay off the debt as soon as he is able to locate the present holder of the debt.
1.e.  Applicant was indebted to Creditor E in the approximate amount of $3,402.00 on
an account placed for collection in about July 2003.  In his response, Applicant denies the
debt.  He disputes the debt.  He states that the creditor has initiated legal action, to which
Applicant was responding as of March 8, 2007, claiming improper conduct by the creditor (Tr
at 50, 51). He promises a payoff with 30 days of resolution.
1.f.  Applicant was indebted to Creditor F (same creditor as in 1.e., above) in the
approximate amount of $10,619.00 on an account placed for collection in about July 2003. 
In his response, Applicant denies the debt.  He states that the creditor has initiated legal action,
to which Applicant was responding as of March 8, 2007, claiming improper conduct by the
creditor (Tr at 50, 51). He promises a payoff with 30 days of resolution.
1.g.  Applicant was indebted to Creditor G in the approximate amount of $157.00 on
4
an account placed for collection in about January 2004.  In his response, Applicant denied this
debt, claiming it did not exist.  He has been attempting to locate the present holder of the debt
and promises a prompt payoff when he learns the debt is valid and owing. 
1.h.  Applicant was indebted to Bank H in the approximate amount of $6,551.00 on an
account placed for collection in about January 2004.  In his response, Applicant denied this
debt.  He believed it may be “an earlier duplicate of the debt(s) [cited in 1.e. and 1.f., above].
He stated that “if not, I will contact the debt holder and pay off the debt in 30 to 60 days”
(Response).  He states that the creditor has initiated legal action, to which Applicant
responded, as of March 8, 2007, claiming improper conduct by the creditor (Tr at 50, 51).  He
promises a full payoff with 30 days of resolution.
Applicant’s overall debt was incurred during the period from August 1996 to August
2003, during which time Applicant was employed for only about 30 months (Tr at 32). The
total of the debts alleged in the SOR is about $110,442.00, but he also owed money on other
debts, and has paid off about $119,000 over the past few years (Response to SOR).  Even
before he sold his house and paid off the balance of his debts, he had reached an agreement
with State B and had begun to make payments on his state tax debt (Tr at 33).  His intent has
been to prioritize his debts, but to resolve all of them eventually.  He served in the U.S.
military for 20 years and has had no legal or financial problems except for those involved in
the present case (Tr at 34).  Through all of this, he has been caring for an adult son who had
serious medical problems and subsequently passed away (Tr at 35).       
His current take home pay is about $3,200.00 per month (Tr at 64).  He also receives
military retirement of about $2,500 per month and $1,800 in social security (Tr at 64).  His
wife received disability payments from Social Security of about “$600/$700 per month” and
a pension of about $400.00 per month (Tr at 65). 
Applicant believes his present delinquent debt is “maybe $20,00.00” (Tr at 56) and
involve debts he is disputing or where he has been unable to contact the debt holder, who are
apparently several layers away from the original creditor (Tr at 54-58).  The record shows
Applicant to be a man of integrity.  He has demonstrated a willingness and ability to resolve
all remaining delinquent debts (Tr at 58). 
POLICIES 
In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the adjudicator should consider
the following nine generic factors: (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3). The
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the
5
conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential
for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence (Directive, E.2.2.1., on page 16 of Enclosure 2).  I have considered all nine factors,
individually and collectively, in reaching my overall conclusion.
The eligibility criteria established by Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6
identify personal characteristics and conduct that are reasonably related to the ultimate
question of whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” for an individual to hold
a security clearance.  An applicant’s admission of the information in specific allegations
relieves the Government of having to prove those allegations.  If specific allegations and/or
information are denied or  otherwise controverted by the applicant, the Government has the
initial burden of proving those  controverted facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons.  
If the Government meets its burden (either by the Applicant’s admissions or by other
evidence) and proves conduct that creates security  concerns under the Directive, the burden
of persuasion then shifts to the Applicant to present  evidence in refutation, extenuation or
mitigation sufficient to demonstrate that, despite the existence of conduct that falls within
specific criteria in the Directive, it is nevertheless consistent with the interests of national
security to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based upon trust and confidence.  As required by DoD Directive 5220.6,
as amended, at E2.2.2., “any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security will be resolved in favor of the nation’s
security.”
CONCLUSIONS 
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor judgment, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide
by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
   
Disqualifying Conditions: 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and ( c) a
history of not meeting financial obligations.
Mitigating Conditions: 20.(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, . . . unexpected medical
emergency or death) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20. ( c)
6
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d) the
individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts.
Applicant’s financial problems substantially occurred during a seven-year period of on
and off employment between 1993 and 2003, and the terminal illness of his son (Tr at 74). The
total amount cited in the SOR is about $110,000.00, and Applicant has incurred other debts
as well.  Several  years ago, he sold his house and used the proceeds to pay off specific debts
cited in the escrow documents, substantially reducing  his delinquent debt load.  As discussed
above, his current monthly income is more than $6,500.00 per month.  His house payments are
about $1,200 per month.  After his monthly operating expenses, as discussed in his hearing
testimony (Tr at 65-69), he has a positive balance.  In his bank account, he has about
$70,000.00, the remainder from the sale of his home (Tr at 70).  He also has about $64,00.00
in a 401K plan and about $95.000.00 equity in his new home (Tr at 71).  
Applicant could have done some things better, and moved faster on resolving all of the
cited debts, but he has made significant inroads into his overall debts and has taken steps to
identify and contact the creditors whose debts have not yet been satisfied.  Applicant is a
persistent man, perhaps even stubborn, but the record does not suggest any unwillingness or
inability to resolve his debts.  He has stated his intent to resolve all debts once he can locate
and negotiate with the current holder of each remaining debt.  
Clearly, he has the ability to do so.  Applicant has paid some $70,000 in tax liens even
though he thought the liens were unfair. As to those debts not yet paid, I conclude that
Applicant  has not yet done so because he has not satisfied himself as to the actual amount
owed or the current holders of the debts. While he could have done more, perfection is not the
standard. Overall, he has demonstrated a strong personal ethic (responsibilities to his family
and work).  There were no apparent problems when he had the cited debts, which makes the
level of  risk even smaller, now that he has significantly reduced those debts and has sizeable
financial assets as well.
In summary, I conclude that Applicant has adequately demonstrated financial
rehabilitation and mitigated the Government’s concerns.  Accordingly, I conclude that
Applicant possesses the judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of somone seeking
to hold a DOD security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
7
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7 of Enclosure 1 of the Directive
are hereby rendered as follows:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)  For the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.a.           For the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.b.               For the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.c.           For the Applicant
           Subparagraph 1.d.            For the Applicant
Subparagraph  l.e.           For the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.f.               For the Applicant
            Subparagraph  l.g.           For the Applicant
                Subparagraph 1.h.               For the Applicant
            
        
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
BARRY M. SAX
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
  
