KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns over his criminal conduct and personal
conduct.  He has a history of four arrests and failed to disclose his arrests and his marijuana use on
his security questionnaire in 2006, yet, nevertheless, certified that his answers were truthful.  While
he has taken some steps to reform his conduct and entered a court treatment and diversion program
for his 2005 possession of marijuana arrest, he has not completed the program.  Thus, he has not yet
demonstrated sufficiently his successful rehabilitation.   Consequently, security concerns remain over
both criminal conduct and personal conduct.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-22066.h1
DATE: 08/30/2007
DATE:  August 30, 2007
In Re:
-------------------------
SSN: -------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-22066
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
KATHRYN MOEN BRAEMAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
       This procedure is required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2, 1992 (Directive), as amended by Change 4, April 20, 1999.   
       SOR 2.b. You falsified material facts on your electronic questionnaire for investigation processing2
(eQIP) executed by you on January 17, 2006, on which you were required to reply to the following question:
Section 24, your use of illegal drugs and drug activities.  The following questions pertain to the use of illegal
drugs or drug activity. You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully and your failure to do
so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or action against you, but neither your truthful
responses nor information derived from your responses will be used as evidence against you in any
subsequent criminal hearing; a., since the age of 16 or in the last seven years, which ever is shorter, have you
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics
. . .or prescription drugs?, to which you answered, “No,” whereas in truth you deliberately failed to list that
you smoked marijuana as recently as November 2005.  (TR 39-41)
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns over his criminal conduct and personal
conduct.  He has a history of four arrests and failed to disclose his arrests and his marijuana use on
his security questionnaire in 2006, yet, nevertheless, certified that his answers were truthful.  While
he has taken some steps to reform his conduct and entered a court treatment and diversion program
for his 2005 possession of marijuana arrest, he has not completed the program.  Thus, he has not yet
demonstrated sufficiently his successful rehabilitation.   Consequently, security concerns remain over
both criminal conduct and personal conduct.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
to the Applicant on December 11, 2006.  The SOR detailed reasons why the Government could not
make the preliminary positive finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for Applicant.   The SOR alleged specific concerns over personal1
conduct (Guideline E) in paragraph 1 and over criminal conduct (Guideline J) in paragraph 2 based
on the revised (“new”) Adjudicative Guidelines issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by
the Department of Defense, effective September 1, 2006.  Applicant responded to these SOR
allegations in a notarized Answer of January 9, 2007, where he admitted all allegations in paragraph
1 and all allegations in paragraph 2.  He requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel indicated the case was ready to proceed on January 30, 2007.  The
matter was assigned to another Administrative Judge on February 1, 2007.  The case was re-assigned
to me on March 29, 2007.  A March 30, 2007, Notice of Hearing set the case hearing for April 19,
2007. 
At the hearing the Government offered two exhibits  (Exhibit 1-2) which were admitted into
evidence without objection.  Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit A, which was admitted into
evidence without objection.  At the close of the evidentiary portion of the hearing Department
Counsel moved to amend the SOR based on paragraph 17 of the Directive to add a new allegation,
2.b.   Applicant initially objected, but later withdrew his objection; he conceded his testimony2
3
supported the new allegation.  (TR 41-43)  Consequently, I granted the amendment to the SOR.  (TR
43)  The transcript (TR) was received on April 27, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following Findings of Fact:
  
Applicant, 25 years old, began  work for a defense contractor in a position classified as  Tech
I in December 2005 and later was promoted to Tech III.  He completed an Electronic Questionnaire
for Investigative Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) in January 2006. (Exhibit 1; TR 30-31; 37-38)  
Applicant received a B.S. in electronics engineering technology from a university in February
2005. (Exhibit 1) 
Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct 
Applicant’s first arrest was for trespassing and unlawful discharge of an air gun in August
2000 when he was 18 and playing paint ball with friends.  He completed his four-month supervision.
(SOR 1.a.)  (Answer; TR 33-34) 
His second arrest was in June 2002 when he was twenty as he violated the Liquor Control
Act.  (SOR 1.b.)  He was outside drinking at a college party; he was arrested by an university police
officer who saw him with a drink when he was underage.  He paid a fine. (Answer; TR 34-35)
His third arrest for consuming alcohol in public on a patio at a bar was in February 2004
when he was 23.  He was arrested by an officer on a bicycle and required to do ten hours of
community service.   (SOR 1.d.) (Answer; TR 35-36)
Applicant began using marijuana in high school and testified his last use of marijuana was
in November 2005 when he was arrested.  (SOR 1.d..) Applicant certified that his answer were true,
complete and correct on his eQIP; however, in response to questions in Section 24, he falsely
answered “no” and failed to disclose that he had previously used drugs.  He was afraid to report his
marijuana usage on the form as this job was his first after college and he feared losing it. After
completing the form, he falsely told the security investigator when he was interviewed  that he had
last use marijuana in high school.  (TR 27-30)  He admitted he lied.  (TR 31)
Also, in response to questions in Section 23, Applicant failed to disclose that he had been
charged and convicted of offenses related to alcohol or drugs.  Despite his certification that his
answer were true, complete and correct, he falsely answered “no” to that question.  In June 2002  he
had pleaded guilty to a violation of the Liquor Control Act and was fined $300; in February 2004
he was charged with Consuming Alcohol in Public; and in November 2005 he was arrested and
charged with Possession of Marijuana and Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.  (Answer; Exhibits 1,
2) He was arrested when a bicycle police offer came to his car window and saw a marijuana pipe on
his dashboard.  He was booked at the police station.  (TR 20) 
     Executive Order No. 10865 § 7.3
4
Applicant conceded he was arrested in November 2005, a month before he filled out the
security form in January 2006.  He had not heard anything more about the case since his arrest, so
he hoped he would not have to report it as he was afraid to disclose the arrest.  He believed he could
answer “no” as he had been charged, but had not yet been to court and been convicted of the 2005
arrest.  He thought he was “still in the clear” when he filled out the form.  After he received the SOR
in December 2006, he checked with the local courts and found that there was a warrant for him as
he had missed a court date.  He had moved, so had not received the notice of the hearing. He went
to court in March 2007 and was allowed to enter the Treatment Assessment Screening Center
(TASC) program.  If he completes the program, all charges will be dismissed.   He entered the TASC
diversion program and is now in a program and trying to “make a turnaround.”  (Exhibit A; TR 14-
15; 16-19; TR 21-25)  To reform his life he moved to a new city for his job in December 2005 and
away from his previous friends with whom he used drugs. He is paying $250 per month to be in the
TASC program.  In March 2007 he took a drug education seminar.  (TR 25-27; 30-31; 32)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider in evaluating an
individual's security eligibility which  are divided into conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying and conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  In deciding whether
 to grant or continue an individual's access to classified information, the mere presence or absence
of any adjudication policy condition is not decisive.  Based on a consideration of the evidence as a
whole in evaluating this case, I weighed these relevant Revised Adjudication Guidelines:
 The responsibility for producing evidence initially falls on the Government to demonstrate
that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant's access to
classified information.  Then the Applicant presents evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate in order  to overcome the doubts raised by the Government, and to demonstrate persuasively
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue the clearance.  Under the
provisions of Executive Order 10865, as amended, and the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an applicant's security clearance may be made only after an affirmative finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest. In reaching the fair and impartial overall common sense
determination, the Administrative Judge may  draw only those inferences and conclusions that have
a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides industrial security clearance
decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not
necessarily a determination as to the allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism of an applicant.  It is merely3
an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of
Defense have established for issuing a security clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
5
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct
30.  The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The government established security concerns under criminal conduct disqualifying
conditions as detailed in  ¶ 31.(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.  Applicant had
four misdemeanor arrests from ages 18 to 24.  The last arrest in November 2005 was for possession
of marijuana and drug paraphernalia when he was 24 and is more serious.  In December 2006, he
checked with the local courts and found that there was a warrant for him as he had missed a court
date. He went to court in March 2007 and was allowed to enter the TASC treatment program.  If he
completes the program, all charges will be dismissed.   
With the government’s case established, the burden shifted to Applicant to present evidence
of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against him. It is possible to mitigate
security concerns under this guideline:  ¶ 32. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns
include: ¶ 32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individuals reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  While his earlier arrests can be mitigated
under this test, the recent arrest in 2005 does not meet this test.  To his credit, Applicant finally
entered TASC and sought therapy in March 2007 to address the underlying issues that led to his drug
use.  Applicant has taken some steps on the path to successful rehabilitation but he has not completed
the TASC program; so does not yet meet the test that his rehabilitation is successful under MC ¶
32.(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education,
good employment record, or constructive community involvement. No one yet can conclude with
certainty that his misconduct is unlikely to recur.  Thus, doubt does persist over his reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  While he reported a satisfactory employment record and has
been promoted, doubts persist over his suitability to have access to classified information.
Consequently, after looking at him as a whole person and considering the Adjudicative Process
factors and the Adjudicative Guidelines, I rule for Applicant on subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b., and 1.c., but
against Applicant on subparagraph 1.d. under SOR Paragraph 1.
Guideline E:  Personal Conduct
15. The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  
The Government provided substantial evidence that Applicant’s personal conduct raised
security concerns under disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 16:  he falsified his answers to two questions
on the security questionnaire even though he certified that his answers were true.  He failed to
disclose his November 2005 drug-related arrest and his marijuana use that continued to November
6
2005.  
With the government’s case established, the burden shifted to Applicant to present evidence
of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against him.  However, he admitted
he put his self-interest first and intentionally falsified, so he provided  no basis to mitigate.  
Whole Person Analysis
Having considered both the record and Applicant in light of the “whole person” concept, I
conclude he is an earnest person who has finally made progress by entering the TASC program, but
he has not completed it.  Even though he has reported a favorable employment history, he failed to
be truthful on the security questionnaire which raises doubts as to his trustworthiness.
Thus, after weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has failed to mitigate the security
concerns pertaining to personal conduct considerations.  I rule against  Applicant on subparagraphs
2.a. and  2.b. under SOR Paragraph 2.
FORMAL FINDINGS
After reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the Adjudicative Guidelines in
Enclosure 2 and the factors set forth under the Adjudicative Process section, I make the following
formal findings:
Paragraph 1. Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.  Clearance is
denied.
7
Kathryn Moen Braeman
Administrative Judge
