KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Alcohol
DIGEST: Applicant has a history of four admitted alcohol-related incidents between 1981 and 2004
that resulted in convictions, jail time, fines and reduction in pay.  A separate assault conviction in
2003 was preceded by alcohol consumption sufficient to make this offense alcohol-related as well.
While never diagnosed as alcohol dependent, he has recently admitted to being an alcoholic,
following years of self-denial.  His restorative efforts to date, while encouraging, are insufficient to
enable safe predictive assessments about Applicant’s ability to avoid recurrence in the foreseeable
future.  Applicant fails to fully mitigate government security concerns about his alcohol-related
incidents that reflect alcohol  abuse.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 07-00275.h1
DATE: 08/30/2007
DATE:  August 30, 2007
In re:
-------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00275
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROGER C. WESLEY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant has a history of four admitted alcohol-related incidents between 1981 and 2004
that resulted in convictions, jail time, fines and reduction in pay.  A separate assault conviction in
2003 was preceded by alcohol consumption sufficient to make this offense alcohol-related as well.
While never diagnosed as alcohol dependent, he has recently admitted to being an alcoholic,
following years of self-denial.  His restorative efforts to date, while encouraging, are insufficient to
enable safe predictive assessments about Applicant’s ability to avoid recurrence in the foreseeable
future.  Applicant fails to fully mitigate government security concerns about his alcohol-related
incidents that reflect alcohol  abuse.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 19, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or
revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 12, 2007, and requested a hearing.  The case was
assigned to me on June 20, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on July 26, 2007.  A hearing was
held on July 26, 2007, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At the hearing,
the Government's case consisted of nine  exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses (including
himself) and four exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on August 3, 2007.
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to keep the record open to permit
him the opportunity to obtain a medical evaluation.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
14 days to supplement the record.  The Government, in turn was allowed three days to respond.
Applicant did not supplement the record.
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guidelines J and G, Applicant is alleged to have been (a) arrested, charged, or cited
with four alcohol-related offenses between 1981 and July 2004: specifically, in January 1981 for
Driving Under the Influence (DuI) and driving with an invalid driver’s license, after which he was
turned over to military police, cited under Article III, UCMJ for DuI and operating without valid
license, and awarded reduced pay; in November 1989 for DuI, for which he was found guilty, fined,
sentenced to one day in jail, and ordered to complete 12 hours of alcohol classes; in January 2002
for liquor in vehicle, for which he was found guilty and fined; and in July 2004 for DuI and DuI with
a blood alcohol count (BAC) of .08 per cent or more, for which he was found guilty of DuI,
3
sentenced to one day in jail, fined, and required to attend alcohol screening.  Under Guideline J only,
he was alleged to have been charged in November 2003 with aggravated assault of a law
enforcement officer, to which he pled guilty and was fined Additionally.
Additionally, under Guideline G, Applicant is alleged to been hospitalized in 1981 for an
alcohol overdose and on occasion to have consumed a beer while driving a motor vehicle.
For his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations.  He provided
explanations of the events and circumstances associated with the alleged conduct and claimed to be
working on his alcohol problem.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 46year-old electronic technician for a defense contractor who seeks retention
of a security clearance he has held since 1985 (R.T., at 62).  The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted to by Applicant are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant was introduced to alcohol in high school (R.T., at 62-63).  Following his
enlistment in the Army in 1978 he increased his consumption of alcohol (R.T., at 64).  He generally
drank two to three times a week, and on the occasions he drank, his consumption varied from a 12-
pack or six-pack of beer at a time (R.T., at 64).   Occasionally, he consumed hard liquor.
 In January 1981, Applicant was pulled over by German police for making an improper turn.
He had consumed alcohol (estimated to be six bottles of beer) with several German friends and was
taking them home when he was stopped (R.T., at 66).  He was subsequently transferred to U.S. Army
military police and charged with DuI with drunk driving and operating a POV without a valid
USAREUR driver’s license under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ).  As a result of this
arrest, his pay was reduced (R.T., at 67).  
Applicant continued to consume alcohol on a regular basis for the duration of his Army
enlistment.  In the summer of 1981 while stationed overseas, he and his German girlfriend consumed
three to four large steins (24 to 30 ounce jugs) of beer during the course of a day while socializing
with several Army friends (see ex. 7).  While traveling as a passenger with his girlfriend, he
encountered breathing difficulties and laid down on the sidewalk in some distress (R.T., at 68-70).
Friends called for a German ambulance to assist him.  An ambulance was dispatched  to the scene.
Applicant was subsequently taken by ambulance to a U.S. Army hospital for observation (R.T., at
70-71).  Attending hospital medical personnel told him he had overdosed on alcohol (ex. 7).
Applicant disagreed with this assessment and attributed his breathing problems to an asthma attack.
Hospital records are not available to corroborate Applicant’s account.  
Following his discharge from the Army in September 1982, Applicant continued to consume
alcohol on a regular basis.  While in Alaska (between 1982 and 1984) he drank two beers almost
every day (R.T., at 72-73).   He increased his alcohol intake to daily drinking after his relocation to
his present place of residence in 1984.  He continued his practice of daily alcohol consumption
between 1984 and 2002. During this period, he occasionally consumed alcohol at the frequency rate
4
of one to two beers a day (save for a two year period spanning between 1982 and 1984 when he was
residing outside of the Continental United States) while on his way to pick up his daughter from
school (R.T., at 72-73) 
While at a racetrack event in November 1989, Applicant consumed three to four glasses of
whiskey.  On his way home from the track, he was arrested by city police for DuI and was later found
guilty of DuI (R.T., at 58-60).  The court fined him $413.00, sentenced him to one day in jail, and
required him to attend 12 hours of alcohol classes.  By all accounts, Applicant completed these
classes.  
Applicant continued his daily drinking after his 1989 DuI arrest, and in January 2002, he was
cited for liquor in his vehicle.  He was found guilty of the offense and fined $54.25.  Since his 2002
citation, he has never kept a beer or alcohol container in his car (R.T., at 79).  He continued
consuming beer after his 2002 citation, however, and in November 2003 he became embroiled in a
domestic argument with his wife after consuming about three beers (R.T., at 85).  Police were called
to his house and during an exchange with the police, Applicant slightly bumped one of the police
officers (R.T., at 53-55, 85-86).  Although he denies any intentional bumping of the officer, he later
plead guilty to charges of aggravated assault of a law enforcement officer and was fined $100.00 for
the offense.  While Applicant was not cited for an alcohol-related incident, his acknowledged intake
of  beer preceding the incident is enough to make this an alcohol-related incident.
Applicant continued to consume beer on a daily basis following his 2003 arrest, and was
arrested in July 2004 for DuI and DuI with a BAC of .08 per cent or more.  He was found guilty of
DuI and was sentenced to 10 days in jail (all but one day suspended), fined $1,000.00, required to
attend alcohol screening and counseling (believed to be 12 hours), and had his driver’s license
suspended for 30 days (R.T., at 81-82).  Applicant was never diagnosed by his counselors.  So, still
believing he did not have an alcohol problem, he continued drinking on a daily basis between June
2004 and June 2007 (R.T., at 82-83).  
At the urging of his spouse following his receipt of the SOR, Applicant quit drinking in June
2007 and turned to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) for help (R.T., at 83-84).  Although never
diagnosed (R.T., at 88-90), he considers himself an alcoholic (viz., not someone who is dependent,
but rather one who drinks too much) and has attended AA meetings weekly (R.T., at 83-84, 88-95).
He has earned his 24 hour and 30-day chips that recognize his sustained abstinence for the periods
covered (see exs. C and D; R.T., at 53).  He has a sponsor who he occasionally talks to but has
delayed his participation in AA’s 12-step program until after the holding of this hearing (R.T., at 84).
Afforded a post-hearing opportunity to seek an evaluation from a credentialed medical provider or
substance abuse counselor, Applicant has failed to do so in any way that can be documented in this
record.
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors and colleagues.  A test officer and colleague
who has worked along side of Applicant  rates Applicant a class A radar operator and describes him
as the best radar operator he has ever seen (R.T., at 27-30).  He credits Applicant with being an asset
to the contractor’s mission.  This colleague assures he has never heard of Applicant’s being drunk
on or off the work site (R.T., at 28).  However, this same colleague was not aware of Applicant’s
prior DuIs until just recently (R.T., at 33).  Other colleagues who have known Applicant for many
years also characterize him as an excellent radar operator who has never exhibited signs of drinking
5
on or off the job (see ex. A; R.T., at 36-43).  Applicant has received numerous letters of appreciation
and awards that recognize his contributions to the Army’s test programs (see ex. B).  
POLICIES
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of the
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (Disqualifying Conditions),
if any, and all of the Mitigating Conditions, if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess
these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and
mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy factors
are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply
with laws, rules and regulations.
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment,
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness. 
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make
a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of
an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those
inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s] alleged
in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a material bearing
to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  The required showing of
material bearing, however, does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the
6
applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a
security clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of establishing his
or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the
Government's case.
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is a highly regarded electronics technician for a defense contractor with a history
of regular alcohol consumption over a 30-year period and  five alcohol-related incidents between
1981 and 2004.  Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents and self-diagnosis of alcoholism
reflect both a recent pattern of alcohol abuse outside the work place and a potential dependency
problem that raise security concerns.   
On the strength of the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Adjudication Guidelines for alcohol consumption may be applied: 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) and 22©) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to
the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent).  Because Applicant’s drinking has never been diagnosed, it is not
entirely evident that his years of daily drinking can be considered habitual much less binge drinking
within the meaning of DC 22©).  Nonetheless, the combination of his years of daily drinking when
considered in juxtaposition to his DuI incidents and recent self-diagnosis of alcoholism justifies
assigning some application to DC 22©) of the guidelines for alcohol consumption.
Because four of Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses are covered by arrests or charges that
involve criminal conduct, they are covered by the guidelines for criminal conduct as well.
Specifically, DC 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) applies.  Because
Applicant’s 2002 citation for liquor in the vehicle does not involve a likely criminal offense, this
incident is not specifically covered by guideline for criminal conduct.
To his credit, Applicant has acknowledged alcoholism, has become involved with AA, has
obtained a sponsor, and has earned chips for 24 hours and 30 days of sustained abstinence,
respectively.  However, his failure to seek an evaluation and enlist substance abuse counseling for
any identified alcohol problem to date, his acknowledged alcoholism, and his failure to furnish a
favorable prognosis preclude application of  any of the mitigating conditions of the guidelines for
alcohol and criminal conduct. Applicant’s  renewed commitment to abstinence does reflect positive
changes in behavior supportive of sobriety, and for these efforts Applicant is to be commended.
Favorable views of his progress from work colleagues who know him are also helpful in gauging the
strength of his commitment to sobriety. 
Taking into account both Appellant’s history of alcohol abuse and his strong work record,
his mitigation efforts to date, while encouraging, reflect insufficient evaluative information and
7
evidence of sustained commitment to AA and its tenets of sobriety to conclude he is no longer at risk
of recurrence.  Without a favorable prognosis, it would be imprudent to relax the time mitigation
requirements of any of the mitigating conditions of the alcohol and criminal conduct guidelines,
which in Applicant’s case work conjunctively with each other. 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant failed to make a convincing showing that he
has both the maturity and resource support at his disposal to avert any recurrent problems with
judgment lapses related to alcohol to warrant safe predictions that he is no longer at risk of judgment
impairment associated with such conduct.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to all but
one the allegations covered by the alcohol and criminal conduct guidelines of the SOR. 
Subparagraph 1.c is favorably concluded. 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each of the E
2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the context of
the FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS, CONDITIONS, and the factors listed above, this
Administrative Judge makes the following FORMAL FINDINGS:
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
 
8
