KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant has a history of repeated financial problems. She gave false answers in response
to two questions about her financial delinquencies on a security-clearance application.  She did not
present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Eligibility
for a security clearance is denied.
CASENO: 07-00550.h1
DATE: 08/07/2007
DATE:  August 7, 2007
In re:
--------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00550
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MICHAEL H. LEONARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant has a history of repeated financial problems. She gave false answers in response
to two questions about her financial delinquencies on a security-clearance application.  She did not
 Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended (Directive).
 See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (December
29, 2005). 
2
present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Eligibility
for a security clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke eligibility for a security
clearance. Acting under the relevant authority,  the agency issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to1
Applicant on March 16, 2007. The SOR—which is equivalent to an administrative
complaint—details the factual basis for the action and alleges security concerns under Guideline F
for financial considerations based on multiple delinquent debts, and under Guideline E for personal
conduct based on falsification of a security-clearance application. 
In addition to the Directive, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by
the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense
Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending formal amendment.2
The Revised Guidelines apply to this case because the SOR is dated March 20, 2007, which is after
the effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR in an undated submission. She elected to have her case decided
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Applicant admits all the allegations under Guideline F.
Also, she admits the falsification allegations under Guideline E. She did not provide a further
explanation to the SOR allegations. 
On June 21, 2007, the government submitted its written case consisting of all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file of relevant material
(FORM) was mailed to Applicant and it was received by her on June 27, 2007. Applicant timely
replied to the FORM by providing proof of payment for two accounts. Department counsel reviewed
those documents and had no objections to their consideration. The documents are marked and
admitted as Exhibits A and B. The case was assigned for decision on July 26, 2007. 
In general terms, there are two  major issues: Is it clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance for Applicant in light of (1) her history of
3
repeated financial problems, and (2) her false answers in response to two questions on a security-
clearance application? Both issues are decided against Applicant. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established. 
1. Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a company engaged in federal contracting. She has
worked for a federal contractor since about January 2005. She has worked for her current employer
since about October 2006. 
2. In October 2006, Applicant completed a security-clearance application. When signing it, she
certified that her statements were true, complete, and correct to the best of her knowledge and belief
and were made in good faith. Also, she acknowledged that a knowing and willful false statement on
the application could be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both. Question 28 on the application
asked Applicant to disclose financial delinquencies. In response to Question 28a, she denied, in the
last seven years, being more than 180 days delinquent on any debts. In response to Question 28b, she
denied that she was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debts. In her written response to
the SOR, Applicant admits giving false answers in response to these two questions. 
3. Applicant has a history of repeated indebtedness over many years. For example, in 1997, she
obtained a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge for about $5,536 in debt. A credit report from October
2006 reveals derogatory information about her financial condition. The public record section of the
report reveals the bankruptcy case as well as a civil judgment she had satisfied. The report also
reveals 47 accounts in the collections section. Another credit report from March 2007 further
confirms Applicant’s financial history. 
4. The SOR alleges that Applicant has 18 unpaid debts ranging from $13 to $13,777 for a total
of about $18,000. Several of the unpaid debts are based on bad checks. In addition, it alleges
Applicant obtained the Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge as described above. In her written response
to the SOR, Applicant admits these matters. In addition to her admissions, the credit reports from
October 2006 and March 2007 further establish these matters. 
5. Exhibit A is proof of payment for the unpaid $56 debt in SOR subparagraph 1.f. Exhibit B
is proof of payment for an unnamed debt. It appears to be a one-page fax from a collection agency.
It indicates a certain case number was paid in full for a total amount of $2,299.55. It cannot be
determined if this debt is one of the debts in the SOR. 
6. Other than Exhibits A and B, Applicant did not produce proof of payment or other
documentary evidence about the debts in question. She did not produce documentary evidence about
her overall financial situation. And she did not address her  false answers to Question 28a and 28b.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plain that thereth
is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AND POLICIES
No one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in Department3
of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes any existing security5
clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level and retention of any existing
security clearance.   Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about6
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting or continuing eligibility for access to classified
information.  The government has the burden of presenting evidence to establish facts alleged in the7
SOR that have been controverted.  An applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute,8
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has9
the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court said that the burden of proof in a security clearance case is less than the preponderance of the
evidence.  The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings11
of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 14
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 15
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 16
5
conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access
to classified information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access
to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met the strict13
guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically exists due to14
significant unpaid debts. Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to meet
financial obligations. Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The government contends Applicant’s history of financial problems is a security concern.
Applicant did not make specific contentions. The question is whether Applicant’s history of repeated
financial problems is consistent with eligibility for access to classified information under the clearly-
consistent standard. 
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of repeated financial
problems over many years. The 1997 Chapter 7 bankruptcy case and the more recent adverse
financial information are proof of this conclusion. Her history of repeated financial problems is a
security concern because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not15
meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more than16
sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. 
All of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F have been considered and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. She did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
the security concern. In particular, the record evidence is insufficient to establish that she made a
good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve her indebtedness. The minimal documentation, Exhibits
A and B, is not enough to show a serious, good-faith effort. Applicant’s history of repeated financial
problems outweighs the favorable evidence. 
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  17
 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,18
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
6
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  a security concern may arise due to conduct17
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations, which may raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process.
The government contends that Applicant’s false answers raise a security concern. Applicant
did not make specific contentions. The question is whether Applicant’s false answers in response
to two questions about her financial delinquencies on a security-clearance application are consistent
with eligibility for access to classified information under the clearly-consistent standard. 
The government established its case under this guideline. Applicant admits giving false
answers in response to Questions 28a and 28b of her security-clearance application. The record
evidence is sufficient to conclude that DC 1 of the guideline applies against Applicant.  Making18
deliberately false statements to the government during the security-clearance process is serious
misconduct.  
All of the mitigating conditions under Guideline E have been considered and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. She did not offer an explanation for her false answers. And she did not offer
evidence that might otherwise explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. 
Viewing the record evidence as a whole, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the cumulative effect of her history of financial problems and
false statements. Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due
consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision for Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
SOR ¶ 1–Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a–r: Against Applicant
SOR ¶ 2–Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
7
DECISION
In light of all the facts and circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
    
