 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08384 
                                                                      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations), Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and the “whole-person” 
analysis. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 1, 2009. On June 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was signed and notarized on July 1, 2010. She 
requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. The government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 30, 2010. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Additionally, in the FORM, the Government 
 
2 
 
 
requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (Pakistan) and provided, for reference, eight official U.S. Government source 
documents and a five-page factual summary derived from the eight official U.S. 
Government documents. I marked the Government’s administrative notice documents 
as Hearing Exhibit (H.E.) A.  
 
On October 1, 2010, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the file on October 7, 2010. Her response was due on 
November 6, 2010. Applicant timely submitted four exhibits related to the Guideline F 
allegations in the SOR. Deputy Chief Department Counsel did not object to the 
admission of these exhibits, which I then marked as Ex. A through Ex. D and admitted 
to the record. Additionally, Applicant submitted additional evidence in response to the 
Guideline B allegations. I marked Applicant’s additional information as Ex. E and 
admitted it, without objection, to the record. 
 
Additionally, Applicant, in response to the FORM, submitted 16 documents which 
discussed persecutions of a minority Muslim sect in Pakistan. Deputy Chief Department 
Counsel did not object to these documents. I marked the documents as H.E. 1 through 
H.E. 16 and admitted them into evidence. H.E. 1 and H.E. 6 were official U.S. 
Government documents containing facts about the persecution of the minority Muslim 
sect. H.E. 2, H.E. 3, and H.E. 4 were selections from publications of private sector 
human rights advocacy groups. H.E. 5 was a law review article about the persecution of 
the minority Muslin sect. H.E. 7, H.E. 9, H.E. 10, H.E. 11, H.E. 12, H.E. 13, H.E. 14, 
H.E. 15, and H.E. 16 were reports printed from internet news sources. The source for 
the information offered as H.E. 8 was not identified. Pursuant to ¶¶ E3.1.19. and 
E3.1.20. of Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural Guidance, Directive, I take administrative 
notice of Applicant’s H.E. 1 and H.E. 6. Additionally, Applicant provided as H.E. 17, five 
decisions by DOHA administrative judges in cases with Guideline F and Guideline B 
allegations. I admitted H.E. 17 to the record, without objection, but note that DOHA 
administrative judge decisions have “persuasive” but not precedential value. On 
January 10, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.), and six allegations that raise 
security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.f.) In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three Guideline F allegations but denied that 
they raised security concerns and provided additional information. She admitted five 
Guideline B allegations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a., 2.c., 2.d., 2.e., and 2.f.) and denied one allegation 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.). She denied that the Guideline B allegations raised security concerns, and 
she provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of 
fact.  (Item 1; Item 2.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant is 30 years old, a native-born U.S. citizen, and an employee of a 
defense contractor. She married in 2000, and she is the mother of two children, ages 
seven and two years. (Item 3; Item 4.) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant purchased a home as an investment property. The record 
does not contain Applicant’s mortgage contracts, information reciting the monthly 
mortgage payments she agreed to make, or a listing of her income and expenses at the 
time of the purchase. On her e-QIP, Applicant stated that she purchased the house 
“with brothers and sisters as an investment opportunity.”1 In her response to the FORM, 
Applicant identified herself as the purchaser of the property. She stated that she 
contacted the creditor and was unsuccessful in negotiating a loan modification. 
However, she provided no documentation to corroborate this statement. She also stated 
that she exhausted her savings and borrowed $12,000 from her father in order to make 
mortgage payments on the property.2 When Applicant could no longer make the 
necessary mortgage payments or sell the property, it was foreclosed upon in March 
2008. Applicant’s March 2010 credit report shows she owes a past due amount of 
$35,763 on a second mortgage of approximately $119,000 on the foreclosed property. 
The delinquent debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the debt. She stated that she intended to pay the debt in the future after she 
had satisfied other financial obligations. (Item 1; Item 2; Response to Form, Ex. A, Ex. 
E; Item 4 at 58; Item 5 at 2.) 
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant provided general information on 
mortgages and foreclosures in 2006. She also provided statistics on individuals facing 
foreclosures of their homes. She stated that the circumstances that caused the decline 
of the real estate market were beyond her control. She also stated that she had taken 
all steps that she could have taken to resolve her real estate debt.  (Response to 
FORM, Ex. A, Ex. D.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was responsible for two additional delinquent 
debts. SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges that Applicant owes a creditor $3,874 on a delinquent debt in 
collection status. Her credit reports of April 17, 2009 and March 2, 2010 show that the 
debt became delinquent in November 2008. SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges that Applicant owes a 
creditor $591 on a delinquent debt in collection status. Applicant’s credit report of April 
17, 2009, shows that the debt became delinquent in July 2008. Applicant admitted both 
debts. In her Answer to the SOR and response to the FORM, Applicant provided 
documentation to corroborate that she had negotiated a payment plan with the creditor 
identified in SOR ¶ 1.a. and had made four payments of $50 in accordance with the 
 
1 Applicant stated that she and her brother lived in the property. Her credit report of March 2, 2010, lists 
the second mortgage debt. (Item 3 at 13; Item 5.) 
 
2 In her response to the FORM, Applicant stated that she had “cashed out” her 401k account, and she 
provided a document showing that on June 26, 2008, she received a net lump sum distribution of 
$11,402.46 from an investment company. She stated that she used $8,500 of that amount to repay her 
father, who had lent her $12,000 to pay her investment property mortgage debt. She used the remaining 
lump sum distribution to pay other debts. (Response to FORM, Ex. A, Ex. C, Ex. E at 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
plan. The $50 payments were made in August, September, October, and November of 
2010.  In her response to the FORM, Applicant stated that she had made a settlement 
payment to the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. in July 2009, but had been unable to 
make subsequent payments because she elected to pay other debts instead. She 
stated that she intended to resume payments to the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. in 
January 2011. She provided no evidence of a payment plan or previous payments to 
the creditor. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 5; Item 6; Response to FORM, Ex. A.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement. She reported a monthly net income of approximately $2,9233 and monthly 
living expenses of $2,157. Her monthly living expenses are as follows: rent, $1,185; 
groceries, $130; clothing, $50; utilities, $100; and car expenses, $692. She listed 
monthly debt payments totaling $530. Applicant’s net monthly remainder is $291.4 
Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. 
(Item 3 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband, from whom she is separated, is a citizen of Pakistan and a 
member of the Ahmadi Muslim sect, which has been persecuted in Pakistan. Applicant 
has daily contact with her husband regarding the care of their two children. Applicant’s 
father, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen, has been an employee of the Pakistani 
government in the United States for at least 28 years. Applicant denies that her father is 
a dual citizen of Pakistan, and it is not clear from the record that he holds or exercises 
dual citizenship with Pakistan. (Item 3 at 13; Response to FORM, Ex. E.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother is deceased and is buried in Pakistan. Applicant’s stepmother 
and mother-in-law are Pakistani citizens and reside in the United States. Applicant has 
an uncle, a Pakistani citizen, who was residing in Pakistan in 2007, when Applicant and 
her son traveled to Pakistan and visited him there. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
reported that she had recently learned that her uncle had moved to Canada and was 
pursuing Canadian citizenship. (Item 3 at 14; Item 4; Response to FORM, Ex. E.) 
 
 Applicant asserts that she is estranged from her father and her stepmother. She 
has contact and communication with them about once a month. Applicant’s husband 
and mother-in-law were granted asylum in the United States based on their Ahmadi 
Muslim religious beliefs. Applicant’s mother-in-law suffered a stroke in 2003. She has 
been bedridden since that time and unable to take part in normal family life. Applicant 
sees her mother-in-law about once a month, and because of the mother-in-law’s 
physical disabilities, she has limited communication with her.  (Response to SOR, Ex. E, 
1-5.)     
 
 
3 Applicant reported that she also had earned $55.16 in overtime pay between January 1, 2010, and 
February 22, 2010. (Item 3 at 4-5.) 
 
4 Applicant’s overtime pay is calculated as a part of her net monthly remainder. (Item 3 at 4.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 I take administrative notice of facts about Pakistan. The facts in the following 
summary were provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and to me. The facts were 
derived from official U.S. Government documents provided as attachments to the 
FORM and are identified in the record as H.E. A5: 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary republic in South Asia with a population of 
over 170 million people. Pakistan is a low-income country, with a 
population that is 97% Muslim. Pakistan has extreme poverty and is 
underdeveloped. Its economy remains vulnerable to internal security 
concerns. Pakistan has a coalition government led by Prime Minister 
Yousef Gilani and president and head of state Asif Ali Zardari, widower of 
assassinated Pakistan People’s Party leader Benazir Bhutto. 
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the U.S. in 
counterterrorism efforts and made a commitment to eliminate terrorist 
camps on its territory. Despite these efforts, members of the Taliban are 
known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of 
Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Kpk) (formerly known as the 
Northwest  Frontier Province (NWFP)), and in the Balochistan Province, 
which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leader of the Taliban, Mullah 
Omar, is operating openly in Pakistan. The Pakistani Taliban (Tehrik-i-
Taliban “TTP”), al-Qa’ida extremists, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani 
militants have re-exerted their hold over areas in the FATA and NWFP, 
and the Pakistani Taliban also used the FATA to plan attacks against 
civilian and military targets across Pakistan. Al-Qa’ida leadership in 
Pakistan supported militants in conducting attacks in Afghanistan and 
provided funding, training, and personnel to facilitate terrorist and 
insurgent operations. 
 
In addition to the Taliban, the FATA in Pakistan continues to be a vital 
sanctuary to al-Qa’ida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based 
extremist groups. Al-Qa’ida and other Afghan extremist groups exploit that 
operating environment to plan operations, direct propaganda, recruit and 
train operatives, and raise funds with relative impunity. 
 
 
5 The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary quoted in 
this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Pakistan, July 21, 2010 (16 pages); U.S. 
Department of State, Country Specific Information: Pakistan, July 13, 2010 (10 pages); U.S. Department 
of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Pakistan, March 11, 2010 (41 pages); Annual Threat Assessment of 
the U.S. Intelligence Community for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Director of National 
Intelligence, February 2, 2010 (47 pages); Verbatim Interview: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
Admiral Mike Mullen, National Public Radio, March 27, 2009, as found at 
http://www.jcs.mil/speech.aspx?id=1148; U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, 
Chapter 5 – Terrorist Safe Havens and Tactics and Tools for Disrupting or Eliminating Safe Havens, 
August 5, 2010 (15 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, Chapter 2 – 
Country Reports South and Central Asia Overview, August 5, 2010 (9 pages); and U.S. Department of 
State, Travel Warning Pakistan, July 22, 2010 (4 pages). Footnotes in the quoted text were omitted. 
 
6 
 
 
Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts, but its record 
with dealing with militants has been mixed. Pakistan has demonstrated 
determination and persistence in combating militants it perceives to be 
dangerous to Pakistan’s interests, particularly those involved in attacks in 
settled areas, but it maintains its historical support to the Taliban, has not 
consistently pursued militants focused on Afghanistan, and still considers 
militant groups to be important to its efforts to counter India’s military and 
economic advantages. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined terrorist safe havens as 
ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed areas of a country and non-
physical areas where terrorist groups that constitute a threat to U.S. 
national security interests are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
communicate, recruit, train, and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both. The U.S. 
Department of State has concluded that, despite increased efforts by 
Pakistani security forces, al-Qa’ida terrorists, Afghan militants, foreign 
insurgents, and Pakistani militants continue to find safe haven in portions 
of Pakistan’s FATA, NWFP, and Baluchistan, and have operated in those 
areas to organize, train, and plan attacks against the United States and its 
allies in Afghanistan, India, and Europe. 
 
The Department of State warns U.S, citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of the threat of terrorist activity, specifically the presence 
of al-Qa’ida, Taliban elements, and indigenous militant sectarian groups 
that pose a danger to American citizens. In the last three months of 2009, 
Pakistan-based extremists and al-Qa’ida conducted at least 40 suicide 
terrorist attacks in major cities in Pakistan, killing about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel. Terrorists and their sympathizers 
have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets where 
Americans are known to congregate or visit. Suicide bombings and 
attacks occur throughout Pakistan on a regular basis. Also, since 2007, 
several American citizens throughout Pakistan have been kidnapped. 
 
The human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Major problems 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances. Additional 
problems include poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, widespread 
government corruption, rape, honor crimes, and widespread trafficking in 
persons. The military operations in the FATA and NWFP resulted in the 
deaths of approximately 1,150 civilians, and militant attacks in the FATA 
and NWFP killed 825 more civilians. The Pakistani government also 
maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitored politicians, 
political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicated that authorities routinely 
used wiretaps and intercepted and opened mail without the requisite court 
approval, as well as monitoring mobile phones and electronic messages. 
 
7 
 
 
In addition to al-Qa’ida, the Taliban, and other insurgents and militants, 
foreign terrorist organization Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT) also operates out of 
Pakistan. The LT is the prime suspect for the November 2008 Mumbai 
attacks and is one of the largest and most proficient of the traditionally 
Kashmiri-focused militant groups. 
 
 Applicant’s exhibits, identified in the record as H.E. 1 through H.E. 16. specify 
persecutions of individuals of the Ahmadi sect in Pakistan. I also take administrative 
notice of the following facts, provided by Applicant, which appear in an official U.S. 
Government document that she provided: 
 
Ahmadis, who number three-four million in Pakistan, are prevented by law 
from engaging in the full practice of their faith. The Constitution of 
Pakistan declares members of the Ahmadi religious community to be 
“non-Muslims,” despite their insistence to the contrary. Barred by law from 
“posing” as Muslims, Ahmadis may not call their places of worship 
“mosques,” worship in non-Ahmadi mosques or public prayer rooms which 
are otherwise open to all Muslims, perform the Muslim call to prayer, use 
the traditional Islamic greeting in public, publically quote from the Koran, 
or display the basic affirmation of the Muslim faith. It is also illegal for 
Ahmadis to preach in public, to seek converts, or to produce, publish, and 
disseminate their religious materials. Ahmadis have been arrested and 
imprisoned for terms of up to three years for all of the above acts, and 
they are reportedly subject to ill treatment from prison authorities and 
fellow prisoners. Because they are required to register to vote as non-
Muslims, a policy that was reaffirmed by Pakistani government officials in 
February 2004, Ahmadis who refuse to disavow their claim to being 
Muslim are effectively disenfranchised. 
 
Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, 
May 2005, 129-130, identified in the record as H.E. 1. 
 
                     Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
8 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                            Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline identifies conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG 
& 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. The record evidence establishes that Applicant accumulated 
substantial delinquent debt and did not pay her creditors. Applicant bears the burden of 
persuasion to establish either that she is not responsible for the debts or that matters in 
mitigation apply. 
 
Several mitigating conditions could apply to Applicant’s case. If the financially 
delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might apply. If 
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
 Applicant admitted responsibility for two consumer debts that totaled 
approximately $4,407. In her response to the FORM, she provided documentation to 
corroborate her assertion that she had negotiated a payment plan with the creditor 
identified in SOR ¶ 1.a. for satisfaction of a $3,874 delinquent debt and had made four 
consecutive monthly payments under the payment plan. Because she provided 
documentation to establish that she had made a consistent good faith effort to satisfy a 
delinquent debt, I conclude SOR ¶ 1.a. for Applicant. 
 
10 
 
 
 However, Applicant failed to provide documentation to establish that she had 
negotiated a payment plan with the second creditor or had made consistent payments 
on a consumer debt of $591. In her response to the FORM, she acknowledged that she 
had not paid the delinquent debt because she had elected to pay other debts instead. 
She stated she would pay the $591 delinquent debt at some unspecified time in the 
future. 
  
Additionally, Applicant acknowledged that she was past due in payments on a 
second mortgage of $119,000 and owed the creditor approximately $35,763. She stated 
she would pay the creditor in the future. She asserted that her inability to pay her 
mortgage and the subsequent foreclosure action on the property was the result of a 
downturn in the housing market and due to circumstances beyond her control. However, 
Applicant provided no documentation to corroborate her assertion, and she failed to 
establish that she acted reasonably under the circumstances. The record is silent 
regarding her income, assets, and financial stability at the time she acquired the 
investment property. Similarly, she provided no documentation showing her monthly 
mortgage payments and the percentage of her net income that the mortgage payments 
represented. It is also not clear whether she paid the entire mortgage herself or shared 
that expense with her brother or other siblings. While she stated that she had taken all 
steps that she could have taken to resolve her real estate debt, she provided no 
documentation to corroborate her statement.  While she stated that she had contacted 
the mortgage company to seek a loan modification, she provided no correspondence to 
or from the creditor to corroborate contacts with the creditor. 
 
Applicant expressed her intent to pay two of her three delinquent debts in the 
future. However, in determining an individual's security worthiness, the Government 
cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her outstanding 
debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999). 
 
 The record does not support a conclusion that Applicant has received financial 
counseling, and it is not clear from the record that Applicant has a coherent and 
consistent plan to avoid financial delinquency in the future. I conclude that while AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) apply in part in mitigation to the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a., AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(b), and 20(e) do not apply to the facts of this case. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
 
11 
 
 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
Soon after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its 
alliance with the U.S. in counterterrorism efforts and made a commitment to eliminate 
terrorist camps on its territory. However, despite these efforts, members of the Taliban 
are known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Kpk) (formerly known as the Northwest Frontier Province 
(NWFP)), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. Overall, 
Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts, but its record with dealing with 
terrorists and militants has been mixed. Pakistan has demonstrated determination and 
persistence in combating militants it perceives to be dangerous to Pakistan’s interests, 
but many terrorist groups, including al-Qa’ida and other transnational terrorists and 
insurgents appear to be operating freely in parts of Pakistan. 
 
 Terrorist groups operating in Pakistan have targeted U.S. citizens. The U.S. 
Department of State has warned U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to Pakistan. In 
2007, Applicant, a U.S. citizen, traveled with her young son to Pakistan, thereby 
exposing herself and her child to retaliation and danger. While in Pakistan, Applicant 
stayed with her uncle, a citizen and resident of Pakistan. Applicant claims the uncle now  
lives in Canada and has applied for Canadian citizenship. 
 
 Applicant’s father, a naturalized U.S. citizen, is an employee of the Pakistani 
government in the United States. The record did not establish that he is a dual citizen of 
Pakistan, and I therefore conclude allegation 2.b. for Applicant. Applicant, who provided 
information about her uncle’s Pakistani citizenship and residency, stated in her Answer 
to the SOR that she had learned that her uncle moved to Canada and applied for 
Canadian citizenship. Applicant’s assertion is credible, and I also conclude allegation 
2.d. for Applicant. I also conclude allegation 2.f. for Applicant, since travel to Pakistan is 
not, per se, a disqualifying condition under Guideline B, and the alleged travel to 
Pakistan was not recent.  
 
Applicant’s stepmother is a citizen of Pakistan who resides in the United States 
with Applicant’s father. While Applicant claims she is estranged from her father, she 
sees him and her stepmother about once a month. Applicant has sought her father’s 
support and financial assistance in the past, and she has a long-standing relationship 
with him. Applicant also asserts that she is estranged from her husband, who is a citizen 
of Pakistan and a member of a Muslim sect that has a history of persecution in 
Pakistan. Despite the separation, she has daily contact with her husband. Her 
husband’s mother, a stroke victim and bedridden for several years, is also a citizen of 
Pakistan and resides in the United States.  
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts in this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
12 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.”  
 
Applicant’s father, while a naturalized U.S. citizen, is an employee of the 
Pakistani government and has ongoing contacts with Pakistani government officials. 
Applicant’s husband, from whom she is estranged but with whom she has daily contact, 
is a citizen of Pakistan. Her stepmother and mother-in-law are also citizens of Pakistan. 
Applicant’s strained relationships with her father, husband, and stepmother do not 
lessen or diminish the possibility that her contacts with them could create a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Additionally, if Applicant were entrusted with sensitive or classified information, her 
relationship with her father, an employee of the Pakistani government, could create a 
potential conflict of interest between her obligation to protect sensitive information and 
her desire to help her father or the Pakistani government.    
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
 
 Applicant’s contacts and relationships with her father, husband, stepmother, and 
mother-in-law are neither casual nor infrequent, but are based on long-standing family 
ties and obligations. Pakistan, while allied with the United States in fighting terrorism, 
has not fully contained or defeated the Taliban and al-Qa’ida terrorists within its borders. 
These and other insurgents seek to harm U.S. citizens and U.S. security interests. 
Applicant’s contacts with family members who are Pakistani citizens or who have strong 
ties with the Pakistani government increase the likelihood that she could be subject to a 
conflict of interest or placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual or government and the interests of the United States. Applicant failed 
to demonstrate that her loyalty to her family members is minimal or that she has such 
deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in the United States that she could 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. These facts 
raise ongoing security concerns which Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate. I therefore 
 
13 
 
 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) do not fully apply in mitigation to Applicant’s 
case. 
  
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested she was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided very little 
documentation to establish mitigation in her case. While she receives credit for 
providing documentation showing that she had an active payment plan in place for the 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a., she failed to provide evidence that might have mitigated 
security concerns relating to her remaining financial delinquencies and to her contacts 
with her father, an employee of the Pakistani government, and her husband, mother-in-
law, and stepmother, all of whom are citizens of Pakistan.  
  
A careful review of Applicant’s family relationships raises security concerns about 
her vulnerability to conflict of interest, foreign exploitation, inducement, and coercion. At 
the present time, Pakistan remains dangerous, volatile, and subject to unpredictable 
terrorist attacks. Terrorist groups operating in Pakistan target U.S. citizens and U.S. 
security interests.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
 
14 
 
 
conclude that she failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations and foreign influence adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                       For Applicant 
 
                      Subparagraphs 1.b. -1.c.:              Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2: Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.f.:   For Applicant 
 
                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
