KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any Guideline and an
applicant’s security eligibility.  A clearance adjudication may be based on circumstances
unrelated to conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s relatives.  
CASE NO: 09-07565.a1
DATE: 07/12/2012
DATE: July 12, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07565
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  DOHA issued an undated statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 27, 2012, after
the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings
under Guideline F are not at issue in this appeal.  In addition, at the hearing and prior to the taking
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(d): “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status,
if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion[.]”  
2
of evidence, the Government moved to withdraw the sole allegation addressed under Guideline E.
The Judge granted this motion.  Decision at 2.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s
decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a native-born U.S.
citizen.  He works for a Government contractor.  He served in the U.S. military from 1982 until
1990.  
Applicant’s wife was born and raised in China.  She came to the U.S. in the early 1990s and
earned two master’s degrees.  She did some work toward a Ph.D., but she did not take the degree.
She became a U.S. citizen in the mid-2000s.  She has visited China only once since coming to the
U.S. in the early 1990s, and she used a U.S. passport when she did so.
Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of China.  They visited the U.S. once,
in the late 1990s.  Applicant’s wife has two siblings, two siblings-in-law, and an uncle who are
citizens and residents of China.  The uncle works for a provincial government.  Applicant’s wife
speaks with her parents by telephone once a week.  She also speaks with her parents and sisters on
holidays, and she communicates with her sisters by e-mail.  
China is the most aggressive country conducting espionage against the U.S.  It focuses its
attention on acquiring information and technology useful to the development of its military capacity
and its economy.  There are several agencies of the Chinese government engaged in efforts to obtain
U.S. technology.  Moreover, China rewards the actions of private citizens who obtain technology
for it, and officials of the Chinese government offer financial incentives to U.S. Government
officials to encourage them to provide classified information.  China targets not only U.S. citizens
of Chinese background, but others as well.  China has a poor human rights record, engaging in
arbitrary arrest and detention, searches without warrants, and monitoring of private communications,
including telephone conversations, text messaging, and e-mail traffic.  
In the Analysis, the Judge entered favorable formal findings regarding the Guideline F
allegations.  However, she concluded that Applicant’s family connections with China raised security
concerns.  She stated that Applicant had done nothing to rebut the presumption that a person has ties
of affection and obligation to the family members of his or her spouse, and that Applicant’s wife’s
relations with her Chinese family create a “heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  Decision at 8.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(a).  She
concluded that these family relations could pose a risk of a conflict of interest for Applicant between
his “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and [his] desire to help” his in-laws.
Decision at 9.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(b).  She also concluded that Applicant’s marital
circumstances themselves raised a security concern.1
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(a): “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual . . . and the interests of the
U.S.”
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(c): “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation[.]”
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
3
In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge concluded that his wife’s frequent
contact with her parents and siblings in China precluded full application of Foreign Influence
Mitigating Conditions (FIMC) 8(a)2 and 8(c).3  She stated that a country with China’s poor human
rights record makes it more likely that China might attempt to coerce Applicant through his in-laws,
placing him in a conflict of interest between their interests and his obligation to protect classified
information.  She concluded that Applicant had failed to show that his circumstances met the criteria
of FIMC 8(b).4  She therefore concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the security concerns
arising from his foreign in-laws.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that his circumstances raised security
concerns under Guideline B.  He states that there was no evidence in the record to show that he had
compromised classified or sensitive information.  We construe this to be an argument that there is
no nexus between his circumstances and the Guideline B security concern.
As a general matter, the Government is not required to provide direct evidence of a nexus
between an applicant’s circumstances and the pertinent security concern.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011).  The Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any Guideline and an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 07-05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 15, 2008).  We note the Judge’s findings, as follows: (1)
Applicant is married to a spouse born in China; (2) Applicant’s wife’s parents and siblings live in
China and are residents of that country; (3) Applicant’s wife speaks with her parents weekly by
telephone; (4) China monitors telecommunications, such a telephone conversations, e-mail traffic,
and text messaging; (5) China is the world’s most avid collector of U.S. technology and related
information.  We also note the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had done nothing to rebut the
presumption that he has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of his
spouse.  (See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3, supra.)  As the Supreme Court stated in
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-529 (1988), a clearance adjudication may be
based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to conduct, such as the foreign
residence of an applicant’s close relatives. Under the facts of this case, the evidence raises a
reasonable concern that Applicant’s Chinese in-laws could come to the attention of the Chinese
government and become a means through which that government might attempt to coerce Applicant
into turning over classified information.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s circumstances
raised Guideline B security concerns is sustainable. 
4
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Egan, supra, at 528.  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
