1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 10-04934
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On November 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to the above-referenced Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR). The SOR
enumerated security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD)
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.   
In a response dated December 15, 2011, Applicant admitted the three
allegations raised under Guideline F and requested a hearing before a DOHA
administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 15, 2012. The parties
proposed a hearing date of June 6, 2012. A notice setting that date for a video
teleconference hearing was issued on May 23, 2012. The hearing was convened as
scheduled. Applicant testified and offered one document that was accepted into the
record without objection as exhibit (Ex.) A. The Government introduced four documents
which were accepted into the record as Exs 1-4. 
 Tr. 16. To date, Applicant has not received income from these properties. Tr. 22.      1
 Tr. 16-17.      2
 Tr. 17.      3
2
Applicant was given until June 13, 2012, to submit any additional materials. On
June 11, 2012, he timely submitted to Department Counsel a letter and five documents.
The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on June 12, 2012. On June 18,
2012, Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s submissions without objection. They
were accepted into the record as Exs. B-G, and the record was closed. Based on a
review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant met his burden of
mitigating security concerns related to financial considerations. Clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old computer technician research specialist who is
currently unemployed. He has earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science and two
associate degrees. Applicant is a disabled veteran of the U.S. military, having honorably
served in the United States Air Force from 1980 until 2000. He is married and has
raised five children. 
While serving in the Air Force in 1981, Applicant married his first wife. After
having five children, they separated in late 1998 and divorced in June 1999. The
divorce decree stipulated that they would split their two properties, thus enabling them
to continue leasing the homes and sharing both the resultant costs and incomes. The
couple worked out the terms of their child custody and support on their own. Initially,
their agreement went smoothly. Then, around 2003, Applicant became unemployed for
about a year and a half. Because he could not afford to pay his full monthly child
support of $890 as his period of unemployment continued, his ex-wife discussed
alternative financial arrangements. He agreed to pay her half of his monthly child
support payment in return for her deduction of his remaining child support balance from
his current net income or equity interest in their jointly held properties.  Since they had1
thus far worked out their agreements orally, Applicant did not memorialize this
arrangement in writing. However, the two began executing this arrangement as agreed.
Later, unbeknownst to Applicant, his ex-wife went to the state division of child
services enforcement and claimed that Applicant was not paying her any child support.
He was not given any credit for either his half payments of $445, which were usually
paid in cash, or the offset she acquired on his real estate interest in lieu of full child
support.   In the end, Applicant felt forced to take his ex-wife to court over the matter.2
There, the judge “basically said, ‘Well, child support and division of property are two
different issues.’”  Consequently, he was given neither relief nor credit for his3
diminished holding in their joint property or for his cash child support payments. He was
ultimately found to be in arrears for approximately $48,000, which included alleged
sums predating their divorce and his loss of employment.
 Tr. 24.      4
 Tr. 24.      5
 Tr. 24.      6
 Tr. 18-20, 23; Ex. A (Letter, dated Mar. 13, 2012).      7
 Collection on these accounts is now handled by a law firm with a different name. See Ex. 4 (Credit Report,      8
dated Oct. 5, 2011) and Exs. B, D-G. 
 Tr. 26.      9
 Tr. 26.      10
3
Ultimately, Applicant was able to find sufficient evidence of payments to reduce
the arrearage to about $38,000. He pledged to stop fighting the matter and decided to
pay the full amount ordered. He committed himself to doing what he could to honor his
child support obligation until his children each reached at least 18 years of age.
Between reduced payments and the near-depletion of his 401K account, Applicant
reduced his debt. He became unemployed about three years ago, however, when his
employer expanded its working areas and required all employees to have security
clearances.  He had been previously denied a security clearance “because they said4
they had not received some information from [him], which [he] had sent [but not by
registered mail,] so [he] had no way of proving otherwise.”  Without a clearance, he was5
laid off until he could secure one.  He has since found it difficult to find alternative6
employment in his region, due to heavy competition for electronic technician and
computer technician positions from current military personnel with security clearances.
For a time, he received unemployment compensation. Since that time he has relied on
disability payments from the Veteran’s Administration (VA) and partial payment on a
pension, which is shared with his ex-wife as a consequence of his divorce. Despite
limited income, he has been able to budget sufficient sums to satisfy his total child
support arrearage, including the $8,059 balance noted in the SOR at ¶ 1.a.  A related7
lien was released by his state on March 8, 2012, indicating a zero balance on the child
support account. Today, Applicant’s children are 21 years of age or older. Applicant no
longer financially supports any of his children.
When Applicant and his first wife were divorcing in mid-1999, they had two credit
cards with outstanding balances. They are represented in the SOR at allegations ¶¶
1.b-1.c as judgments for $9,527.67 and $12,466.03 from 2006 and 2005, respectively.8
The amounts reflected represent increases due to the balloon interest rates of the
debts upon default and subsequent litigation resulting in the related liens. Applicant and
his ex-wife had agreed to each pay half of the debt, but that plan was never honored by
his ex-wife.  Applicant has been unable to make payments due to his lack of9
employment and his having made satisfying his child support arrearage a priority.10
However, he has kept his creditor apprised of his financial and employment situation. 
 Ex. E (Settlement Proposal, dated Sep.23, 2011) and Ex. 6 (Response, dated Oct. 19, 2011).      11
 Ex. F (Response, dated Oct. 19, 2011).      12
 Ex. G (Letter, dated Feb. 19, 2012).      13
 Ex. D (Letter, dated Jun. 8, 2012). This increase appears to be the result of an increase in Applicant’s      14
available funds resulting from his  having satisfied his child support arrearage in March 2012 and his
willingness to completely deplete his remaining 401K balance. See Tr. 26-27, 42-43.
 Ex. C (Credit Card Statement, period ending May 19, 2012).       15
 Ex. 4 (Credit Report, dated Oct. 5, 2011).      16
 Neither of the judgments at issue are noted in the credit report under the current collection entity’s law      17
firm’s name or the name noted in the SOR at ¶¶ 1.b-1.c. However, the law firm is listed as having inquired
about Applicant’s credit in April 2010 and September 2011.
 Tr. 31.      18
4
Applicant provided copies of correspondence he sent to the law firm now
representing this debt from 2011 and 2012. For example, on October 19, 2011, before
he received the SOR of November 21, 2011, Applicant responded to an offer to settle
the balance noted as owed.  In his response, Applicant offered to settle the sum for11
approximately 17 percent of the current balance reflected, noting that he was still
unemployed, but eager to work with the creditor to settle the matter.  No response was12
received. On February 19, 2012, Applicant wrote the creditor, inquiring whether a
decision had been made on his October 2011 offer and noting that he had now been
unemployed for over two-and-a-half years.  With no response forthcoming, Applicant13
wrote the creditor a third time on June 8, 2012. In that letter, he reminded the entity that
he had yet to hear an answer regarding his response to its solicitation for an offer
settlement, noted that he was into his third year of unemployment, and increased his
offer to settle to slightly over 25 percent of the purported balance.  To date, he has not14
received any communication from the creditor. 
The judgments noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b-1.c are Applicant’s only debts,
despite his having been unemployed for over three years. He provided evidence that
his other credit card reflects a zero balance.  His credit report reflects a current15
mortgage with only one late payment (30 days) since September 2000. The majority of
the other credit accounts reflected on his credit report are shown as “closed or paid
account/zero balance.”  No delinquent accounts are currently noted.   16 17
As noted, Applicant is currently laid off from work, but is still maintained on the
books by his former employer because the employer “thinks highly of [him] and knows
[he] can do a very good job at what” he does.  Consequently, Applicant’s job is being18
held open for him should he be granted a security clearance. If he returns to work,
 Tr. 31 (“Oh, I could pay $400 on each of them; $800 a month with no problem.” These payments would      19
come from the partial retirement and Veterans Administration disability payments he currently receives, plus
a salary of approximately $52,000 a year he would receive if he is permitted to return to work.)
 Applicant’s retirement distribution is shared with his ex-wife. Tr. 32.      20
 Tr. 35.      21
 Tr. 35-37.      22
 Tr. 37. Applicant’s ex-wife is fighting his pursuit of a formal division of their interests in the properties. He      23
does not expect any progress to occur for three to six months. Tr. 37-38.
 Tr. 39-42.      24
5
Applicant feels he could pay $800 a month “no problem” on the remaining debt.  Also19
as noted, Applicant is living off half of a retirement payment ($784) and a 50 percent
disability payment ($824) from the VA.  Those payments provide sufficient funds to pay20
his monthly $530 mortgage payment, utilities, and any minor charges he acquires. 
Applicant lives simply. He has not received financial counseling. His current wife
is presently unemployed, but draws a monthly disability check for $400, from which she
pays for their groceries and gas. Although the couple has a meager income, they have
not acquired any additional debt. They currently pay their obligations as they are
acquired. Applicant has no extraneous obligations such as car payments. He retains
two small credit cards for emergency use only.  When balances are accrued that21
cannot be paid off immediately, Applicant routinely pays more than the minimum
balance owed to minimize interest.  He hopes to have the division of his marital22
properties from his first marriage resolved soon, but is not sure when that will occur.23
Applicant has been thoroughly consistent in his past statements and testimony
regarding his debts, their acquisition, and his efforts to address them.  He is committed24
to satisfying his old debt. He is convinced he can readily address his debt once he
returns to work.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      25
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      26
 Id.      27
 Id.      28
6
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a25
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  26
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access27
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.28
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
 AG ¶ 18.      29
 Id.      30
7
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  It29
also states that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted30
to three debts amounting to approximately $30,000. This is sufficient to raise Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns. 
The debts at issue are multiple in number. They were acquired during, and in the
wake of, Applicant’s 1999 divorce from his first wife. The debts involve marital credit
cards that were to be shared, but were not, and child support. The credit card balances
became inflated due to interest, fees, and the judicial process leading to the acquisition
of liens; the child support balance became inflated due to his failing to get full credit for
cash payments or property interests he gave his ex-wife under an oral agreement she
failed to honor. Consequently, the balances now reflected are significantly higher than
the debts originally acquired. Applicant has had difficulty honoring these obligations due
to a period of unemployment that occurred a couple of years after his divorce that
lasted approximately a year-and-a-half, and a current period of unemployment that has
lasted over three years. 
Despite Applicant’s significant periods of unemployment, he made tremendous
strides in honoring his early commitment to satisfy his child support arrearage. He
measuredly reduced an initial determination that his arrearage was about $48,000 to
zero. He similarly made an early commitment to satisfy his two remaining judgements,
accounts remaining from marital credit cards. To that end, he showed that he has been
keeping his creditor apprised of his state of unemployment and trying to accept his
creditor’s offer to settle his debt. He began that process before the SOR was issued.
Applicant most recently offered a reasonable settlement of over 25 percent of the
outstanding balance to satisfy the debt, despite his current financial situation. He is
currently awaiting a response from his creditor. Despite his currently meager income,
he has refrained from acquiring any new debt. Given these facts, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) and AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) apply.
However, because he has not received financial counseling, AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications
that the problem is being resolved or is under control) does not apply. 
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavior in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a mature, well-educated, and highly credible professional. His explanations
regarding his finances and personal life have been consistent throughout this process.
He is currently remarried and has helped raise his five children. He honorably served in
the United States military. Applicant and his wife live simply and do not spend money
on extravagances. Despite significant periods of unemployment, his only delinquent
debt at present are the two debts reflected at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.
During Applicant’s divorce from his first wife, it was agreed that their two major
marital credit card balances would be shared. It was also agreed as to how he would
pay her child support. Applicant’s ex-wife reneged on both agreements to Applicant’s
financial detriment. Despite having been unemployed for nearly half of the past decade,
he was able to set forth a workable plan to satisfy his debts. He satisfied an attributed
child support arrearage of about $48,000 while continuing to pay child support for his
children past their 18  birthdays and he has tried to work with his remaining creditor. th
Since before the SOR was issued, Applicant has kept his remaining creditor
apprised of his financial situation and unemployment status. He accepted an invitation
to settle his balances three times, most recently offering to completely deplete the
remainder of his 401K in order to offer payment of over 25 percent of the balance. To
date, however, he has not received a response to the offer his creditor solicited from
him. Regardless, he has continued to contact it to check on the status of his settlement
offers and to apprise it of his situation.
Applicant is as ready and willing to return to work as his employer is to have him
return full-time. Should he be able to return to work, he will receive a salary in excess of
$50,000 to complement his monthly $1,608 payments from a pension and VA disability
payments. With such combined income, Applicant clearly will have the ability to make
regular and significant payments on his remaining debt balance. He demonstrated his
commendable ability to honor his child support-related debt in the past, and he has
credibly expressed similar commitment to honoring this balance when he has the
available income. With his demonstrated efforts to satisfy this remaining debt predating
the issuance of the SOR, his expressed commitment carries more weight than simple
promises. Further, despite the past three years of unemployment and a limited income,
Applicant has demonstrated his ability to live within his means and not acquire
additional debt. More importantly for this process, Applicant has set forth a workable
9
plan to satisfy or resolve his debt which he has thus far implemented successfully. In
light of his present financial and employment circumstances, the responsibility
evidenced by his progress in satisfying his child support arrearage, and his honest
efforts to work with his remaining creditor, I find that financial considerations security
concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
