 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07915 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 10, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who is indebted to a 
bank for a delinquent mortgage in the approximately amount of $225,096. Applicant 
failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concern. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an undated 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2012. DOHA 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on May 7, 2012, scheduling the hearing for May 24, 2012. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 
through GE 8 and two documents for administrative notice marked GE 9 and GE 10, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through J. The record was left open for Applicant to 
submit additional exhibits and on June 20, 2012, Applicant presented two emails with 
attachments that I have marked AE K through AE T. Department Counsel had no 
objections to Applicant’s post-hearing documents and they were admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 1, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
the defense industry since 1990. He is married and has a 17-year-old daughter, a 15-
year-old son, and cares for his 9-year-old nephew. 
 
Applicant’s credit reports from June 5, 2010; September 11, 2011; and May 11, 
2012; and his answers to interrogatories, show that Applicant is indebted on a mortgage 
loan in the approximate amount of $225,096 as alleged on the SOR. This debt remains 
unpaid. (GEs 1-8.)  
 
In May-June 2005, Applicant and his wife invested in a vacant parcel of land. 
Their friend, a mortgage broker, worked with a developer to sell subdivided plots that 
they intended to develop into upscale housing. The developer needed capital for 
building the infrastructure of the housing project. Through his mortgage-broker friend, 
Applicant entered into a verbal agreement with the developer to purchase a parcel in 
the subdivided project. The developer agreed to reimburse Applicant for his monthly 
mortgage payments for one year. After the first year, Applicant agreed to sell the 
property back to the developer for the purchase price plus $100,000 in profit. (AE K; AE 
O; Tr. 36-42.) 
 
On June 8, 2005, Applicant purchased the parcel for $321,250. He put $85,000 
down, which he obtained by taking a second mortgage on his residence, and paid 
$85,557.13 in fees. The remaining amount of the purchase price, $236,250, was 
financed through a mortgage held by a bank. Monthly mortgage payments were 
$1,513.19. Payments were due on the 5th of each month, until the maturity date of June 
5, 2010, at which time a balloon payment of $222,946.57 became due. (AE S; Tr. 36-
42.) 
 
Applicant made the mortgage payments from July 2005 through May 2006. The 
developer reimbursed Applicant for those mortgage payments on May 17, 2006. 
Applicant received a 1099-INT showing interest income from the developer for that 
reimbursement. From May 24, 2006, through January 26, 2009, the developer made 
monthly mortgage payments to Applicant. Applicant documented the payments with 
copies of the checks from the developer. The developer attempted to acquire the 
appropriate permits to add infrastructure on the land, but permission was not granted by 
the city. Eventually, the developer stopped making the payments to Applicant. Applicant 
 
3 
 
and his wife made payments on the parcel from January 27, 2009, through June 10, 
2009. They stopped making payments on this mortgage at that time. Applicant did not 
attempt to sell the plot because it had declined in value and improvements could not be 
built upon it. (AE N; AE Q; AE S; Tr. 43-51.) 
 
On August 13, 2009, Applicant received a notice of default from the bank. He 
consulted an attorney and was advised to let the bank foreclose on the plot. On April 16, 
2012, the bank filed a complaint against Applicant, alleging three causes of action for 
“Breach of Written Contract, Judicial Foreclosure on Real Property, and Common 
Counts-Money Lent.” Applicant hired an attorney to represent him in the litigation. The 
dispute is pending. (AE S; AE M; AE R; AE S; AE T; Tr. 44-51.) 
 
 In May 2010, the down-turn in the economy led to Applicant’s wife’s 
unemployment. They removed their children from private school and placed them in 
public school. His wife was fortunate and found another job. Applicant testified that he 
has approximately $270,000 worth of equity in his residence. He presented 
documentation that shows he has a net monthly remainder of $1,709, after his 
expenses are met. He has four savings accounts totaling $4,411.89 and a checking 
account with a balance of $6,414.99. His pay statement shows that he has over 
$16,500 in 401K savings. Applicant recently purchased a new vehicle for his daughter 
to use for college. With the exception of the mortgage he defaulted upon, he pays his 
bills on time. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 8; AE A; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE K; Tr. 61-68.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by his direct-line manager, former co-workers, and 
friends. Applicant was said to have high integrity and is described as a conscientious, 
hard-working individual. He performs well at work and has the respect of his past and 
present colleagues. (AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns for Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
 
5 
 
 Since June 10, 2009, Applicant has been unwilling to pay his mortgage on his 
plot of land. When the developer failed to uphold his verbal agreement, Applicant paid 
the mortgage for only four-to-five months before he chose to default on his contract with 
the bank. The Government established a prima facie case for disqualification under 
Guideline F. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are recent and on-going. His debt remains 
unsatisfied and pending in litigation, despite having equity in his home, funds available 
in his savings and 401K, and $1,709 left monthly after his expenses are met. Applicant 
made an investment decision, based upon misplaced trust in his friend. When the 
developer failed to uphold his end of the verbal bargain after the first year, Applicant 
remained involved in the project. He did not try to sell the plot. Instead, he continued to 
take the money from the developer. When the developer failed to remit the monthly 
mortgage payment, Applicant decided that he would stop payments to the bank after 
only four-to-five additional monthly payments.  
Applicant failed to demonstrate that his family took any responsible cost cutting 
measures before defaulting on the mortgage. It was only after Applicant’s wife lost her 
job that they took measures to reduce their expenses. His children remained in private 
school until Applicant’s wife lost her job. Further, despite their growing debt on the plot 
mortgage, his family used surplus funds to purchase a new vehicle for their daughter. 
Applicant has not demonstrated that he acted in good faith or that he demonstrated 
 
6 
 
good judgment. The debt is currently in litigation and unresolved. None of the mitigating 
conditions apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his direct-line manager, former co-workers, and 
friends. He performs well at his job. However, he has at least $225,096 worth of debt 
that he has failed to adequately address. Applicant is currently involved in litigation over 
this debt. At this point, Applicant has not shown financial prudence or demonstrated that 
he uses sound judgment. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
