 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08192  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 18, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 14, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 22, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on June 29, 2011, scheduling the hearing for July 17, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 25, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since April 2010. He served in the U.S. military from 1998 until he 
was honorably discharged in 2008. He held a security clearance in the military, but it 
lapsed when he was discharged. He attended college for a period but did not obtain a 
degree. He married in 2000 and divorced in 2006. He married his current wife in 2006. 
He has three children, ages 11, 5, and 4.1 
  
 Applicant has had financial issues for a number of years. He and his first wife 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005, and their debts were discharged the same year. The 
bankruptcy petition listed $24,686 in secured claims and $23,445 in unsecured claims. 
He stated that his first wife mismanaged their finances while he was deployed. He and 
his first wife separated in 2004. The added costs of supporting two households also 
contributed to their financial problems.2  
 
 Applicant was unemployed for about a year after his discharge from the military. 
When he did find work, the jobs did not pay well. He was unable to pay all his bills, and 
three cars were repossessed.3 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s bankruptcy and 13 delinquent debts, with balances 
totaling about $35,000. The debts range from $74 to $15,000. Applicant admitted owing 
all the debts. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his 2005 bankruptcy. 
He has not received additional financial counseling, but he reads financial advice on the 
Internet. He made some payments toward his delinquent debts, and he paid several 
debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He has not made any payments since February 
2012, when he settled a debt that was not alleged in the SOR for $100. He could not 
explain why he did not pay some of the smaller debts in the SOR. Applicant pays $500 
per month in child support, and his wife is a stay-at-home mother. He earns enough to 
pay his child support and his current obligations, but he is unable to pay anything 
towards his delinquent debts. He consulted an attorney about filing a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, but he cannot afford the attorney’s fees. He is saving for the attorney’s 
retainer and plans to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy when he has enough to pay the 
lawyer.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15, 19, 22-24; GE 1, AE D. 
 
2 Tr. at 15; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 15, 22, 25-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 15-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A-C. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant received numerous awards and accolades during his military career. 
He served at least one deployment to Iraq. He volunteers in his community. Letters on 
his behalf attest to his excellent job performance, dedication, responsibility, 
trustworthiness, and honesty.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 23; AE A-F. 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
5 
 
  Applicant’s first wife mismanaged their finances while he was deployed. They 
separated in 2004. The added costs of supporting two households also contributed to 
their financial problems. After his 2008 discharge from the military, he had periods of 
unemployment and underemployment before he obtained his current job in April 2010. 
The above events qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
  Applicant’s debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2005. His finances did not 
remain stable after the bankruptcy. He had three cars repossessed, and he could not 
explain why he did not pay some of the smaller debts in the SOR.  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted completely responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts.6 His finances are not 
yet under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second 
section is not. I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
6 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, particularly his service in a 
war zone, and his favorable character evidence. I believe Applicant is sincere in his 
desire to rectify his financial problems. However, AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” At this time, Applicant has not dispelled the 
doubts raised by his financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
