                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                     )                                                           
          -----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  10-05726           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign preference and foreign
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case
On January 31, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended, Department of defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 14, 2011, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on June 19, 2012, and was scheduled for hearing on
June 25, 2012. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-2). Applicant relied on two witnesses (including
herself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B). The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 5, 2012. 
Besides its four exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of six
documents pertaining to the country of Jordan: Background Note: Jordan, U.S.
Department of State (March 2010); Country Specific Information: Jordan, U.S.
Department of State (August 2010); Human Rights Report: Jordan, U.S. Department of
State (March 2010); Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, Chapter 2-Country Reports,
Middle East and North African Overview (August 2010); Statement for the Record from
the Counterintelligence Executive, Before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on
Immigration, Border Security and Claims (September 2005); Annual Threat Assessment
of Intelligence Community, Director of National Intelligence (February 2008).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or
government reports that are well known.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006). For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with
respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in
Jordan. Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent
with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly (a) has family members who are citizens
and residents of Jordan: two brothers and three sisters, and (b) traveled to Jordan in
2000 and 2003.  Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly applied for and was issued a
Jordanian passport in 2000, even though she became a naturalized U.S. citizen in
about 1993. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations.  She explained that all of her sisters and their spouses and children reside
in the United States and hold green cards.  She claimed she traveled to Jordan in 2000
to attend her youngest brother’s wedding (her first visit to see her family in 13 years)
and traveled to Jordan in 2003 with her husband for her vacations reasons. She claimed
that she also traveled to Jordan in October 2009, in May 2010, and again in December
2010 for vacations with the full approval of her command while deployed in Iraq.
Applicant claimed she renewed her Jordanian passport to preserve her eligibility
to inherit her parents’ property (family home and inherited land). She explained that her
parents have since become U.S. citizens, along with her two brothers, thereby mooting
any inheritance interests she might have.  And she claimed her Jordanian passport
expired in 2005 and has not been renewed.
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old translator for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1985 and became a naturalized U.S.
citizen in October 2003. (GE 2; Tr. 62) She married in August 1985 and has three
children from her marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 46-47) Her husband is a naturalized U.S. citizen
and has an expired Jordanian passport. (Tr. 49) Applicant’s children were all born in the
United States. (Tr. 47-48) Only her daughter has a Jordanian passport. (Tr. 47)
However, when she travels she always uses her U.S. passport. (Tr. 48)
Applicant became a translator in 2008.  The compensation she received for her
work helped her send her daughter to college. (Tr. 50) Since becoming a U.S. citizen,
she retains her loyalties only for the United States. She makes these assurances with
the acknowledgment that some Jordanians might see her as a traitor. While an
interpreter for the United States on Iraq deployments, her loyalty, honesty, and
dedication have never been questioned by military personnel she embedded with on her
deployments. (Tr. 52-53)
Applicant applied for a Jordanian passport in May 2000 to preserve her
inheritance eligibility rights to her grandfather’s property in Jordan. (GE 2) Her parents
immigrated to the United States in 1994 and have since become U.S. citizens. (Tr. 64)
Her grandparents passed away before she was born, and their property interests were
held in her father’s name for many years. (Tr. 66) This property has since been divided
between her father and his brother, and is no longer potentially available to Applicant
under Jordan’s inheritance laws. She cannot supply any value estimates of the property.
(Tr. 66-67)
Applicant has no other property interests in Jordan and has not received any
financial benefits from Jordan or any other country since she became a U.S. citizen. (Tr.
58-59) By contrast, she and her husband have considerable property interests in the
United States. (Tr. 59-61) 
In 2000, Applicant  traveled to Jordan using her Jordanian passport and in 2003
using her U.S. passport. While in Jordan, in 2000 she renewed her Jordanian passport.
She documents renouncing her Jordanian citizenship in June 2012 and surrendering
her two Jordanian passports: one that expired in October 1989 and the other that
expired in May 2005. (AE A) Since 2003, Applicant has traveled twice to Jordan for
vacation: once in October 2009, once in May 2010, and once in December 2010. On
each trip she used her U.S. passport. (GE 2)
4
Applicant has three sisters and two brothers who were born in Jordan and remain
citizens of Jordan.  Each of them have since immigrated to the United States and reside
here.  They have green cards that entitle them to work in the United States, and they
have applied for U.S. citizenship. (GE 2; Tr. 54)
Country information on Jordan 
Jordan occupies a small land area in the Middle East that once was part of the
historical fertile crescent region. See Background Note: Jordan, supra, at 2. Jordan has
a constitutional monarchy based on its constitution promulgated in January 1952.  Id., at
3.  It is a small country with limited natural resources, especially its water supplies. Its
economy is a developing one that relies heavily on imported oil supplies. See
Administrative Notice: Jordan, at 1-2. Jordan is ruled by King Abdullah II, and has a
council of ministers who are selected by the King. See Background Note: Jordan, supra,
at 1-4. Jordan also has a partially elected bicameral national assembly. Id., at 3-4.  
From 1949 to 1967, Jordan administered a territory known as the West Bank.
See Background Note: Jordan, supra, at 2.  Since the 1967 war, when Israel assumed
control of the territory, the United States has considered the West Bank to be territory
occupied by Israel.  Id., at 2.  The United States continues to believe that the final status
of the West Bank can be determined only through negotiations among the concerned
parties based on United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338.  Id. 
For over 60 years, Jordan has maintained a close alliance relationship with the
United States. However, it has had something of a turbulent history since it signed a
mutual defense pact in May 1967 with Egypt.  Background Note: Jordan, supra, at 1-4.  
Despite some noticeable improvements in certain areas, Jordan’s human rights
record continues to be problematic. See 2008 Human Rights Report: Jordan, supra, at
1-2. Problems include torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, overcrowded
prisons with poor sanitary conditions, denial of due process, infringement on citizen’s
privacy rights, political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press,
assembly, association, and movement. Id.  The UN reports widespread use of torture by
police and security forces in the country, and there has been some substantiation of
torture reports. See 2008 Human Rights Report: Jordan, supra, at 2. 
Jordanian law allows any male relative to prevent a woman or child from leaving
Jordan, even if they are U.S. citizens.  See Country Specific Information: Jordan, supra,
at 3. Jordanian law applies to dual Jordanian-U.S. citizens, and subjects dual citizens to
mandatory military service obligations for males under the age of 37.  Id. Jordan treats
dual citizens as Jordanian citizens and is known not to inform the U.S. embassy of dual
Jordanian-American citizen problems while in Jordan.
Counterterrorism measures notwithstanding, the threat of terrorism remains high
in Jordan. Terrorists in Jordan often do not distinguish between U.S. Government
personnel and private citizens and specifically target areas known to be frequented by
5
Westerners. See Country Specific Information: Jordan, supra, at 2. To be sure,
Jordanian security forces are of record in disrupting numerous terrorist plots against
U.S. interests in recent years, and have continued to prosecute terrorism cases, both al-
Qaida related and non-al-Qaida related. See Country Reports on Terrorism 2008,
supra, at 12. Jordan’s state security court convicted and sentenced three individuals,
first to death, but then commuted the sentences to 15 years each, for plotting to
assassinate President Bush during his November 2006 trip to Jordan. Id.  
For the future, terrorist groups can be expected to continue to conduct
intelligence activities as effectively as the Jordanian state’s intelligence services. See
Statement for the Record from the Counterintelligence Executive, supra, at 2.  
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by her command who work with her closely and
vouch for her loyalty and trustworthiness. Her facility security officer (FSO) who worked
with her in Iraq for eight months considers her a loyal, reliable and trustworthy
translator. (Tr. 31-33) He expressed familiarity with her siblings immigration to the
United States and her lack of interest in Jordan. (Tr. 34) He trusts her enough to place
his life in her hands. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant’s military superior during her Iraq deployments (an Army staff judge
advocate) first worked with her in Iraq in 2009 and credits her with extraordinary
assistance in the preparation of detainees in advance of the planned U.S. troop
withdrawal from Iraq. (Tr. 39-42) He considers Applicant to be 100 percent trustworthy
and a close family friend.  He would be willing to place his life in her hands. (Tr. 43)
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
6
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) .
AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
                                                                            Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate
preference  for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  See AG ¶  9.
      Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication under the this
Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
                
7
            Burden of Proof
Under the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance
may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the
national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a
commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part,
on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515
U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only
those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.
Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation
or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Appellant is a civilian translator who deployed several times to Iraq between 2009
and 2010, while holding dual citizenship with the United States and Jordan. She has
since renounced her Jordanian citizenship and surrendered her two Jordanian
passports.  
Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States in 1994 and currently reside
in this country. She has two brothers and three sisters who were citizens and residents
of Jordan. They have since immigrated to the United States and currently reside in this
country as well.  None of Applicant’s immediate family members have shown any interest
to return to Jordan to reside.
8
Foreign Preference concerns
By virtue of her birth in Jordan to parents of Jordanian descent and citizenship,
Applicant was endowed with Jordanian citizenship. This citizenship could not be lost
except by express renunciation, approved by the Jordanian government. Applicant
renounced her Jordanian citizenship in June 2012 and surrendered her two expired
Jordanian passports at the same time. She currently has no inheritance rights in Jordan
and retains no other property interests in Jordan. She has not received any financial
benefits from Jordan since she became a U.S. citizen. When she has traveled to Jordan
for vacations and to see her family, she always used her U.S. passport after becoming a
U.S. citizen.
                                            
Foreign preference and foreign influence concerns are raised relative to
Applicant’s past Jordanian citizenship and Jordanian passports. Since becoming a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003, Applicant has taken several actions and exercised
Jordanian privileges that reflect active indicia of dual citizenship. Specifically, she
retained her Jordanian citizenship and renewed her Jordanian passports to preserve her
inheritance rights to property owned by her grandfather.
Disqualifying conditions (DCs) that raise foreign preference concerns comprise
DC ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S.. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member,” to
include “(1) possession of a current foreign passport” and “(5) using foreign citizenship to
protect financial or business interests in another country.” By retaining her Jordanian
citizenship and renewing her Jordanian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant
exercised privileges of Jordanian citizenship.
Three potentially applicable mitigating conditions may be considered. Having
exercised a privilege of her dual Jordanian citizenship by renewing her Jordanian
passport in 2003, Applicant has since renounced her Jordanian citizenship and
surrendered her Jordanian passports. As a result, three mitigating factors apply to
Applicant’s situation: MC ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on her parents’
citizenship or birth in a foreign country,” MC ¶ 11(b), “the individual has expressed a
willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” and  MC ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
Applicant has firmly demonstrated her loyalty and preference towards the United
States through her dedicated support of U.S. security interests in Iraq where she has
earned the respect and trust of members of her command. She has no financial interests
in Jordan and considerable financial interests in the United States.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s exercise of dual
citizenship with Jordan and the United States and her demonstrated mitigation efforts,
foreign preference concerns are mitigated.
9
Foreign Influence concerns
Foreign influence concerns are raised, too, over the presence of members of
Applicant’s family (i.e., her brothers and sisters) who are or have been citizens of Jordan,
a country historically beset with violence and terrorism in certain parts of the country.
Because Applicant’s sisters and brothers are still citizens of Jordan (although they reside
in the United States), they present some potential security risks covered by disqualifying
condition (DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. 
The citizenship and potential return residence status of Applicant’s sisters pose
some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence
that could compromise sensitive or classified information under Applicant's possession or
control. Risks are considerably lessened, however, by their residence status in the
United States and the absence of any affiliations or contacts of family members with
Jordan officials currently known to be associated with intelligence or military
organizations interested in collecting proprietary or sensitive information in the United
States. 
Further, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant’s 
family members have any (a) political affiliations with the Jordanian government or
military, (b) history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or (c) appear
to be vulnerable to the same. Jordan, although a country with reported violence and
terrorism, and human rights violations, enjoys a friendly bilateral relationship with the
United States, with a strong respect for the rule of law in the areas of foreign trade and
commerce. While Jordan has a documented record of illegal arrests and detentions,
kidnaping, and human trafficking, it generally enjoys stable diplomatic and trade
relationships with the United States.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens or residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical need be weighed
on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the supplied
materials and country information about Jordan. 
Jordan remains a valuable trading partner and a country with institutions that are
wholly compatible with our traditions and respect for human rights and the rule of law.
The AGs do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations with the United
States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with
citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical
aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. Jordan, while
reported to have terrorism, human rights, and human trafficking issues in certain parts of
10
the country, is still a country with no known recent history of government-sponsored
hostage taking or disposition for exerting undue influence against family members to
obtain  classified information or unclassified economic and proprietary data. 
As for security concerns associated with the Jordanian citizenship status of
Applicant’s brothers and sisters, any potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or
undue foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or
economic or proprietary data out of Appellant through her family members residing in
Jordan is quite remote. Applicant, accordingly, may take advantage of one important
mitigating condition: MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons
in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or
government and the interests of the U.S.” 
MC ¶ (8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” has application, too, to Appellant’s situation.  Since immigrating to the United
States in 1985, Applicant has demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional
commitments to the United States.  Whatever potential conflicts she may have through
her prior dual Jordanian citizenship and contacts with her family members in Jordan
have been more than counterbalanced by her demonstrated U.S. citizenship
responsibilities. 
Any conflict risks are further reduced by the lack of Applicant’s financial interests
in Jordan and corresponding material financial interests in the United States.
Accordingly, MC ¶ (8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual,” is applicable to
Applicant’s situation as well. 
In appraising risks associated with Applicant’s Jordanian family relationships from
a whole-person perspective, considerable weight is accorded Jordan’s strong historical
relations with the United States, the lack of any cognizable potential conflicts between
Applicant and members of her family, the U.S. residency status of her family members,
and the absence of any detectable Applicant financial interests in Jordan (and
corresponding material interests in the United States). Since becoming a U.S. citizen
Applicant has shown excellent character and placed her own life in danger to protect
U.S. interests in a combat zone in Iraq.  Members of her command commend her efforts
and credit her with significant contributions to the U.S. withdrawal mission in Iraq. 
When considered together, any risk of undue foreign influence on Applicant and
her family members is insubstantial, and clearly not of the magnitude that could make
11
them subject to a heightened security risk of coercion, pressure, or compromise under
the foreign influence guideline. Foreign influence concerns are mitigated.
    
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.c: For Applicant
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:           For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
