 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
                                                                      ) 
                  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06684 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record in this case, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, 
but he failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2009, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 19, 2011, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct and financial 
considerations adjudicative guidelines. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated December 13, 2011, 
declined a hearing, and requested that his case be determined on the written record. 
The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 5, 2012. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 13. By letter dated April 6, 
2012, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
received the file on April 25, 2012. His response was due on May 25, 2012. Applicant 
filed additional information within the required time period. Department Counsel 
objected to Applicant’s information but did not provide reasons for objecting. On July 11, 
2012, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s response to the 
FORM as Item A and admitted it to the record over Department Counsel’s objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 12 allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.l.), and two allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.). In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h. He neither 
admitted nor denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.i. He admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 
1.j. and 1.k., and he denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.l. He denied the allegations at 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant in response to the FORM. The record 
evidence includes Applicant’s September 10, 2009 e-QIP; official investigation and 
agency records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 Applicant’s credit 
reports of September 26, 2009, April 28, 2010, April 19, 2011, and April 3, 2012; 
Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy court filings of September 25, 2011, January 9, 
2007, and April 11, 2008; and his response to the FORM. (See Items 3 through 13; Item 
A.) 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old, married, and the father of two adult children. He is also 
the stepfather of an adult child. He has a high school diploma. In 1977, he enlisted in 
the U.S. military, where he served on active duty until his retirement in 1999. He 
received an honorable discharge. He has held a security clearance since 1996. He 
receives approximately $1,623 each month in military retirement and disability pay. 
(Item 3; Item 5.)  
 
 Since 2002, Applicant has been employed by a federal contractor and has 
worked overseas. While overseas, Applicant provided his wife with a power of attorney 
so that she could manage their joint finances.  (Item 1; Item 10; Item A.) 
 
                                            
1 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
on May 6, 2010. He acknowledged the debts identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., and 1.i. On 
June 11, 2011, Applicant acknowledged that the investigator’s summary of the interview accurately 
reflected the information he provided to the investigator on the day of his interview. (Item 5.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Since 2001, Applicant and his wife have filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy three 
times. Applicant’s bankruptcy filings are alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. Applicant’s first filing, 
which occurred in September 2001, recited total assets of $116,727 and total liabilities 
of $164,820. In an interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated that he 
had an adjustable rate mortgage which rose above his capacity to pay. He then filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy to protect his home from foreclosure. This bankruptcy was 
dismissed in August 2002. (Item 8; Item 10; Item 13.) 
 
 In 2005, while employed overseas, Applicant was diagnosed with diabetes, which 
required that he take medication. Because the U.S. military hospital would not dispense 
to Applicant the medicines prescribed for his disease, he was required to purchase 
them from commercial sources in the country where he was serving. The diabetes 
medicines purchased in this way were expensive, Applicant stated. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a second Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in January 
2007. On Schedule B, they reported personal property valued at $181,580. On 
Schedule I, they reported an average monthly income of $13,472 and average monthly 
expenses of $9,565. They also reported assets of $700,476 and liabilities of $420,124. 
The bankruptcy court dismissed Applicant’s second Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 
2008. (Item 11; Item 13.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife requested a loan modification from the creditor holding the 
mortgage on their home. They feared losing their home again to foreclosure. When they 
did not receive information about loan modification from the creditor, Applicant and his 
wife then filed a third Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition on April 11, 2008. On Schedule B 
of the bankruptcy filing, they reported personal property valued at $55,485 and stated 
they had overestimated the value of their personal property on their second bankruptcy 
filing. Applicant’s third bankruptcy filing was dismissed on September 22, 2008. (Item 5; 
Item 12; Item 13.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for two delinquent mortgages and 
one past-due mortgage. In an interview in May 2010 with an authorized investigator, 
Applicant explained that the mortgage debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. was for his personal 
residence, where his wife lived while he was overseas. In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied the mortgage was delinquent and unpaid. However, he provided a 
credit report that showed that $110,459 was past-due on the loan and that the creditor 
has started foreclosure proceedings. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant included a 
letter from the creditor, dated October 17, 2011, acknowledging his request for workout 
assistance. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided a letter from the creditor, 
dated April 26, 2012, stating that Applicant’s request for a loan modification had been 
received and forwarded to the appropriate department. (Item 1; Item 5; Item A.) 
 
 In his interview with the authorized investigator, Applicant stated that the 
delinquent mortgage account and past-due mortgage account alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. 
and 1.c. were for a property he owned that was occupied by his daughter. In his answer 
to the SOR, Applicant provided a credit report dated December 13, 2011. On the credit 
 
4 
 
 
report provided by Applicant, the last reported monthly payment of $307 on the debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. occurred in September 2011, and the balance on the account on 
October 2011 was $33,120. On an April 3, 2012 credit report provided by DOHA, the 
account showed a balance of $33,057. While he stated that the account was being paid 
on time, Applicant provided no other documentation to confirm timely payment. (Item 1; 
Item 5; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant also denied the mortgage debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. In his answer to 
the SOR, he stated: “By July 2018 this account is scheduled to go to a positive status.” 
An April 2010 credit report provided by DOHA showed the account was delinquent by 
$34,991. An April 2011 credit report provided by DOHA showed the account to be 150 
days past due. Applicant provided no documentation to confirm timely payment. (Item 1; 
Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant denied a $1,276 debt to a creditor, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d., and he 
stated that he had disputed the debt. In his interview with an authorized investigator, he 
stated that the debt had been paid with funds he provided to his bankruptcy trustee in 
2007-2008. With his answer to the SOR, he provided a credit report, dated December 
13, 2011, which confirmed he had disputed the debt in November 2010. However, the 
record does not reflect that the debt has been resolved. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant also denied an $8,011 debt, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. He asserted that the 
account was “legally paid in full.” Applicant’s credit report of December 13, 2011, 
confirms that the account was paid pursuant to a settlement. The credit report states: 
“Account legally paid in full for less than full balance.” (Item 1.) 
 
 Applicant denied a $37,383 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. He stated that he had 
disputed the debt, and it had been removed from his credit report. In his interview with 
an authorized investigator, Applicant denied he owed any money to the creditor 
identified at SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant provided no documentation to confirm that he had 
disputed the debt with the credit bureau. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant also denied a $5,935 delinquent debt to a creditor identified in SOR ¶ 
1.g. In his response to the FORM, he provided documentation showing he had agreed 
to settle the debt by April 30, 2012, by paying $1,472.41. He also provided 
documentation showing he had made two electronic funds transfers to the creditor. One 
transfer was for $13.95 and the other transfer was for $1,053.24. Nothing in the record 
confirms that the creditor accepted the partial payment as payment in full. (Item 1; Item 
A.) 
 
 Applicant denied a $13,458 delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h. His credit 
report of December 13, 2011, stated that the debt was past due and had been charged 
off by the creditor. (Item 1.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.i. that Applicant owes a creditor a delinquent debt of 
$7,386. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the debt.2 He 
further stated that he had disputed the debt and it had been removed from his credit 
report. However, in response to the FORM, Applicant provided a credit report, dated 
April 26, 2012, which showed that the account had not been paid and had been charged 
off by the creditor. (Item 1; Item A.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.k. that Applicant failed to pay his federal income taxes 
for tax periods ending December 31, 2005, December 31, 2006, and December 31, 
2007. As a consequence of his failure to pay these taxes, a federal tax lien was placed 
on Applicant’s property on October 21, 2008. The lien was withdrawn after Applicant 
reached settlement with the Internal Revenue Service. (Item 1.) 
 
 Applicant denied a $2,082 delinquent debt, in collection status, alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.l. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he had disputed the debt and it was no 
longer on his credit report of December 2011. In his response to the FORM, Applicant 
provided documentation from the creditor acknowledging receipt of $1,041 on April 26, 
2012. The creditor further stated that when the payment was credited to its bank 
account, it would consider Applicant’s account to be settled. (Item 1; Item A.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided a credit report dated April 26, 
2012. On the credit report, he highlighted five existing debts that were in charged-off 
status. At least two of those debts were not alleged on the SOR. (Item A.) 
 
 Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP on September 10, 2009. Section 26 
on the e-QIP asks that an individual disclose information on all financial obligations 
covering a period of the last seven years. Specifically, Section 26c asks: “Have you 
failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax return, when required by law 
or ordinance?” In response to Section 26c, Applicant answered “No” and failed to 
disclose that he had failed to pay his federal income taxes in a timely manner for tax 
years 2005, 2006, and 2007. Applicant’s failure to reveal this information is alleged as a 
deliberate falsification in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 1.) 
 
 Section 26d on the e-QIP asks: “Have you had a lien placed against your 
property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?” Applicant responded “No” to Section 
26d. He did not disclose that on October 21, 2008, he had a lien placed on his property 
for failure to pay federal income taxes for tax years 2005, 2006, and 2007, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant’s failure to reveal this information is alleged as a deliberate 
falsification in SOR ¶ 2.b. (Item 1.) 
 
 On September 10, 2009, after completing his e-QIP, Applicant signed the 
following certification:  
 
                                            
2 For the purposes of this adjudication, I interpret Applicant’s response to SOR ¶ 1.i. as a denial. 
 
6 
 
 
My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, 
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in good 
faith. I have carefully read the foregoing instructions to complete this form. 
I understand that a knowing and wilful false statement on this form can be 
punished by fine or imprisonment or both. (18 U.S.C. 1001). I understand 
that intentionally withholding, misrepresenting, or falsifying information 
may have a negative effect on my security clearance, employment 
prospects, or job status, up to and including denial or revocation of my 
security clearance, or my removal and debarment from Federal service. 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that his falsifications were deliberate. 
He stated that he was not aware of his tax delinquencies or his tax lien when he 
completed his e-QIP. He stated that because he works overseas, his wife handles all 
their financial matters. In the FORM, Department Counsel acknowledged that 
Applicant’s failure to list his delinquent taxes and tax lien was probably not intentional 
considering that he has been working overseas since 2002. (FORM at 7; Item 1.) 
 
 In February 2011, Applicant provided a personal financial statement in response 
to DOHA interrogatories. He reported a net monthly income of $11,482, total monthly 
living expenses and debt payment of $9,206,3 and a monthly net remainder of $2,276.  
The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counselling. (Item 5.) 
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                            
3 Applicant’s monthly living expenses include his living expenses overseas as well as his wife’s living 
expenses in the United States. (Item 5.) 
 
 
7 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
8 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns in this case. 
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency. He has filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy three times since 2001. All three filings have been dismissed. It is unclear 
whether he will be able to avoid foreclosure on his principal residence and pay his 
existing delinquencies. He failed to pay his federal income taxes for three tax years. The 
record reflects that Applicant has been steadily employed overseas for approximately 
ten years, but he has failed to demonstrate that he has a plan for resolving the majority 
of his delinquent debts. This evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant had some health problems while employed overseas and was required 
to purchase expensive medications. While this was a condition beyond his control, it is 
not in itself sufficient to mitigate Applicant’s failure to pay his creditors over many years. 
He continues to have financial delinquencies. His has sought protection from his 
creditors three times by filing Chapter 13 bankruptcies. However, the bankruptcies were 
dismissed and there was no clear resolution of his financial difficulties, which remain a 
 
9 
 
 
serious concern. While bankruptcy is a legitimate legal tool in the resolution of debt, it 
does not erase concerns about an individual’s good-faith efforts to satisfy his creditors 
and his current and future financial stability.  
 
 Applicant merits some credit for his efforts to resolve the debts alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 1.e. and 1.l. Additionally, I find the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.j. and 1.k. for Applicant. 
Applicant was within the law and within his rights to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and 
therefore that allegation does not recite a fact that raises a potential disqualifying 
condition. However, Applicant’s three Chapter 13 filings suggest a pattern of financial 
conduct that has not resulted in the resolution of his delinquent debts. Additionally, I 
conclude for Applicant SOR ¶ 1.k., which recites in part that Applicant’s tax lien was 
withdrawn after he reached a settlement with the Internal Revenue Service. 
  
 However, several of Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved and in 
charged-off status. While creditors may no longer expect payment of debts in charged-
off status, an applicant retains a good-faith obligation to satisfy or otherwise resolve 
them. Failure to do so transfers the financial obligation to pay or compensate for debts 
to others. DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve delinquent debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 Applicant has been steadily employed for ten years. He has delegated his 
financial responsibilities to his wife; he has not had financial counseling; and he has 
provided no evidence that his financial situation is under control. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not fully apply in mitigation in Applicant’s case.4 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
                                            
4 AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
10 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and signed his e-QIP in September 2009, he failed to 
provide truthful answers to queries about his failure to pay his federal income taxes and 
to reveal the federal tax lien brought against him. The SOR alleged that Appellant’s “No” 
responses to these questions were deliberate falsifications. Applicant denied his 
falsifications were willful and deliberate.  
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing 
falsification cases: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind 
when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under 
Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to 
present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
(App. Bd. June 9, 2004)).  
 
  Applicant’s false answers may raise a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which 
reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
I have carefully reviewed the record evidence in this case. I acknowledge that 
Applicant delegated his financial responsibilities to his wife when he worked overseas. 
He was not aware on a day-to-day basis of his household financial situation. I conclude 
that Applicant’s “No” answers to Sections 26c and 26d on his e-QIP were not deliberate.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. He 
accumulated substantial debt. Over time, he repeated unsuccessful strategies in an 
attempt to resolve his debt.  
 
Applicant reports a monthly net remainder of over $2,000. Despite these 
resources, the majority of Applicant’s debts remain unresolved, and he appears to lack 
a plan to pay his creditors and avoid financial delinquency in the future.  
 
Applicant did not deliberately falsify his answers to questions about his financial 
situation of his e-QIP. However, his ignorance of those matters is regrettable, for he 
appears to lack not only knowledge of his financial situation but also an awareness of 
the necessary means to address his financial delinquencies and ultimately to meet his 
financial obligations. The record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant did not 
deliberately falsify his answers to financial questions on his e-QIP. However, I also 
conclude that he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:                        For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f. - 1.i.:              Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.j. - 1.l.:              For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.b.:            For Applicant 
   
                                                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
