 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09320 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 23, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 24, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2012. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on June 5, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 27, 
 
2 
 
 
2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objections. Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
July 6, 2012, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He submitted AE D 
through G, which were admitted without objection, and the record was closed.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 6, 2012.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the hearing, the Government moved to amend the SOR. The Applicant did not 
object, waived his right to delay the case, and agreed to proceed immediately.2 The 
following allegations are added: 
 
1.g. You are indebted to [creditor] on an account charged off in the amount of $24,006. 
As of the date of the Statement of Reasons it remained unpaid. 
 
1.h. You are indebted to [credit card company] on an account that is 120 days past due 
in the amount of $7,811. As of the date of the Statement of Reasons it remains unpaid. 
 
1.i. You owe approximately $4,000 for property taxes on a house you purchased in 
(state). As of the date of the Statement of Reasons the debt remains unpaid. 
 
1.j. As of the date of your hearing you failed to file your 2011 federal income tax return.  
 
1.k. As of the date of the Statement of Reasons you failed to file your state income tax 
returns from 1994 to 2009 and 2011.  
 
1.l. As of the date of the Statement of Reasons you owe $549 for 2010 delinquent 
federal income taxes. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 43 years old. He is single and has no children. He attended 
technical school and completed a journeyman apprenticeship in 2003.  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from November 2010 to January 2011; January 2010 
to March 2010; February 2006, July 2005 to October 2005; and June 2003. Applicant 
sought work in different locations that paid less, which affected his financial situation. 
                                                          
1 AE D, E, and F consisted of one-page documents. AE G is 28 pages. It consists of bank statements 
from October 20, 2011, to March 16, 2012. Hearing Exhibit I is a memorandum from Department Counsel 
noting there were no objections to the documents.  
 
2 Tr. 103-107. 
 
3 
 
 
He also had to find temporary lodging in the places he worked and had travel costs, 
which also impacted his finances.3  
 
 Applicant purchased a home in 2005. His brother rents the home from him and 
pays $750 of the $1,200 mortgage. In 2009, Applicant purchased another home in a 
different city. The home was being foreclosed, and he purchased it for $17,000. He took 
a cash advance on a credit card and used this cash to pay for the purchase of the 
home. He stated he paid approximately $7,000 toward the credit card debt, but then had 
employment problems and was unable to make the payments. He failed to pay his 2010 
and 2011 property taxes on the house and owes approximately $4,000 for the taxes.4 
 
 In June 2010, Applicant was offered a job in another state that paid better. He 
then resigned from his present job to accept the more lucrative job. He traveled to the 
new job and was advised he needed to apply for a security clearance before he could 
be officially hired. After an initial background investigation, he was advised that he 
would need to resolve his financial issues before he could be hired. Applicant returned 
to his home state.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed he had not filed his federal income 
tax returns from 1994 through 2009. In June 2010, upon returning from the prospective 
employer’s location, he contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). He arranged for 
a person to help him file his federal income tax returns. He stated the IRS advised him 
to only file for tax years 2001 through 2009. He stated he then filed his federal income 
tax returns, and it was determined he owed approximately $26,000 in delinquent taxes. 
In July 2010, he began paying $500 a month toward the tax debt. He filed his 2010 
federal income tax return and received a refund that was applied to his delinquent 
taxes. He failed to file his 2011 federal income tax return. He stated he believes he is 
entitled to a refund for his 2011 taxes. He asked his former employer for his old job back 
and was rehired in August 2010 and worked through November 2010, while he rectified 
his financial issues. He then went through training with the prospective employer from 
November 2010 to December 2010. He was not paid during this period, but received 
unemployment benefits. He began getting paid sometime in December 2010, but due to 
his financial issues, he was terminated and received unemployment benefits from 
January 2011 and until he started a new job in February 2011.5 
 
Applicant did not file his state income tax returns from 1994 through 2009 and 
2011. He filed his 2010 state income tax return, but did not pay what he owed. Applicant 
stated that in 1993, his father passed away, he was helping his mother and his tax 
                                                          
3 Tr. 18-21, 88-89. 
 
4 Tr. 77-83, 89-93. 
 
5 Tr. 17, 27-35, 48-60, 83-84; AE A. I have not considered Applicant’s failure to file his federal income tax 
returns from 1994 to 2009 for disqualifying conditions, but will consider it when analyzing the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions and the “whole person.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
obligations “kind of fell off the track as far as paying the IRS.”6 He stated he failed to file 
his income tax returns because of “lack of conviction on my – on my part of following a 
bad role model like my brother who’s having his – wages garnished because he hadn’t 
–he hadn’t paid his taxes.”7 Applicant then stated the reason he failed to file his income 
tax returns was because there was a “domestic thing” with his parents.8 He failed to 
articulate how any domestic issues impacted his ability to file his tax returns, especially 
since his father passed away in 1993.9 He stated his “mind set was not what it should 
have been.” I did not find Applicant credible.  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($5,496) is a credit card debt. Applicant last made 
a payment on the debt in July 2010. He stated that he stopped paying the debt because 
he was making payments to the IRS for his delinquent taxes. He has not contacted the 
creditor to resolve the debt. He explained he could not afford to make the payments to 
the IRS and this creditor.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b ($202) is for medical services. It is not paid. The 
debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d ($4,633) and ¶ 1.e ($7,728) are for credit cards to the same 
creditor. Applicant has been paying $150 a month for the past six months on the debt in 
¶ 1.d.11 He is not making payments on the debt in ¶ 1.e.12  
 
Applicant settled the credit card debt ($11,123) alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for $5,423 
on April 5, 2012.13  He has another delinquent credit card debt to the same creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f ($5,961) that is unpaid.14  
  
 Applicant cosigned a loan for a friend to purchase a truck in 2007. This debt is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g ($24,006). He has not paid the loan since July 2010. The truck is 
at his friend’s house. The creditor contacted Applicant because it wanted to repossess 
the truck. Applicant has not returned the truck. His friend has not paid Applicant. 
Applicant stated he never drove the truck. The debt remains unresolved.15  
                                                          
6 Tr. 23, 69-73. 
 
7 Tr. 24. 
 
8 Tr. 25. 
 
9 Tr. 25-27. 
 
10 Tr. 38-40; GE 1. 
 
11 Tr. 41, 60-63; AE D, G. 
 
12 Tr. 60-61. 
 
13 AE B,E; GE 6. 
 
14 Tr. 63-64. 
 
15 Tr. 64-69. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h ($7,811) is for a credit card that Applicant stopped 
paying in approximately September 2011, when he learned the account was closed. He 
has not followed up on determining the status of the debt or resolving it.16 
 
 Applicant has four credit cards that are open and not delinquent. The total 
balance owed on the cards is approximately $5,850. He has no money in savings and 
approximately $1,200 in his checking account. He stated all of his monthly expenses 
are current. He has other credit cards that he is making monthly payments on. He has 
some money in a retirement plan, but did not know how much. He stated he has ten 
years vested in the plan. He indicated he recently received a promotion with a pay raise 
that will allow him to expedite repayment of his delinquent debts. He indicated he 
provides about $400 a month in support for his girlfriend.17  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
16 Tr. 76-77. 
 
17 Tr. 21, 41-49, 85-86, 101-102. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
  
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $60,380 that are 
delinquent and unresolved. He failed to file his annual federal income tax return for 
2011 and his state income tax returns from 1994 through 2009 and 2011. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for 16 years. After he sought 
a job that required a security clearance he was told he could not obtain the job until he 
cleared up his finances. He then filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2001 
through 2010. He then failed to file his 2011 federal income tax return. He is paying 
$500 to satisfy his $26,000 federal income tax debt. He has yet to file his delinquent 
state income tax returns for tax years 1994 through 2011. He did not indicate his 
intention to do so. Applicant indicated that he began experiencing difficulty paying bills 
when he was required to pay his delinquent federal income taxes. Applicant did not 
have a good explanation for his failure to file his federal or state income tax returns. He 
has settled one delinquent credit card debt and has been paying $150 on another, but 
his remaining debts are unresolved. His behavior is recent, and the facts do not support 
that the circumstances are unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because 
his conduct was frequent and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant was required to file his federal and state income tax returns. His failure 
to do so and the subsequent federal tax debt was a condition totally within his control. 
The subsequent financial problems that occured because he had to pay his tax debt are 
merely the consequences of his own irresponsible conduct. He has settled one credit 
card debt. His conduct of financing the purchase of a house through a cash advance 
from his credit card raises questions about his judgment, as does his failure to pay the 
property taxes on the home. His failure to make the loan payment on a truck he 
purchased, or return the truck to the creditor after the creditor notified him it wanted to 
repossess it, also raises questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
 
8 
 
 
judgment. There is insufficient evidence to show he has acted responsibly in resolving 
his delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He took no action to resolve his 
financial problems until he was confronted with the tax issues that affected his ability to 
obtain a security clearance. At that point, he filed his federal income tax returns for 2001 
to 2010. He has made no effort to address his state income tax returns and gave no 
indication of what his intention was regarding them. Applicant offered no credible 
explanation for his conduct. Except for settling one credit card debt and making 
payments on another the remainder of his delinquent debts are not resolved. His 
actions do not constitute a good-faith effort to pay his creditors. Even after he filed his 
past federal income tax returns and was well aware of the consequences of his actions, 
he did not file his 2011 federal tax returns. There are no clear indications his financial 
problems are being resolved. I find AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the credit card he settled and 
the other debt he is making paying on, but does not apply to the remaining debts. I find 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 43 
year old. He is single and has no children. He was aware of his responsibility to file his 
tax returns and pay taxes, but provided little explanation for why he did not do so for so 
many years. When he finally filed some of his federal income tax returns, it was only 
after he became aware it would impact his ability to obtain a security clearance. He 
again failed to file his federal income tax return in 2011 and has taken no action to 
 
9 
 
 
address his delinquent state tax returns. He indicated that his debts became delinquent 
because he had to pay the IRS, and he was unable to pay his other debts. He 
purchased a home with a credit card cash advance, which is now delinquent. He has 
not paid the property taxes on the home. Applicant’s history of irresponsible conduct 
raises security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
Financial Considerations guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c-1.d:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.l:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
