 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-06175 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He currently 
owes more than $45,000 in delinquent debt. Although his financial trouble was due to a 
period of unemployment, he has been with his current employer for nearly three years 
and failed to establish that his financial situation is under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On January 18, 2012, Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a decision based on the written record. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On April 30, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM).2 Applicant received the FORM on May 8, 2012. He had 30 
days within which to file a response and any objections to the FORM. He did not submit 
a response or objections. I was assigned the case on July 2, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his early thirties. He is separated from his wife and has four young 
children. He served in the U.S. military from 1997 to 2003. After voluntarily separating 
from the military and receiving an honorable discharge in December 2003, he was 
unemployed until July 2004. He started working as an aircraft mechanic for his current 
employer in September 2009. He has also been working at a part-time job since March 
2006. He was previously granted a security clearance in 1998. (GE 5; GE 7) 
 
 Applicant accumulated a significant amount of debt after his voluntary separation 
from the military in 2003. He made little to no effort to resolve most of his debts until 
2010. Applicant disclosed his financial issues on his current security clearance 
application, including that he had fallen behind on his child support obligation and had 
defaulted on his base exchange credit card. These debts were satisfied through the 
garnishment of his wages and a tax refund. Applicant discussed his financial problems 
with a federal investigator in April 2010, and during the interview claimed that he had 
secured the services of a private debt consolidation firm to help him resolve his debts. 
(GE 5; GE 7) 
 
Applicant admits that he currently owes over $45,000 to 19 different creditors. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.m, 1.o – 1.s, 1u – 1v) Applicant claims that six accounts, totaling 
$7,002, are included with his debt consolidation program. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 
and 1.v) He did not submit documentation regarding the debt consolidation program or 
to support his claim that the $925 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a has been satisfied. Applicant 
did previously submit documentation showing that he had started to repay his 
delinquent student loans, but failed to submit documentation showing the current status 
of the loans. (SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.h) He previously disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k, a 
delinquent car loan for nearly $12,000 that his wife is purportedly solely responsible for 
paying. He did not submit documentation to substantiate this dispute and admits this 
debt in his Answer. Applicant’s recent personal financial statement (PFS) shows that he 
has a substantial sum of money left over each month after paying his bills, but the PFS 
does not indicate that any payments are being made towards the resolution of his 
longstanding, past-due debts. Applicant did not submit proof that he has taken a 
financial counseling course.3 (GE 4; GE 5; GE 7)  
                                                          
2
 The FORM contains the Government’s position and ten documentary exhibits. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 are admitted into the record without objection.  
 
3
 The SOR alleges a $3,837 delinquent debt in ¶ 1.t and two unpaid traffic fines in ¶ 1.w. 
Applicant denied both allegations and there was no evidence provided to substantiate either allegation. 
Applicant further denied the $664 debt in ¶ 1.n, which he disclosed on his SCA and has continuously 
maintained is paid. Although Applicant failed to provide documentation regarding the satisfaction of this 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.4 An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. In resolving this ultimate 
question, a judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
debt, the evidence in the file supports a finding that the debt has been satisfied. Accordingly, I find in 
Applicant’s favor as to SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.t, and 1.w.  
 
4
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
5
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
“This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of his or her 
debts.”6 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may indicate 
that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in 
handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of over $45,000 in delinquent debt raises this concern. 
It also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant may mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one 
or more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating 
conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
6
 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 
(App. Bd. June 26, 2012) (The Guideline F concern “is broader than a concern that an applicant might 
commit criminal acts in order to pay off his debts. Rather, Guideline F requires a judge to consider the 
totality of an applicant’s circumstances–the reasons underlying his financial problems and his efforts to 
address them–in order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the applicant possesses the judgment and 
self-control required of those who have access to national security information.”) 
 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant’s current financial 
situation can be traced back to his seven months of unemployment following his 
discharge from the military, his decision to separate from the military was a voluntary 
one.7 Furthermore, he has been continuously employed since July 2004 and has been 
with his current employer for nearly three years. His current PFS shows that he has a 
substantial monthly remainder, but does not indicate that any payments are being made 
toward the satisfaction of his longstanding, past-due debts. Thus, even if I were to 
assume that Applicant’s unemployment was a matter largely beyond his control, he 
failed to establish that despite this financial setback he acted responsibly with respect to 
his financial obligations.8 He also failed to submit documentation showing that he is 
resolving his past-due debts, has a reasonable basis to dispute the debts at issue, or 
has put his financial house in order.9 In short, Applicant’s financial situation remains a 
security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).10 I considered the favorable and extenuating factors in 
                                                          
7
 ISCR Case No. 09-08108 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011) (an applicant’s decision to voluntarily 
change jobs or relocate, which results in loss income and/or higher expenses, does not amount to a 
financial problem that was “largely beyond the person’s control”). 
 
8
 ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) (application of mitigating condition 20(b) 
is only warranted when an applicant demonstrates that he or she acted responsibly with respect to their 
finances despite the issues outside of their control that impacted their financial situation). 
 
9
 See ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present 
documentation to substantiate his or her claim about the debts at issue). 
 
10
 The adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
 
this case, including Applicant’s honesty during the security clearance process, his 
honorable military service, and that he previously held a security clearance. However, 
he has a substantial amount of unresolved debt and failed to dispel the significant 
security concerns raised by his financial situation.11 Therefore, the favorable whole-
person factors present in this case do not outweigh these concerns. Hopefully, 
Applicant will be able to address his financial situation in the near future and provide 
proof of a track record of responsible conduct regarding his financial obligations. 
However, at this time, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.n:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.s:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.t:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u – 1.v:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.w:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
11
 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (an applicant’s honesty 
and “[e]ven years of safeguarding national security information may not be sufficient to mitigate a history 
of ongoing, significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
