 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-03906 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 11, 2008, while 
on active duty in the U.S. Air Force, seeking a top secret clearance. On January 20, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified him that it was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his 
access to classified information, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to continue or revoke his clearance. 
DOHA set forth the basis for its action in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing security 
concerns under Guideline B. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 2
Applicant received the SOR on January 27, 2012; answered it on February 6, 
2012; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel requested a hearing on March 2, 2012, but withdrew the request on May 14, 
2012. On May 24, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
On May 25, 2012, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on June 14, 
2012, and he submitted additional materials on June 25, 2012, which were included in 
the record without objection from Department Counsel. The case was assigned to me 
on July 19, 2012.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Russia. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b, alleging that his wife is a citizen of Russia and his mother-in-law is a citizen and 
resident of Russia. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
and currently stationed in Afghanistan. When he submitted his security clearance 
application, he was a master sergeant on active duty in the U.S. Air Force. He 
submitted his application in anticipation of assuming duties requiring a top secret 
clearance. He held a security clearance for all of his Air Force service. He retired from 
the Air Force after about 26 years of service. While on active duty, he received the 
Meritorious Service Medal six times, the Air Force Commendation Medal three times, 
and the Air Force Achievement Medal six times. He was hired by his current employer 
and deployed to Afghanistan after answering the SOR. 
 
 Applicant met his wife, a citizen of Russia, in April 2004, while he was on active 
duty in the Air Force and assigned to a base in the Republic of Korea.1 His wife was 
then working as a dancer in an off-base club. They married in January 2008, while 
Applicant was assigned to a base in Italy. At the time of their marriage, Applicant’s wife 
had never resided in the United States. (Personal Subject Interview (PSI) at 2.) As of 
the date of Applicant’s response to the FORM, she had resided in the United States for 
about two years. Applicant states that his wife hopes to apply for U.S. citizenship next 
year.  
 
While living in Russia, Applicant’s wife worked in an administrative position for a 
government-operated power company and as a card dealer at a casino. Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he began dating his wife in 2002. However, his 
security clearance application reflects that he lived in Alaska in 2002 and was not assigned to Korea until 
April 2004. 
 
 3
mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is retired from the same power 
company where Applicant’s wife worked. Applicant and his wife have contact with his 
mother-in-law about once a week. His mother-in-law visited him and his wife for about 
two months in 2009, while they were stationed in Italy. His wife’s father passed away 
when she was a child. (PSI at 2-3.)  
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that his wife does not ask him 
about his work, other than asking, “How was your day?” He declared that he would 
terminate their relationship immediately if he had any concerns about her loyalty to him 
or any reason to believe she was trying to gather intelligence information. 
 
 Applicant describes his access to classified material or systems as “minimal at 
best.” However, he is required to have a clearance in order to enter the controlled areas 
where he works. His site leader states that he does not have access to classified 
information. (Response to FORM.) 
 
 Applicant’s site leader, who has deployed twice with him, describes his work as 
“outstanding.” An Air Force colleague, who has known Applicant for 23 years, considers 
him as “a person of impeccable character.” The Air Force colleague has known 
Applicant’s wife for ten years and describes her as a stay-at-home housewife and “a 
person of upstanding character.” She has never asked the Air Force colleague about his 
job or anything related to sensitive or classified information. (Response to FORM.) 
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Russia is one of the top three most 
aggressive and capable collectors of economic information and technological 
intelligence from U.S. sources. I have also taken administrative notice that Russia 
provides military and missile technologies to countries of security concern, including 
China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela, and that Russian military programs continue to be 
driven by the perception that the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization are its principal strategic challenges and greatest potential threat. Finally, I 
have taken administrative notice that Russia’s human rights record is uneven, and in 
some areas is poor. The judiciary is not independent and is subject to manipulation by 
political authorities. Abuses include attacks on journalists, physical abuse by law 
enforcement officers, harsh prison conditions, arbitrary detention, politically motivated 
imprisonment, electronic surveillance without judicial permission, warrantless searches 
of residences and other premises, and widespread corruption in the executive, 
legislative, and judicial branches. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
 
 4
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(c): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (c) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or living with a person who is 
a citizen of a foreign country. 
 
 The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).  
 
 
 6
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. 
 
 The evidence that Applicant’s wife is a Russian citizen and his mother-in-law is a 
citizen and resident of Russia establishes AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (c). The “heightened risk” 
required to establish these disqualifying conditions is established by Russia’s extensive 
and aggressive collection of sensitive information and its record of targeting the United 
States for economic and technological information. Although Applicant’s mother-in-law 
is no longer employed by the Russian government, she is retired and dependent on the 
Russian government for whatever pension she receives. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). This mitigating condition is not established because of the 
connections of Applicant’s wife and his mother-in-law to Russia, a country that 
aggressively targets the United States for economic and technological information.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s sense of loyalty to his wife is not minimal. His sense of loyalty to his mother-
in-law is more difficult to measure, but he has not rebutted the presumption that he has 
feelings of obligation to her. Applicant has strong ties to the United States, 
demonstrated by his extensive and distinguished military service, his long record of 
holding a security clearance without incident, and his current deployment to a combat 
 
 7
zone in support of U.S. interests. His wife’s ties to the United States are minimal. She is 
not a U.S. citizen, and she has resided in the United States for only two years.  
 
Because Applicant requested a decision on the written record, it is difficult to 
assess the sincerity and credibility of Applicant and his wife, the nature and intensity of 
their interaction, the likelihood that his wife would attempt to influence him, and the 
likelihood that Applicant would succumb to facially innocuous attempts by his wife to 
obtain sensitive information from him. I have no doubts that Applicant’s loyalty to the 
United States would cause him to reject overt attempts to obtain sensitive information, 
but I am less confident that he would recognize and reject sophisticated and subtle 
attempts by his wife or by experienced intelligence agents using her or her mother as 
conduits to obtain information. The nature, extent, and aggressiveness of Russian 
intelligence agencies targeting the United States place a very heavy burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to show that he would resolve any potential conflict of interest 
in favor of the interests of the United States. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is not 
established.  
 
 I have considered the fact that Applicant currently does not have access to 
classified information or need such access to perform his current duties, but I have 
given that fact little weight for two reasons. First, he had access to classified information 
while on active duty; and second, if he receives a security clearance, he will be eligible 
for access to classified information in future assignments without going through the 
security clearance process again. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c). 
Applicant has regular contact with his mother-in-law, and she visited him for two months 
in 2009. I conclude that this mitigating condition is not established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has served his country with distinction for many years, as a member of 
the U.S. Air Force and now as an employee of a defense contractor. Nevertheless, his 
marriage to a citizen of Russia has created a potential conflict of interest. He has 
declared unequivocally that he would terminate his relationship with his wife if she 
attempted to elicit classified or sensitive information from him. However, with only a 
written record before me, I am unable to question him or assess his demeanor, and my 
ability to evaluate his sincerity and credibility is limited.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
