 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 11-04512 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a native of southern India who relinquished his Indian citizenship 
upon his U.S. naturalization in September 1999. His parents and an uncle, as well as his 
spouse’s parents and her sister, are all resident citizens of India. Applicant also owns an 
undeveloped parcel of land in his native region, which is valued around $350,000. He 
plans to sell the foreign property to pay for his children’s college educations in the United 
States, and his foreign relatives have no ties to the Indian government or military. The 
foreign influence concerns raised by his security significant ties to India are overcome by 
his strong ties to the United States, where he has chosen to make his home, pursue his 
career, and raise his children. Clearance granted. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence, and explaining why it was unable to grant a 
security clearance to Applicant. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
 
 
 2 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 28, 2012, and he requested a 
hearing. On June 6, 2012, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and I 
scheduled a hearing for July 25, 2012. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Before the introduction of any evidence, 
the Government withdrew SOR allegation 1.c. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and 
three Applicant exhibits (AEs A-C) were admitted. Applicant also testified, as reflected in 
a transcript (Tr.) received on July 2, 2012. At the Government’s request, I agreed to 
take administrative notice of pertinent facts related to India and its foreign relations, 
including with the United States. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 The Government’s request for administrative notice, dated March 16, 2012, was 
based on publications from the U.S. State Department, the Congressional Research 
Service, the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, the National 
Counterintelligence Center, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the U.S. Department of 
Commerce.1 Applicant did not object to my taking administrative notice, although he 
expressed concern about the relevance of some of the information to his case. I agreed 
to take administrative notice, subject to my obligation to make accurate and timely 
assessments of the political landscape in foreign countries when adjudicating Guideline 
B cases. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007). Accordingly, I 
informed both parties of my intent to consider the DOD news transcript of recent 
remarks by Defense Secretary Leon Panetta at the Institute for Defence Studies and 
Analyses in New Delhi, India, on June 6, 2012,2 as well as any updates to the 
government’s official positions on India, including revisions to the State Department’s 
Background Note: India, India Country Specific Information, and Human Rights Reports: 
India.3 The Government and the Applicant had no objection. The facts administratively 
noticed are set forth in the Findings of Fact, below. 
                                                 
1
The Government’s formal request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record. 
 
2
The Government and the Applicant were directed to the DOD website (www.defense.gov) where the 
transcript was available, and they were advised that they could file a response or propose new facts for 
administrative notice. Neither party proposed any new facts for administrative notice. 
 
3
The Government’s March 16, 2012 Administrative Notice request is based, in part, on Background Note: 
India, dated July 14, 2010 (XI); India Country Specific Information, dated July 28, 2011 (XIII); and 2010 
Human Rights Reports: India, dated April 8, 2011 (XIV). Before Applicant’s hearing, the State Department 
issued a Background Note: India on April 17, 2012; an India Country Specific Information on April 3, 
 
 3 
           Findings of Fact 
 
As amended with the withdrawal of SOR 1.c, the SOR alleges under Guideline B, 
foreign influence, that Applicant’s mother (SOR 1.a), father (SOR 1.b), parents-in-law 
(SOR 1.d), sister-in-law (SOR 1.e), and uncle (SOR 1.f) are resident citizens of India. 
Applicant allegedly also owns a parcel of real estate in India valued around $350,000 
(SOR 1.g). 
 
Applicant denied the allegations, although he then explained why his family 
relations in India do not pose a threat. Similarly, Applicant denied SOR 1.g concerning 
his real estate ownership in India, but he then explained that he purchased the land as 
an investment in 2007 with the intent to sell it within a year or two. The global financial 
crisis of 2008 led him to defer his plan to divest himself of the property. Applicant 
indicated that he will have to sell the land within the next two or three years to cover his 
daughter’s college expenses in the United States. After considering the pleadings, 
exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old computer language developer, who is being sponsored 
for a DOD top secret security clearance to work as a subcontractor at a university-
affiliated prototype development laboratory. He has not previously held a DOD security 
clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 19, 46.) 
 
Applicant was born in southern India in 1966 to resident citizens of India. His 
father worked as an accountant in the private sector his entire career. (Tr. 49.) He 
retired in 1999. (Answer.) Applicant’s mother never worked outside the home. (GE 2; Tr. 
47.) They had no other children. During his youth, Applicant visited his maternal uncle 
with some regularity, about every three or four months. When Applicant was in his 
teens, his uncle moved to another town, and their visits became less frequent. 
(Answer.) 
 
Applicant earned his undergraduate degree in India. He never served in the 
Indian military. (Tr. 43.) In September 1987, he was admitted to a graduate program in 
computer science in the United States. (Tr. 25, 43-44.) His hard work and diligence was 
quickly rewarded, and he received a graduate research stipend after only a few months. 
(AE A; Tr. 25.) On earning his master’s degree, he began working in the United States. 
(Tr. 25, 80.) With his career in the United States progressing, Applicant decided to make 
the United States his home. (Tr. 80.) From September 1994 to June 1999, Applicant 
successfully pursued a second master’s degree at night while working in the computer 
field. (GE 1; Answer.) 
 
In June 1993, Applicant, then a U.S. permanent resident, traveled to India for his 
marriage. His spouse was from a neighboring city in India, and they met when Applicant 
was in college. (GE 1; Tr. 68-69.) In August 1993, Applicant renewed his Indian 
passport. (GE 1.) After they married, Applicant’s spouse came to the United States on a 
                                                                                                                                                             
2012; and India--Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011.  See www.state.gov. The updated 
information was considered in determining the facts appropriate for administrative notice. 
 
 4 
student visa. (Tr. 44. 68-69.) She has a graduate degree from a private university in the 
United States. (Answer; Tr. 40, 44.) In August 1995, Applicant and his spouse bought 
their first home in the United States for $220,000. (Tr. 63.) In September 1998, they had 
a daughter. Their son was born in August 2005. Both children are U.S. citizens by birth, 
and they have never held Indian passports. (GE 1; Tr. 41.) They do not speak any 
Indian languages. (Answer.) 
 
In September 1999, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant was 
no longer a citizen of India because the country does not recognize dual citizenship, 
and he discarded his Indian passport, which was scheduled to expire in August 2004. 
(GE 2.) Applicant holds a U.S. passport, which was renewed in September 2009. (GE 1; 
Tr. 39.) Applicant’s spouse acquired her U.S. citizenship in 2010. (Tr. 40.) 
 
When Applicant’s then employer ceased operations in June 2002, he turned to 
consulting in computer software development. Applicant worked in software 
development on a contract basis for a succession of firms in the financial industry until 
July 2010. (GE 1; Tr. 44.) His income as a consultant has varied from $150,000 to 
$200,000 annually while his spouse earns between $100,000 and $110,000 per year 
from her employment as a software engineer for a bakery café company. (GE 2; Tr. 40, 
64.) While they focused on their life in the United States, they maintained telephone 
contact with their parents in India and traveled to India for family visits and vacations. 
Applicant went to India, at times by himself (Tr. 78), in January 2003 and again in 
February 2006 for 21 days; in June 2006 and in May 2007 for 10 days; in June 2008 for 
15 days; in January 2010 for 10 days; and in October 2011 for eight days to visit family. 
When in India, Applicant stayed mostly with his parents, while his wife has stayed with 
her parents. They have also stayed in hotels when vacationing outside of their parents’ 
immediate area. (Tr. 53.) 
 
Applicant’s parents stayed with him in the United States for two months in June 
2001, May 2002, and June 2004; for three months in February 2006; and for two 
months in May 2011. (GE 2; Tr. 61.) Applicant’s parents-in-law came to the United 
States for three month stays in August 2004, August 2005, and July 2006. (GE 2.) 
 
After Applicant lost some money in the stock market in the “dot com” crash, he 
began looking at real estate as a more secure investment. He and his spouse wanted 
the best education for their children, and interest checking would not provide the return 
needed to pay for his children’s college educations in the United States. Due to the high 
price of real estate in the United States around 2005, they began considering investing 
in Indian real estate because the market there was “up and coming,” and the country 
was encouraging foreign investment. (Tr. 57.) After they had been looking for about a 
year, Applicant’s spouse learned from her father about a suitable parcel near him. After 
both sets of parents had checked out the property, Applicant purchased an 
undeveloped one-acre plot in southern India for about $350,000 in March 2007. His plan 
was to sell it within a couple of years and then purchase something in the United States. 
(GEs 1, 2; Tr. 58, 67.) He bought it with savings and a $200,000 home equity loan 
through a U.S. bank, which he has paid off. (Tr. 58, 62-63.) Applicant does not have an 
 
 5 
annual tax obligation in India on the property, although he will have to pay taxes on the 
equity realized in any sale. (Tr. 69.) As of June 2012, Applicant had not yet sold the land 
in India, which is being informally monitored by his parents and parents-in-law. The 
value of the property has been flat, and with the depreciation of the rupee against the 
dollar, Applicant would take a currency hit if he sold it now. (Tr. 58-59.) Applicant 
intends to sell this foreign asset within the next couple of years, by the time his daughter 
is in the 10th grade, or sooner if the Indian rupee appreciates in value against the dollar. 
(Tr. 70.) Applicant has no other financial assets in India. (Answer; Tr. 56.) In the event 
of an attempt to gain influence on him through his foreign property, Applicant indicates 
he would “just walk away from [the parcel] . . . take the loss and move on.” (Answer.) 
Also, if required to sell the land for his security clearance, Applicant would do what was 
necessary for his clearance, including give the land away. (Tr. 60.) Applicant has taken 
no action to divest himself of this foreign asset because he has not been back to India 
for the time needed, “at least a week,” to discuss a possible sale with a realtor. (Tr. 76-
77.)  
 
With their daughter entering middle school in the fall of 2010, Applicant and his 
spouse decided to purchase a new home in a better school district. They sold their old 
home in June 2010, and purchased their present home in July 2010 for about $1 million. 
(GE 1; Tr. 42, 65.) They had around $250,000 in equity in their previous residence (Tr. 
65) and $100,000 to $150,000 in savings that they put toward their new home. (Tr. 73.) 
They also took out a low interest home equity loan of less than $500,000, on which he 
pays $2,000 to $3,000 per month. (Tr. 73-74.) Most of their spare income has gone to 
pay down the home loan, so they currently owe around $350,000 on the house. (Tr. 64, 
74.) 
 
In July 2010, Applicant contracted to perform software design work at a 
university-affiliated research and development laboratory involved in DOD projects. On 
July 22, 2010, he completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) for a top secret security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 45.) Applicant disclosed the 
Indian citizenship and residency of his parents and parents-in-law. In response to any 
foreign contacts, he disclosed contact by telephone, in person, and email about three to 
seven times a year with his wife’s sister, who is also a resident citizen of India. As for 
any foreign financial interests, Applicant reported his ownership of land in southern India 
from March 2007 to present valued at $350,000. Applicant listed his foreign travel, 
including six trips to India since January 2003. (GE 1.) 
 
 On September 8, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about his contact with his and his 
spouse’s relatives in India. Applicant indicated that he sees his parents, parents-in-law, 
and sister-in-law about once a year. He has telephone contact with his parents twice 
weekly, with his parents-in-law once monthly, and with his spouse’s sister four times a 
year. Concerning his unlisted contact with his uncle in India, Applicant had telephone 
contact with him about once a year and in-person contact six times since 2003. He 
averred that none of his relatives in India had any affiliation with a foreign government. 
They also did not know that he was being considered for a DOD security clearance. He 
 
 6 
denied any vulnerability or preference for India because of these family relationships. 
Applicant indicated that his land in India was of no importance to his overall financial 
situation. (GE 2.) As of June 2012, he and his spouse’s joint net worth in the United 
States was about $1.5 million.4 (Tr. 71.) Applicant asserts sole loyalty to the United 
States, where he has spent his adult life and developed deep roots over the past 25 
years. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant and his spouse have discussed possibly traveling to India before the 
end of this summer. (Tr. 77.) Applicant does not intend to return to India to live, even to 
care for his elderly parents (“they have to fend for themselves”). (Tr. 38.) They have not 
talked to him about possibly moving to the United States. (Tr. 61.)  Applicant’s contact 
with them ranges from once a week to once every two weeks as of June 2012, and their 
conversations revolve around his children, his parents’ social activities, or the weather 
in India. Applicant does not discuss his work. (Answer; Tr. 47-49.) They do not rely on 
Applicant for any financial assistance. (Answer.)  
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are also retired and living in India. His father-in-law 
owned a small business that sold granite until 2001. Applicant does not share 
particularly close bonds with his in-laws. His spouse contacts her parents once a month 
on average. Applicant speaks to them once every three to six months. (Answer, Tr. 50.) 
They do not rely on any financial support from Applicant or his spouse. (Answer; Tr. 79.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister-in-law lived with her parents until 2008. She works as a 
software engineer for a private computer software company in India. (Answer; GE 2; Tr. 
51.) As of June 2012, Applicant had contact with his sister-in-law “once every six 
months maybe.” (Tr. 51.) He visited with her for a few hours each time during his trips to 
India in January 2003, February 2006, June 2006, May 2007, June 2008, and January 
2010. She spent time with Applicant and his spouse during a two-week trip to the United 
States in September 2011. (GE 2,) 
 
 Applicant’s maternal uncle has been retired for over 20 years. Applicant is not 
clear about his uncle’s former employment other than that it was with a company, and 
his uncle had no association with the Indian government or military. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 Outside of work, Applicant’s and his spouse’s activities revolve around their 
children. Applicant’s daughter is an excellent student, who is gifted in mathematics. (AE 
B.) Her extracurricular activities consist of math club, swimming, and dance, while 
Applicant’s son is involved in soccer, tennis, karate, and music lessons. (AE C.) 
Applicant and his spouse hold no official positions, but they help with the school’s 
parent teacher organization and at their children’s sporting and educational events. (Tr. 
55-56.) As to whether their children will attend college in India, Applicant responded, 
                                                 
4
The value of the investment assets held by Applicant and his wife was established solely through his 
testimony. No corroboration of the value of their U.S. assets, or the property in India, was presented by 
way of tax assessments, independent appraisals, contracts of sale, or similar documents. Since 
Department Counsel did not contest the evidence regarding the value of the assets, I accepted 
Applicant’s testimony as true and accurate. 
 
 7 
“Never, not in a million years, no.” (Tr. 38-39.) Applicant and his spouse want their 
children to attend better schools than they did. (Answer; Tr. 26.) Applicant is not 
involved in the Indian expatriate community in his area. (Tr. 54.) 
 
 A close friend of Applicant’s, who has known Applicant since he came to the 
United States for graduate studies, believes Applicant is “extremely reliable and 
trustworthy and has deep roots in our society.” Two laboratory employees, who 
interviewed Applicant for the position for which he seeks classified access, attest to 
Applicant being an asset to the project. He has been diligent about finishing his tasks on 
time and has earned the respect of team members for his technical contributions and 
interpersonal skills. (AE A.)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
After reviewing U.S. government publications concerning India and its relations 
with the United States, I take administrative notice of the following facts: 
 
India is a stable multiparty federal, democratic republic with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of about 1.21 billion. The central government has broad 
administrative powers in relation to its states. Indian society and political organization 
are determined largely by the Hindu caste system of occupational and social 
hierarchies, by religion, and language, although the influence of these factors has been 
diluted if not subsumed in the economically prosperous and heterogeneous cities. The 
Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens. The Congress Party-led 
coalition government, known as the United Progressive Alliance (UPA), in power since 
May 22, 2004, presided over May 2009 elections that were considered free and fair, 
despite scattered instances of violence. India has a vibrant civil society, a free press, 
and a robust democratic political system. Yet, endemic corruption in the government 
and police forces, caste-based discrimination, and domestic violence and other abuses 
against women and children persist, despite criminal penalties for violations and 
government efforts to implement programs designed to empower members of the lower 
castes. Police and security forces often act with impunity, and serious abuses have 
been reported in criminal investigations and efforts to suppress domestic terrorism. 
Separatist and terrorist groups remain active in areas of conflict, such as Jammu and 
Kashmir, the Northeastern States, and the Naxalite belt. 
 
In the wake of the coordinated terrorist attacks in Mumbai in November 2008, the 
Indian parliament enacted laws, such as the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, which 
permits authorities to detain persons for up to 30 days without charge in cases of 
suspected insurgency or terrorism. Anti-Western terrorist groups, including Islamic 
extremist groups on the U.S. government’s list of foreign terrorist organizations, 
continue to plan attacks that could take place in locations throughout India, including 
where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit. Recent incidents 
include bombings in February 2012 of an Israeli diplomatic vehicle in New Delhi, in 
September 2011 at New Delhi’s High Court, and in July 2011 in crowded areas in 
Mumbai. Such threats to safety have led the U.S. State Department to advise U.S. 
 
 8 
citizens to practice good security when in India, and to avoid travel to areas of domestic 
conflict and to the India-Pakistan border. The Maoist extremist groups or Naxalites, 
which are active in rural areas of East Central and Southern India, are responsible for 
more terrorist attacks in the country than any other organization through an ongoing 
campaign of violence and intimidation. The Naxalites have not specifically targeted U.S. 
citizens, but they have attacked symbolic targets that included Western companies and 
rail lines.5 
  
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India remains a leader of the developing world and of the Non-
Aligned Movement. Long a member of the United Nations, the country has a non-
permanent seat on the Security Council in 2011-2012, and it seeks a permanent seat on 
the Council. It has a long tradition of participating in U.N. peacekeeping operations, and 
has committed $1.3 billion to Afghan reconstruction efforts. The United States 
welcomes India’s role in Afghanistan while recognizing Pakistan’s security interests in 
having a friendly western neighbor. Three full-scale wars and a constant state of military 
preparedness on both sides of the border have marked more than six decades of bitter 
rivalry between India and Pakistan. The United States strongly encourages an ongoing 
India-Pakistan peace initiative and remains concerned about the potential for conflict 
over Kashmiri sovereignty and “cross-border terrorism.” Beijing’s military and economic 
support for Pakistan is a major source of friction between China and India. China and 
India have ongoing cooperation in other areas, such as finance, agriculture, water 
resources, energy, environment, and tourism. The Chinese are reportedly increasingly 
wary over the growing strategic relationship between the United States and India. 
 
India continues to obtain the bulk of its imported military hardware from Russia, 
which had been India’s major benefactor for the first four decades of its independence. 
Russia’s status as main supplier of defense equipment has been threatened by alleged 
substandard work by Russia, some cost overruns, and major delays. In recent years, 
Israel roughly equaled Russia in the value of defense exports to India. As of 2000, India 
was listed as one of many countries actively engaged in economic intelligence collection 
and industrial espionage directed at the United States, although there is no evidence 
that India then or now tortures or abuses its citizens to extract economic intelligence. 
The United States has also had longstanding economic issues with India regarding 
protection of intellectual property rights and trade in dual-use technology. As of 2008, 
there had been several incidents of international businesses illegally exporting, or 
attempting to export, restricted, dual-use technology from the United States to India. A 
number of Indian governmental entities have been on the U.S. export control “Entity 
List” of foreign-end users involved in weapons proliferation activities, although as of May 
14, 2012, only three entities, all with its Department of Atomic Energy, were still on the 
list. Differences between the United States and India still exist over India’s nuclear 
weapons programs; the slow pace of India’s economic reforms because of inadequate 
infrastructure, cumbersome bureaucracy, corruption, labor market rigidity, and 
                                                 
5
In its April 3, 2012 India Country Specific Information, the U.S. State Department lists the areas of active 
terrorism and civil unrest. Applicant’s native area, where his family members reside and where he owns 
real estate, is not among them. 
 
 9 
regulatory and foreign investment controls; and India’s bilateral strategic partnership 
with Iran. Between 2004 and 2006, the United States sanctioned Indian scientists and 
chemical companies for transferring nuclear weapons-related equipment and 
technology to Iran. India imported about $10 billion worth of crude oil from Iran in 2009, 
although New Delhi has apparently abandoned its plan to construct a gas pipeline to 
deliver Iranian natural gas to India through Pakistan, which the United States has 
strongly opposed.  
 
At the same time, these differences no longer dominate the United States’ 
attitude toward India. The United States recognizes India as key to strategic interests. 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held increasingly substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services. Both countries are committed to political 
freedom protected by representative government, and share common interests in the 
free flow of commerce, in fighting terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. 
The Bush and Obama administrations have been committed to establishing a strong, 
dynamic partnership with India. In June 2005, the two countries signed a ten-year 
defense pact outlining planned collaboration in multilateral operations, expanded two-
way defense trade and increasing technology transfer opportunities. In July 2007, the 
United States and India reached a historic milestone in their strategic partnership by 
completing negotiations on a bilateral agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation. In 
July 2009, the Obama Administration launched a “Strategic Dialogue” calling for 
collaboration on energy, trade, education, and counterterrorism issues. Major U.S. arms 
sales to India are underway. In 2009, India signed a $2.1 billion deal to purchase eight 
surveillance aircraft from a U.S. manufacturer, setting a new record for the largest-ever 
U.S. arms transfer to India. During a recent visit to India in June 2012, Secretary of 
Defense Panetta cited the strong, strategic, increasingly collaborative, and transparent 
relationship between the two countries as the foundation for a new defense strategy 
guiding the U.S.’ military rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region. He called for already 
strong mutual participation in military exercises to become more regular and complex. 
As evidence of the U.S.’ commitment to providing the best defense technology possible 
to India, Secretary Panetta pointed to work by the Obama Administration to reform 
export controls. He called for India to modernize its own regulations in defense 
procurement and nuclear liability legislation. 
 
 The rapidly growing software sector in India is boosting service exports and 
modernizing the country’s economy, although excessive regulatory and bureaucratic 
structures and corruption present obstacles to growth. The United States, India’s largest 
investment partner, strongly supports the market reforms undertaken by India since 
1991 and urges further liberalization of trade and investment barriers. Foreign 
assistance was about $3 billion in 2006-2007, with the United States providing about 
$126 million in development assistance. 
 
India does not permit its citizens to hold dual citizenship. In 2006, India launched 
the Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) program. It is not a dual nationality program and 
does not grant Indian citizenship. A U.S. citizen who obtains an OCI card can travel to 
and from India indefinitely, work in India, study in India, and own property in India 
 
 10 
(except for certain agricultural and plantation properties). An OCI card holder is 
ineligible for an Indian passport or for Indian government employment and cannot vote 
in Indian elections. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 11 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has foreign connections that present a potential risk of divided loyalties 
or undue foreign influence. Applicant’s parents, a maternal uncle, his spouse’s parents, 
and his spouse’s sister, are resident citizens of his native India. Also, he owns an 
undeveloped one-acre plot in southern India valued around $350,000. Four disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 7 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The salient issue under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) is whether there is 
substantial evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign influence or exploitation because 
 
 12 
of the respective foreign tie, contact, or interest. The “heightened risk” denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or owning property in a foreign country, but it is nonetheless a relatively low 
standard. The nature and strength of the family ties or other foreign interests and the 
country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record) are relevant in assessing whether there is a 
likelihood of vulnerability to government coercion. Even friendly nations may have 
interests that are not completely aligned with the United States. As noted by the DOHA 
Appeal Board, “the United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 
5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly 
greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family member is 
associated with, or dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the foreign government, the administrative judge must take into account any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
Applicant has ongoing contact with his and his spouse’s family members in India. 
As of September 2010, he had telephone contact with his parents about twice weekly, 
with his parents-in-law once monthly, with his sister-in-law four times a year, and with 
his uncle once a year. While the frequency of the contact has declined somewhat as of 
June 2012, Applicant has traveled to India to visit them on average annually since at 
least 2003. He went to India for eight days when his mother was ill in October 2011, and 
he and his spouse have discussed a possible trip to India before their children return to 
school in September 2012. When in India, Applicant stays primarily with his parents or 
in a hotel. Yet the nature and extent of his contact with his relatives abroad are what 
one might reasonably expect of any immigrant with a parent or in-laws living in a distant 
country. 
 
Nothing about his family members’ previous or present occupations or activities 
creates a heightened risk. None of them had an affiliation with the Indian government, 
or any military, security, or intelligence responsibilities. Applicant’s father was an 
accountant in the private sector until he retired in 1994. Applicant’s father-in-law was a 
small business owner in granite sales before his retirement in 2001. Applicant’s sister-
in-law is a software engineer for a private company. Applicant knows little about his 
elderly uncle’s previous occupation. Applicant’s mother and mother-in-law did not work 
outside the home. 
 
India and the United States have significantly improved their bilateral relations in 
the past decade. They have held a series of substantive combined exercises involving 
all military services since 2002. As evidence of the U.S.’ commitment to provide the best 
defense technology possible to India, India signed in 2009 a $2.1 billion deal to 
purchase eight surveillance aircraft from a U.S. manufacturer, setting a new record for 
 
 13 
the largest-ever U.S. arms transfer to that country. The Obama administration 
characterizes the relationship between the two nations as strong, strategic, increasingly 
collaborative, and transparent. India has also been a reliable ally of the United States in 
the fight against international terrorism. The country has taken steps since the Mumbai 
attacks to make it more difficult for insurgents or terrorist groups to operate with 
impunity. Human rights abuses in India largely involve harsh treatment of persons 
suspected of terrorist activity. India is not known to coerce its law-abiding citizens. Yet 
Indian-U.S. interests are not aligned on several issues involving Pakistan and other 
countries. India relies on Iran and Russia for oil and gas supplies. Russia has 
historically been India’s largest supplier of military hardware, and Indian scientists and 
chemical companies have been sanctioned by the United States in the past for 
transferring nuclear weapons-related equipment and technology to Iran. While U.S.-
Russian relations have improved since the end of the Cold War, Iran is a state sponsor 
of terrorism and avowedly anti-American. Furthermore, it is noted that India and 
commercial entities in India have aggressively targeted U.S. economic intelligence in 
the past, as recently as 2008, although the Defense Department does not presently 
believe that India is exploiting U.S. technology.6 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established 
because of Applicant’s ties to his parents and uncle, and albeit primarily through his 
spouse, to her parents and sister in India. 
 
Furthermore, Applicant’s ownership of real estate in India valued around 
$350,000 establishes AG ¶ 7(e). Although the property represents only about a quarter 
of his and his spouse’s overall net worth, it is a substantial property interest in a foreign 
country that could present a heightened risk of foreign influence. 
 
Concerning potential factors in mitigation, AG ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the 
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or 
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,” is 
difficult to satisfy, given the ongoing risk of terrorist activity by rogue elements in India, 
although there is no evidence that the region in southern India at issue here has been 
targeted or victimized. 
 
Applicant has infrequent contact with his maternal uncle in India, but AG ¶ 8(c), 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” is not 
satisfied with respect to his other relatives. Applicant may speak to his sister-in-law on a 
few times a year, but she visited Applicant and his spouse in the United States as 
recently as September 2011. 
 
                                                 
6 
In New Delhi on July 23, 2012, to urge closer U.S.-India defense cooperation, Deputy Defense Secretary 
Ashton Carter stated, in part, “We trust India and know that India is not a re-exporter or exploiter of our 
technologies.” See www.defense.gov 
   
 
 14 
The foreign parcel is of such value in relation to Applicant’s overall portfolio to 
make it difficult to mitigate under the first prong of AG ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature 
of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to 
result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or 
pressure the individual.” Applicant is counting on this asset to pay for his children’s 
college educations in the United States. However, the nature of the interest is routine. 
Applicant has no emotional tie to the land. It is not an ancestral property or one that his 
family members rely on for their livelihood. He bought it as an investment well before he 
knew that he would need a security clearance for defense contract work. Applicant’s 
original intent was to own the property for only a couple of years and then sell it. The 
decline in the value of the rupee and the economic slowdown, factors over which he had 
no control, led him to delay any sale. When questioned about the foreign asset in 
September 2010, Applicant indicated that he could abandon the property if necessary. 
At his hearing, he reiterated that he would be willing to divest himself of the asset if 
necessary to obtain the security clearance. When asked about his failure to take any 
action in this regard, Applicant reasonably explained that he wanted to deal with a 
realtor “face-to-face,” and he needed at least a week in India to do so. The value of the 
investment is considerable, but the nature of the interest is routine for Applicant. 
 
A heightened risk of undue foreign influence may also be mitigated under AG ¶ 
8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” As an only child with elderly parents, Applicant conceivably may face 
obligations in the future concerning their care in India. Applicant has adamantly denied 
any intent to return to India to live, and he has made it clear to his parents that his life is 
in the United States. Even so, his annual trips to India to visit them and his regular 
telephone calls show some understandable affection for his parents. Applicant may not 
share a similar affection for his in-laws, but his spouse’s ties to her parents and sister 
also cannot be characterized as “so minimal.”  
 
However, Applicant has persuaded me that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States, where he has resided since 1987 and 
established firm roots. Applicant places a high value on education, so he came to the 
United States to earn his graduate degree in computer science. He is appreciative of 
the graduate stipend that he earned based on his hard work (AE A), and he obtained a 
job in the United States after he graduated. Shortly thereafter, he decided to remain 
here. In 1993, he married an Indian national, whom he had known since college, but he 
made it clear to her that they would be living in the United States. She came to the 
United States on a student visa after their marriage and then obtained her graduate 
degree. In 1995, Applicant and his spouse purchased their first home in the United 
States. Their careers are here. Applicant acquired his U.S. citizenship in 1999, his 
spouse hers in 2010, knowing that they would no longer be citizens of India. Applicant 
has traveled exclusively on a U.S. passport since 1999. There is no evidence that 
Applicant or his spouse has acquired an Overseas Citizen of India card. 
 
 15 
 
Moreover, their two children were born in the United States, and they have been 
raised like their U.S. peers. Applicant has made no effort to obtain Indian language 
training for his children, despite visits to India to see family and to vacation. Applicant is 
not involved in activities of the local Indian expatriate community. Instead, he and his 
spouse are dedicated to their children and children’s school and extracurricular 
activities. Applicant is justifiably proud of his daughter’s academic accomplishments, as 
shown by AE B. Applicant has made it clear that his children will attend college in the 
United States, and in that regard, his investment in Indian real estate reflects his 
commitment to paying for the best educations possible for his children. He professes 
sole affiliation to his adopted homeland,7 and there is nothing about his lifestyle 
inconsistent with his American citizenship. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).8 Applicant has family and real estate ties to India that raise concerns of 
foreign influence. At the same time, these foreign ties are in an area of southern India 
which has not been targeted or victimized by terrorist or insurgent violence. Applicant 
has also minimized the risk somewhat by not discussing his work with his relatives in 
India. They are unaware that he is applying for a DOD clearance. Since September 
1987, Applicant has established firm roots in the United States, where he was 
encouraged and given the opportunity to excel in his chosen field of computer software 
design. Given the rapidly growing software industry in India, Applicant could conceivably 
use his knowledge and skills to his benefit in India. Yet he intends to remain in the 
United States. He is not likely to jeopardize his spouse or children, who are U.S. 
resident citizens, or the employment that he needs to provide better opportunities for his 
children than he had. Applicant has demonstrated his reliability and trustworthiness to 
his co-workers at the laboratory. After considering all the facts and circumstances, I find 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. 
                                                 
7
Applicant considered himself “a patriotic American in mind, body, and spirit long before [he] became a 
U.S. citizen in 1999. (Tr. 27.) 
  
8 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 16 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
