 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-03267
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial problems
and personal conduct. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On October 22, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to renew a security clearance he holds for his work
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On
February 2, 2012, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 Department Counsel provided an index of its documents. It is contained in “List of Government Exhibits” and3
included in the record as Hx. I. See also Tr. 33 - 46.
 Ax. A is 35 pages in length. It includes Department Counsel’s waiver of objection, a letter from Applicant to4
the Administrative Judge, an email from Applicant to Department Counsel with 18 pages attached, an email
from Applicant to Department Counsel with nine pages attached, and five pages of email between Department
Counsel and Applicant verifying that everything Applicant submitted was received as intended.
2
facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for2
personal conduct (Guideline E) and financial considerations (Guideline F).
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on February 29, 2012, and requested a
hearing. On May 9, 2012, DOHA Department Counsel issued to Applicant an
Amendment to the Statement of Reasons (Amendment). The Amendment added three
factual allegations (SOR 2.e - 2.g) under Guideline E. Thereafter, Applicant provided an
undated and unsigned response to the Amendment (Second Answer). This case was
assigned to me on May 29, 2012.
Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on June 2, 2012, I convened a hearing in
this matter on June 20, 2012. The parties appeared as scheduled. The Government
presented Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 14, which were admitted without objection.3
Applicant testified in his own behalf. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on
June 28, 2012. 
I also left the record open to receive additional information from the Applicant.
The record closed on July 9, 2012, when I received Applicant’s timely post-hearing
submission. It is included in the record, without objection, as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A.4
Findings of Fact
In the SOR, the Government alleged, under Guideline F, that Applicant owed
approximately $49,121 for 13 past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.m). Applicant admitted, with
explanation, the allegations at SOR 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m. He denied the
remaining Guideline F allegations. Also, it was determined at hearing that SOR 1.b and
1.l allege duplicate debts. (Tr. 97 - 98) Accordingly, SOR 1.l, which alleged a collection
account for $836, is resolved for Applicant, and the total debt at issue is $48,285. 
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged in the original SOR that Applicant’s
negative answers in his October 2010 eQIP constituted deliberate false statements to
the Government concerning information required to determine his continued eligibility
for access to classified information. Specifically, the Government cited his answers to
question 26.e, regarding whether a judgment had been entered against him in the
previous seven years (SOR 2.a); to question 26.g, regarding whether any of his debts
had been referred to a collection agency in the previous seven years (SOR 2.b); to
question 26.j, regarding whether Applicant had been delinquent on any court-ordered
3
child support payments in the previous seven years (SOR 2.c); and to question 26.k,
regarding whether his wages had been garnished in the previous seven years (SOR
2.d). Applicant denied each of these allegations.
In the Amendment, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified
answers to questions in a Security Clearance Application he submitted on March 15,
2000 (SF 86), and a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (QNSP) dated
November 12, 2008. Specifically, the Government alleged that in his March 15, 2000
application, in response to SF 86 question 25 (Your Police Record - Military Court),
Applicant deliberately omitted that he was punished under Article 15 of the Uniform
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) in 1996, which was within the seven year scope of that
question (SOR 2.e). The Government further alleged that Applicant deliberately made
false statements through his negative answers to SF 86 questions 38 (more than 180
delinquent on any debt in the previous seven years) and 39 (currently more than 90
days delinquent on any debt) (SOR 2.f). Finally, the Government alleged that Applicant
deliberately made false statements through his negative answers to QNSP questions
28.g (bills referred for collection), 28.h (credit accounts charged off or cancelled for
failure to pay), and 28.j (delinquent of court-ordered child support) (SOR 2.g). 
In his Second Answer, Applicant admitted the Amendment allegations. However,
during a review of the pleadings at hearing, it was determined that Applicant did not
mean to admit to the gravamen of these allegations, namely, intent to falsify.
Accordingly, denials were entered in response to these allegations. (Tr. 20 - 27)
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed
the response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional
findings of fact.
Applicant is 40 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that
requires a security clearance. He was hired by his current employer in March 2012, but
he has not actively worked or received income from that job since late April 2012. His
status with that company is on hold pending the results of this case. Applicant has held
a security clearance since 1993, when he was in the military. (Gx. 2; Gx. 10) The
current adjudication of his security clearance was initiated when he applied for a
security clearance through his previous employer, where he worked from August 2010
until he was laid off in March 2012 after his company lost its DoD contract.
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from September 1992 until August 2008. He
received an honorable discharge as a sergeant first class (E-7), but the end of his
military service was premature, caused by complications from knee surgery, which left
him physically disqualified to perform his assigned duties. Applicant’s Army service was
superior. He was recognized for his performance on numerous occasions, and he
received at least ten personal decorations. (Gx. 1; Ax. A; Tr. 66 - 67)
Applicant’s military assignments were as part of the Army’s Signal Corps, which
manages communications and information systems. Since leaving the Army, he has
been steadily employed in information systems technology positions, most of which
have required a security clearance. There are no documented periods of unemployment
4
since 2008. However, Applicant testified that he was unemployed for about two months
between his discharge and his first civilian job in 2008. (Gx. 1; Tr. 68)
When Applicant left the Army, he and his wife resided in State A. He stayed there
when he obtained civilian employment. In 2010, he and his wife moved to their current
residence in State B to be closer to family and to take the job Applicant held until he
was laid off in March 2012. Applicant’s wife had worked as a civilian government
employee while they lived in State A. However, she has been unable to find work in her
field since they moved to State B. The cost of living in State B is significantly higher than
in State A. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 55 - 56, 68 - 69)
 
Applicant is currently married for the third time. He and his wife have been
married since July 2008. They have a two-year-old child together. Applicant was
married the first time between 1996 and 2002. His second marriage started in 2005 and
ended in 2008. In addition to his two-year-old child, Applicant has three children, two of
whom (ages 20 and 16) were born out of wedlock. Another child, now age 14, was born
to Applicant and his first wife. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 58 - 61)
In 1994, Applicant set up an allotment from his Army pay for monthly child
support payments of $336.30 for his oldest child. In 1997, he set up a child support
allotment of $200 monthly for his second child. According to leave and earnings
statements (LES) from 2006, he had over $1,200 withheld from his Army pay each
month for child support, but it is unclear if these were involuntary garnishments or
allotments established by Applicant. A summary of his personal interview in December
2010 characterized his child support payments as the result of involuntary
garnishments. He averred at hearing that his pay was not garnished. (Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr.
90 - 91)
Applicant’s child support payments taken from his military pay stopped when he
was discharged in 2008. Thereafter, he averred that he paid support directly to the
mothers of his children. However, a 2009 credit report included a delinquent child
support debt of $8,577 owed to the child welfare agency in the state where Applicant’s
oldest child lived. This is the debt alleged at SOR 1.f. A 2011 credit report shows
Applicant owes $19,958. This is the debt alleged at SOR 1.e. 
Applicant insisted at hearing that he has been paying support directly to the
mothers and that he can document his payments. He also averred that he has been
trying to resolve his debts with the state agencies involved, but that he has been told his
payments are characterized as gifts to the mothers and do not fulfill his obligation to pay
support required by the state agencies. (Tr. 50 - 51, 56, 62 - 63, 86 - 90, 113 - 115; Gx.
2; Gx. 7; Gx. 9) Applicant provided information about withholding from his Army pay, but
despite extra time allowed after the hearing, he did not submit any records of child
support payments or any disputes he has filed with the state child welfare agencies
involved. (Ax. A)
Applicant has used several personal loans over the past few years to get cash for
various expenses and to pay debts. His credit history shows that most were “payday
loans” and were from the same lender specializing in short-term loans to military
5
personnel. Applicant paid all of those loans back. However, in February 2008, he also
took out a personal loan with the bank that issued the credit card referenced in SOR
1.m. Applicant used that loan to pay past-due debt he had in 2008. He paid on this loan
until late 2009 or early 2010. As alleged at SOR 1.h, he still owes $6,399 for this
delinquent debt. Applicant has had recent contact with this creditor, but has not taken
any substantive action to resolve this debt. (Gx. 7; Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Tr. 92 - 94)
In 2009, Applicant and his wife incurred a debt for $1,470 in unpaid rent in State
A. In November of that year, the landlord filed a civil complaint to enforce the debt,
which is alleged at SOR 1.a. Applicant was unaware of the civil suit until August 2010,
when he received mail forwarded from a previous address. Because Applicant had not
responded to a notice of that suit, a default judgment was entered against him.
Applicant averred at hearing that he resolved the debt in about October 2010. However,
he provided no documentary support for his claim, and the judgment appears on his
most recent credit report. (Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Tr. 77 - 79, 109)
Applicant claimed he has paid the debt alleged at SOR 1.b for a delinquent cell
phone account ($836). He also claimed that the actual debt was about $400. While  he
provided no documents supporting his claims, this debt does not appear on the most
recent credit reports available. (Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Tr. 81 - 83)
The $1,074 debt alleged at SOR 1.c is for a delinquent cable television and
internet account in State A. It became delinquent around March 2010. Applicant testified
it was an account he held with his second wife, who either did not pay the account or
return the cable box and modem after he left in 2008. However, he also admitted he and
his current wife had an account with the same company before they moved from State
A to State B in 2010. (Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Tr. 83 - 84, 110 - 111)
Applicant also owes $7,337 for a delinquent credit card, as alleged in SOR 1.d.
The account was opened in 2007 and was last paid as agreed in 2008. Applicant
testified that the account became delinquent during his last period of unemployment in
2008. He claimed that he has been paying $100 each month on this debt, but there is
no documentary corroboration of his claim in this record. (Gx. 7; Gx. 8; Tr. 84 - 86)
Applicant also owes $970 for a delinquent credit card as alleged in SOR 1.m. He last
paid on this account in 2010. (Gx. 7; Gx. 8; Tr. 98 - 99)
Although he admitted the SOR 1.g debt ($982) in response to the SOR, at
hearing Applicant testified he did not know why this debt is attributed to him. The money
is owed for a delinquent cell phone account with a carrier with which Applicant claims he
has never had an account. Applicant has not disputed this account with the creditor or
with any of the credit reporting agencies, and it does not appear on the most recent
available credit report. (Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Tr. 91 - 92)
Applicant denied owing the $2,986 debt alleged at SOR 1.I for a past-due car
loan. He testified that he still has the car and that he is current on the account. He also
provided copies of his past two payments on that account. A past-due car loan with the
creditor listed in SOR 1.I is attributed to Applicant in credit reports from 2009 and 2010,
6
but no such entry appears in the most recent credit report. (Gx. 7; Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Ax. A;
Tr. 94 - 95)
Applicant testified that the debts alleged at SOR 1.j ($395) and 1.k ($264) are for
medical bills that should have been covered by his military medical insurance. He
received treatment for kidney stones by a civilian medical provider, but was erroneously
billed the amounts alleged. Applicant claimed he paid both debts in 2008 after trying to
straighten out the claims for several months. The accounts had been referred for
collection to the creditors listed in the SOR; however, Applicant provided information
from a recent credit report indicating the debts were returned to the hospital where he
was treated. He also showed that he paid that hospital $2,026 in September 2011. The
debts at SOR 1.j and 1.k are not reflected in the most recent credit report obtained by
the Government. (Gx. 8; Gx. 9; Ax; A; Tr. 96 - 97, 111 - 113)
Applicant testified that his current finances are not good. He cannot work at his
current job without a clearance, and he cannot get unemployment benefits because he
is still listed as an employee for his company. However, he also testified that before he
was laid off in March 2012, he did not have much money remaining each month after
expenses. (Tr. 118 - 124) 
Applicant first applied for a security clearance in 1993 in connection with his
Army service. He has reapplied for clearances at least three times, including his most
recent application in 2010. Applicant also has been interviewed about financial problems
during background investigations in 2003 and 2010. In his 2003 subject interview, he
stated his intention to make arrangements with all of his creditors by May 2003. (Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Gx. 10 - 13)
Applicant did not list any of his past-due debts in his October 2010 e-QIP, his
November 2008 QNSP, or his March 15, 2000 SF 86. Applicant knew he had debts and
other financial problems, including the civil judgment for unpaid rent, before he
completed his 2008 QNSP and his 2010 eQIP. But it was not established, that his
omissions of adverse financial information from his March 2000 SF 86, were intentional,
as alleged in SOR 2.f. SOR 2.f is resolved for the Applicant. However, at hearing, he
characterized his failure to list disclose his adverse financial information in his last two
applications for clearance as “a bad decision...a bad choice.” (Tr. 99 - 107)
In 1993, Applicant received non-judicial punishment (NJP) while in the Army for
arguing with a former girlfriend. He received 14 days extra duty. The Government
alleged in SOR 2.e that he intentionally did not disclose, in his March 2000 SF 86, that
he received NJP “in approximately 1996.” Applicant answered “no” to the following
question:
25. Your Police Record - Military Court: In the last 7 years, have you
been subject to court martial or other disciplinary proceedings under the
Uniform Code of Military Justice? (Include non-judicial, Captain’s mast,
etc.)
(Gx. 2; Gx. 11)
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
7
The allegation at SOR 2.e is not supported by the facts. Nor is it clear that
Applicant was obliged to disclose his 1993 NJP as it occurred approximately seven
years before he submitted the March 2000. SOR 2.e is resolved for the Applicant.
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies6
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
8
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The Government presented information that showed Applicant has experienced
significant financial problems since at least 2000. His most recent background
investigation produced information that attributed to Applicant 13 past-due debts totaling
$49,139. Available information also showed that Applicant has been investigated about
his financial problems several times since 1993, when he first applied for a clearance
through his military service. Applicant’s credit history also shows that he has had little
positive cash flow despite being gainfully employed since 1993, and that he has relied to
excess on personal credit for expenses over several years. This information raises a
security concern about Applicant’s finances addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as
follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the Government’s information requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG ¶
19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations); and AG ¶ 19(e) (consistent
spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness,
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis).
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions and the absence of some of his debts from
the most recent credit report obtained by the Government support a conclusion that the
debts at SOR 1.b, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k have been paid or otherwise resolved. However,
Applicant’s remaining past-due debts are significant. 
Applicant averred that his financial problems were caused by two divorces, and
periods of unemployment. However, he did not present any information to support his
claims or to show how those circumstances might still impair his financial well-being.
Nor did he show that he has acted responsibly in the face of those circumstances. He
also claimed that he is disputing the status of his child support obligations and other
debts. Applicant submitted documentation of his child support allotments from his Army
pay, but presented no information to support his claims that he continued making
payments directly to the mothers of his children. Nor did he present information
documenting his disputes with state child welfare agencies. Applicant has not engaged
9
in any financial counseling or credit assistance programs, and his personal finances are,
by his own admission, not very good. Although he cited his current employment status
as the chief hindrance to his debt resolution efforts, the record shows that his monthly
finances had little margin for error while he was earning a good wage before being laid
off earlier this year. Of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20, I conclude that none
of them apply. Although his current financial problems may be attributable to recent
events, Applicant has not mitigated the recurring security concerns about his poor
financial record over at least the past 12 years. 
Personal Conduct
Applicant denied that he intentionally withheld relevant information about his
finances and a military disciplinary event from his security clearance applications in
2000, 2008, and 2010. The Government met its burden of proving those controverted
issues of fact as to SOR 2.a - 2.d, and 2.g. These facts raise a security concern about
Applicant’s trustworthiness and judgment, that is addressed at AG ¶ 15, as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, information about Applicant’s adverse personal conduct supports
application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a):
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
I also considered all of the pertinent mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and
conclude that none of them apply. There is no indication that Applicant ever tried to
disclose his financial problems before being confronted about his debts in his most
recent subject interview. Nor did he show that his omissions were based on any
competent advice from an appropriate source. Further, deliberately making false
statements to any agency of the United States concerning a matter within its jurisdiction
is a violation of federal criminal law. More important, it is a fundamental breach of a
basic tenet of the Government’s personnel security programs. Thus, it cannot be
considered minor. Applicant has submitted several security clearance applications since
he joined the Army in 1993. He knew or should have know the importance of being
candid with the Government at all times in response to reasonable inquiries into his
background. Certainly, after he was interviewed about his finances in 2003, Applicant
was on notice of the need to provide accurate information about his finances. His
deliberate decision to withhold such information on at least two occasions is
fundamentally at odds with the Government’s need to grant access to classified
10
information based on accurate and complete information. Available information about
Applicant’s personal conduct does not support a conclusion that his conduct will not
recur or that his judgment is suitable for access to classified information.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I have taken into
account Applicant’s record of Army service and that he has been gainfully employed for
most of the past 20 years. However, the positive information in this case does not
outweigh the significant adverse information about Applicant’s finances and about his
willingness to lie to the Government about his finances. A fair and commonsense
assessment of all available information shows that doubts remain about Applicant’s
suitability for clearance. Because protection of the national interest is of paramount
importance in these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c - h: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.i - 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.e - 2.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance
is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
