 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06372  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated alcohol consumption and drug involvement security 
concerns, but he has not mitigated financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E (personal conduct), F (financial considerations), G (alcohol consumption), 
and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2012. DOHA issued 
 
2 
 
a notice of hearing on June 4, 2012, scheduling the hearing for June 20, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. The record was held open until July 9, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional 
information. No additional information was submitted. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2005. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He has an associate’s degree. His first marriage ended in divorce in 2010. He 
remarried in 2012. He has two children, ages seven and three.1 
  
 Applicant started drinking and smoking marijuana when he was in high school. 
He continued to periodically smoke marijuana, with his last use in 2010. He used 
prescription painkillers without a prescription between about 2004 and 2008. He used 
cocaine in 2005 and 2006. He used ecstasy in 2006. He credibly testified that he does 
not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. He does not associate with anyone who 
uses drugs. His wife does not use illegal drugs and would disapprove if Applicant used 
them.2    
 
 Applicant was cited for minor in possession of alcohol in 2004. He pleaded guilty 
and paid a fine. In 2005, he was cited for possession of drug paraphernalia. He was 
cited for minor in possession of alcohol in 2006. The charge was dismissed. In 2007, he 
was arrested for public intoxication. He pleaded guilty and paid a fine. In 2008, he was 
arrested on a warrant for expired inspection and registration and failure to appear. He 
was cited for expired inspection and registration in 2009 and again in 2010. In July 
2011, he was arrested on a warrant for unpaid tickets. He borrowed from his mother 
and paid all the appropriate fines for his various traffic violations. His current car is 
registered and insured, and he has a valid driver’s license. He still drinks alcohol, but he 
stated that he only drinks responsibly.3 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for several years. The SOR alleges six 
delinquent debts with balances totaling about $12,000. Applicant admitted owing the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. He denied owing the two other debts. He 
explained: 
 
I am paying nearly $600 in child support a month on top of providing for 
my family. I make $44,000 annually and it is extremely difficult to maintain 
my current living situation and also resolve all debt immediately. It is a 
process that I will have to undergo in order to resolve, but I am extremely 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-22, 52-54; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-22, 42-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 20-23, 35-42, 47-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3-5. 
 
3 
 
willing. I am trying to get everything managed in a manner that will allow 
me to pay these debts.4 
 
 Applicant was in a car accident in 2006. He had auto insurance and health 
insurance, but all his claims may not have been properly processed. Applicant denied 
owing the $5,239 and $387 medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. The $5,239 
debt is reported by Experian on the combined credit report from February 2011. It is not 
listed on the Equifax credit reports from July 2011 and February 2012. He 
acknowledged that the debt may be from his car accident. He has not contacted the 
hospital or the insurance companies to verify the accuracy of the debt. He has not 
disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies. Applicant believes he paid the $387 
debt. That debt is reported by Experian on the combined credit report from February 
2011, and it is listed on the July 2011 Equifax credit report. It is not listed on the 
February 2012 Equifax credit report.5 
 
 Applicant paid several delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He 
made a few payments toward his delinquent debts in 2011, but he has not made any 
payments in 2012. He has not received financial counseling.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
4 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
5 Tr. at 27-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3, 6-8. 
 
6 Tr. at 27, 33; GE 2, 3, 6-8. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant paid several delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He 
indicated a desire to pay his debts, but he has not made any recent payments toward 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He has not received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant acted responsibly and made a 
good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. His financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They 
continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
 
6 
 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Between 2004 and 2007, Applicant was charged twice with minor in possession 
and once for public intoxication. He sometimes drank alcohol to excess and to the point 
of intoxication. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related charge was in 2007. He continues to drink 
alcohol, but indicated that he only drinks responsibly. I find that Applicant has 
established a pattern of responsible alcohol use. His alcohol consumption does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 
23(b) are applicable.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;7 and 
 
                                                          
7 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
7 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana, prescription painkillers without a 
prescription, cocaine, and ecstasy. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he has does not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future. He no longer associates with anyone who uses drugs. I find that he 
demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence and that illegal drug use is unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
8 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant had multiple drug and alcohol-related charges. He disregarded the law 
and drove with an expired inspection and registration. He failed to appear in court to 
address his traffic citations, and he failed to pay his tickets. That conduct showed poor 
judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are 
applicable as disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant paid his tickets after he was arrested on a warrant in July 2011. His 
current car is registered and insured, and he has a valid driver’s license. Those actions 
have reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is 
applicable. However, it has only been about a year since his arrest. Insufficient time has 
passed for a determination that similar conduct is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s conduct 
continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable. I conclude that security concerns about 
Applicant’s conduct remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, F, G, and H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s youth and immaturity when he was involved in 
questionable conduct. I am satisfied that illegal drug use is in his past and that alcohol 
use is not a problem. However, it has only been a year since his last arrest and he has 
unresolved financial problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated alcohol consumption and drug involvement security concerns, but he has not 
mitigated financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a-3.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a-4.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
