                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )    ISCR  Case No.  11-03281            
                                                             )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On February 22, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1962), as
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 13, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on May 31, 2012, and was scheduled for hearing on June
27, 2012. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the Government's case
consisted of seven exhibits (GEs 1-7). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 24
exhibits (AEs A-X). The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 6, 2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his
endorsements, awards, and accounting information covering his foreclosed properties.
There being no objection from Department Counsel, and for good cause shown, I
granted Applicant seven days to supplement the record and the Government one day to
respond. I also granted Applicant’s request for a seven-day extension. Within the time
permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with his civilian awards and foreclosure
records covering his first home foreclosure. I admitted his submissions as AEs Y and Z.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief
in October 2003 (discharged in January 2004) and subsequently accumulated two
mortgage debts in delinquent status. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations covered by
paragraphs 1.a through 1.c.  He explained he and his wife purchased a home covered
by the creditor identified in subparagraph 1.c in 2005. He claimed he and his wife
purchased a second home covered by the creditor identified in subparagraph 1.c in
2008 and retained the first home as an investment property. 
                 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old field engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first wife in September 1984 and has two adult sons from
this marriage. (GE 1) Both of his sons have served Marine Corps tours of duty. (AE W)
Applicant divorced his first wife in November 1989.  He remarried in January 1990 and
has two stepchildren from his wife’s previous marriage. (GE 1)
Applicant enlisted in the Navy following his graduation from high school in 1986.
(GE 1) He served 20 years of active duty in the Navy before his retirement in April 2006
with the rank of senior chief petty officer. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 50-51) Applicant attended
3
college between January 2003 and May 2005 and earned an associate of arts degree
and a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice administration. (GE 1and AE Y)
Applicant’s finances
Between March 1993 and September 2003, Applicant and his current wife
accumulated a number consumer-related debts (mostly credit card). Bankruptcy
schedules and credit reports reveal that Appellant and his wife purchased three vehicles
during this period: a 1999 Kia Sephra in April 1999 and two 2003 Ford Taurus
automobiles in September 2003. Besides his three vehicles, Applicant amassed over
$40,000 in credit card debts with 21 separate creditors, a credit line, several overdrafts,
and three reported stolen checks that produced fraudulent accounts exceeding $927.
Based on the credit reports, Applicant’s car purchases were fully financed with no
visible down payments. His debt accumulations and debt level left him with little room to
cover unexpected contingencies and emergencies.
One month after purchasing the new Ford vehicles, Applicant and his wife
encountered severe strains in their finances and could not keep up with their debt
payments. Applicant attributes his sudden financial difficulties to three stolen checks
that resulted in unidentified accounts that became delinquent. Beginning in January
2000, Applicant and his wife began receiving notices of two checks drawn against their
checking account. (AEs B and C; Tr. 46-47) Communication exchanges identified three
accounts billed to Applicant by mistake that later became delinquent. (AEs C-F; Tr. 47)
These reported delinquent accounts prompted his credit card creditors to raise their
interest rates on his legitimate accounts. (Tr. 47) 
What actions Applicant took with the credit reporting agencies to delete his
identified illegitimate accounts associated with his stolen checks from his credit reports
is unclear. He and his wife had few available assets available to them to cover any
unforeseen contingencies associated with their increased debts caused by rising
interest rates.  Consequently, they elected to petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in
October 2003. (GE 3; Tr. 48, 53) Preparatory to their petitioning for Chapter 7 relief,
they completed the required online counseling course. (AE A). Records do not
document any Applicant attempt to explore alternative remedies, such as debt
consolidation and Chapter 13 relief, before petitioning for Chapter 7 protections. And
they made their Chapter 7 election just a little over a month after purchasing their 2003
Ford vehicles. (GEs 5-7 and AE F) 
In their Chapter 7 petition, Applicant and his wife scheduled $65,191 in secured
claims and $44,027 in unsecured claims. Applicant’s schedule of secured claims reflects
his purchases of two 2003 Ford vehicles, each currently valued at $11,085. The total
claimed amount on each of these vehicles is $29,843, with $18,758 apportioned as
unsecured on each claim. (GE 2; AE F) Besides the Ford vehicles, Applicant scheduled
his 1999 Kia Sephia as a secured claim. (GE 2 and AE F) Broken down, this claim had
a total claim amount of $5,505, of which $3,930 was treated as unsecured. (AE F) 
4
Applicant’s schedule of unsecured claims listed claims associated with 21 credit
card accounts, a credit line, several overdraft claims, and three claims arising out of
stolen checks and comprising identified claims totaling $927 (apportioned among  three
reported claims). These claims cover debts created between 1993 and 2003. (AE F) 
Applicant and his wife received their bankruptcy discharge in January 2004. (GE
2) They attribute their bankruptcy to the two stolen checks. How these stolen checks
impacted his other accounts was not developed and is unclear.  Because Applicant did
not produce his entire Chapter 7 petition, inferences cannot be made as to how his
assets, if any, were made available to his creditors and apportioned. Presumably, the
three listed vehicles with an aggregate cash value of $23,745 were returned to the
named secured creditors. With no known listed assets to apportion among his creditors
holding unsecured claims, Applicant’s bankruptcy would likely qualify as a no-asset
case.
Less than 18 months after he received his bankruptcy discharge, Applicant and
his wife assumed more debt with a home purchase. In August 2005, they purchased a
home in their state for $192,154. (GE 3) They financed their purchase with a first
mortgage from creditor 1.c. (Tr. 55) They paid nothing down on their purchase and were
assigned monthly mortgage payments of $1,742. (Tr. 55-56) At the time, Applicant
made good money and encountered no problems making his monthly mortgage
payments. (GE 3; Tr. 54) 
Following the purchase of their first home, Applicant and his wife purchased two
new Ford vehicles: one in March 2006 for $33,955 and another in December 2008 for
$43,404. (GEs 4-6) Credit reports do not indicate whether they made any down
payments on the vehicles. The do reveal that  Applicant has since disposed of these
vehicles. (GEs 4-6) 
Anticipating their purchase of a second home, Applicant and his wife listed their
first home for sale with a local brokerage firm in September 2007 for $229,900. (GE 3;
Tr. 57-58). Records do not indicate when they abandoned their sale efforts. What is
known is that they ceased their efforts to market their first home by the time they closed
on their second home in 2008. (AE G) 
Applicant and his wife closed on their purchase of a second home in May 2008.
They paid $235,000 for the property and financed the entire purchase with a first
mortgage with creditor 1.b. (Tr. 57) Their monthly mortgage payments were $1,850.
After moving into their new home, they rented out their first home for $1,300 a month.
(GE 3; Tr. 57-61) With their combined gross income of $122,000 and very few debts at
the time, they determined they could easily make up the $450 mortgage deficiency on
their rented home. Still, in July 2009 they listed their second home for sale with a local
real estate brokerage firm. (AE I) The listing agreement does not include the proposed
sales price. Their sale efforts were not successful
5
In August 2009, Applicant’s current spouse was laid off from her job and
encountered difficulties finding a replacement job in a poor economic climate (13.3%
unemployment in her local community) with her limited educational credits. (GE 3 and
AEs H, J and K) Without his wife’s supplemental income, Applicant faced difficulties
keeping up with his family bills. (GE 3) When the renter of their first house vacated the
premises in January 2010, Applicant and his wife made plans to accept employment
opportunities in their current state of residence. (GE 3) They vacated their home and
moved to their current state of residence in February 2010, (GE 3) Excessive moving
expenses (exceeding $8,000) prompted Applicant to stop making his mortgage
payments on both mortgages. (GE 3; Tr. 66) Rather than try work with the lenders on
arranging short sales of their properties, they abandoned their mortgage obligations.
Applicant and his wife received a notice of pending foreclosure from their lender
on their second home (creditor 1.b) in June 2010. (GE 3) In an attempt to resolve the
loan deficiencies on his two homes and avert foreclosure, Applicant spoke with his
creditor 1.c lender in April 2010 about the availability of refinancing options. (GE 3 and
AE A; Tr. 67)  Even though he had stopped making mortgage payments on both homes,
he was hopeful of working out loan modifications that would enable him to keep the
homes while they searched for renters. (GE 3; Tr. 67-68) Neither creditor would agree
to financing changes to avert foreclosure. (AE A)
Asked if he ever considered working with the lenders on short sale
arrangements, Applicant acknowledged he did not.  Instead, he accepted the advice of
family and friends that he would stand a better chance of restoring his credit by avoiding
short sales and letting the foreclosure process take its course. (Tr.63) While this advice
seems highly imprudent, he and his wife accepted it. Both properties, in turn, were
foreclosed non-judicially by the lenders (creditors 1.b and 1.c) in 2011 and 2012,
respectively. Statistical reports place Applicant’s home state sixth nationally in the
number of homes foreclosed in 2009. (AEs M and N) 
Creditor 1.b foreclosed on Applicant’s second home in August 2010. (AE O; Tr.
54, 68) The foreclosing creditor entered a protective bid of $177,142 and purchased the
property for its own account. (GE 3 and AE O; Tr. 71) Creditor 1.b later resold the
property in November 2011 for $157,000. (GE 3; Tr. 70, 86-87) The creditor has not
made any attempts to date to enforce its deficiency balance against Applicant and his
wife. (Tr. 71) This deficiency balance currently stands at approximately $57,000, and
remains subject to enforcement by suit. (GEs 2 and 3; Tr. 76-77)
Creditor 1.c foreclosed on Applicant’s first residence in August 2011. (AE Z; Tr.
85) At the scheduled foreclosure sale of Applicant’s first property in August 2011, the
property’s public sale produced sale proceeds of $115,200. (AE Z; Tr. 75, 86) This left
an enforceable deficiency of approximately $81,000. To date, the lender has taken no
action to collect its deficiency entitlement. However, it retains the right to pursue
enforcement by court action. (Tr. 73-74) Applicant noted that creditor 1.c resold the
property in November 2011 for $115,000. (Tr. 70)
         
6
Applicant has continued to stay in contact with both creditor 1.b and creditor 1.c
Tr. 71-72, 74-77), and have enlisted some financial counseling. (Tr. 72) To date,
though, he has made no tangible attempts to establish payment arrangements with
either lender. By all evidentiary accounts, Applicant and his wife abandoned their home
mortgages in a strategic fashion without first trying to enlist creditor approvals for short
sales or other means of resolving their mortgage debts with the creditors. Recently,
creditor 1.c completed a move out agreement with the tenant renting the property while
creditor 1.c considers when to dispose of its foreclosed property. (AE R)
Applicant and his wife report a joint monthly remainder of $1,500 and good credit
with all of their remaining debts. (AE S; Tr. 92) He and his wife have $17,504 in their
savings account and an additional $6,553 in their checking account. (AE A) Applicant
has $10,102 in his 401(k) with his current employer and $29,619 in his 401(k) with his
previous employer. (AE A; Tr. 90) Applicant’s wife currently does not work, and she has
no plans to return to the work force. (Tr. 72, 82) Applicant occasionally provides
financial support to his grown children. (Tr. 83) 
Applicant has recently talked to his lenders (creditors 1.b and 1.c) about their
enforcement intentions and reports no further information. (Tr. 76-77) While he would
like to avoid bankruptcy to resolve his two deficiency debts, to date, he has developed
no repayment options to address the deficiencies owed to creditors 1.b and creditor 1.c.
Should either lender, or both, pursue him to collect their deficiency entitlements, he
assures he has ample resources to pay off any deficiencies and any imposed tax
liabilities, or make payment arrangements to do so, should. either or both lenders
initiate enforcement proceedings.  (Tr. 73-74, 90, 92-93) It remains uncertain, though,
whether the monthly remainder and other resources available to Applicant are sufficient
to meet any deficiency demands from creditors 1.b and 1.c should they arise. (Tr. 73-
74) Based on his historical track record, it is just as plausible to foresee his electing to
pursue a bankruptcy course of action or statute of limitation strategy to shed any large
deficiencies. At this point, no meaningful inferences can be drawn as to what Applicant
might choose as his course of action.   
Endorsements
Applicant earned numerous awards in the Navy, honoring his Navy achievements.
(AE Y)  He continues to work for the same employer he joined in August 2010, and is
highly regarded by his current supervisors and coworkers. (AE W) His logistics
supervisor credited him with absolute trust and confidence. (AE W) Another supervisor
characterized Applicant as a colleague “with impeccable character.” (AE W) A coworker
described Applicant as honest, trustworthy, and completely reliable. 
Because none of his character witnesses expressed any knowledge of Applicant’s
financial issues, his employer impressions become more difficult to assess. Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) investigation results report nothing unfavorable about
him with his employer. Based on these reports, inferences warrant that his performance
efforts meet employment standards. (GEs 2 and 3)
7
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
8
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.” 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is a field engineer for a defense contractor with a considerable history of
indebtedness over a number of years. After accumulating over a $110,000 in delinquent
credit card and other consumer-related debts, he petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
9
relief in 2003 and received his discharge in January 2004. Within two years of his
bankruptcy discharge he accumulated real estate mortgages that were foreclosed after
he defaulted on his loan payments on both homes in early 2010. Due to insufficient
proceeds from the ensuing sales of the foreclosed mortgages, Applicant remains at risk
to enforcement of the remaining deficiency balances ($81,000 and $57,000) on the
properties.  Enforcement predictability is difficult to gauge at this time.  
       Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the AGs
when the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Applicant’s accumulation of valid delinquent debts and his past inability to
resolve these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines ¶ DC 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Unexpected deteriorating market conditions in Applicant’s home state and his
good-faith efforts to stay in contact with the lenders who foreclosed his two properties
merit partial application of three of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations: ¶
MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation,
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” and MC ¶ 20(c), “the
person has received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control.” These mitigating conditions all have some
applicability to Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debts, but not a great deal. Most of the
time under consideration, he and his wife controlled their spending levels and debt
accruals and were considerably overextended. And Applicant’s financial counseling is not
documented and is not recent.
To be clear, Applicant is still liable for his creditor 1.b and 1.c deficiency debts in
sums exceeding $138,000. Applicant’s home state is not a no-recourse state, and
foreclosing creditors are permitted to seek deficiency judgments in the courts on
remaining loan balances. Whether Applicant is entitled to any deficiency protections
through his Veterans Administration loan coverage is unclear. 
10
In circumstances similar to the present case, the Appeal Board has said that an
applicant need not have paid or resolved every one of his proven debts or addressed all
of his debts simultaneously. What Applicant needs is a credible plan to resolve his
financial problems, accompanied by implementing actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-06488
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008) By the proofs presented, Applicant has achieved some of his
objectives. His credit reports reveal generally current accounts. However, he has two
large deficiency debts that are susceptible to enforcement by either of the listed lenders
or their assignees.
Whatever the current enforcement intentions of Applicant’s lenders (creditors 1.b
and 1.c), neither of the reported foreclosure deficiencies are barred by his adopted state’s
controlling statute of limitations (§312 of CCP (2004)), or by the statue of limitations in
place in his home state. His home state’s statute of limitations bar for written contracts is
longer (six years) even than the one that is controlling in his adopted state. See M. Comp.
Laws § 600.5801, et seq. So, regardless of which state statute of limitations enforcement
bar is employed, Applicant remains at risk to collection actions on each of his remaining
deficiency debts. 
Faced with two foreclosures and deficiency balances with each lender, Applicant
can choose among three options for resolving his loan deficiencies with creditors 1.b and
1.c. He can certainly initiate work out payment arrangements with the creditors with the
monetary resources to him and his wife.  Considering the amount of money involved (over
$135,000 between both creditors), this would likely entail some very burdensome
payment outlays with the creditors on whatever terms he is able to arrange. Alternatively,
he could petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief as a means of discharging his debt
responsibilities with creditors 1.b and 1.c. But this course of action could jeopardize his
credit standing with his remaining creditors, and would likely be utilized only if severely
pressed by the creditors for payment. As a last resort, he could try to exhaust the allowed
time limitations on deficiency suits and achieve the enforcement protections of his home
state’s statute of limitations. 
Applicant assures he will address his lenders with payment strategies should he be
confronted with payment demands. This is certainly possible. Based on his developed
track record to date, though, safe predictions cannot discount his electing either
bankruptcy or reliance on governing statutes of limitations to discharge his remaining two
debts with creditors 1.b and 1.c. For to date, he has made no affirmative efforts to
complete payment arrangements with creditors 1.b and 1.c and has deferred to the
lenders to make their demands known.    
While Applicant’s choice to defer any payment decisions for the time being is
understandable from a practical and business perspective, it does not meet the good-faith
requirements of the financial considerations guideline or satisfy minimal clearance
eligibility criteria. When presented with similar good-faith repayment challenges, the
Appeal Board has circumscribed “good-faith” repayment efforts to entail actions aimed at
resolving the applicant’s debts in ways that show “reasonableness, prudence, honesty,
and adherence to duty or obligation.” See ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April
11
20, 2004 (quoting ISCR Case No., 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001).  This means
that an applicant must generally do more to resolve his debts than rely on a legally
available option like bankruptcy or a statute of limitations.  See id.
Consideration of Applicant’s military and educational background, his prior
bankruptcy discharge in 2004,  his circumstances surrounding his post-bankruptcy debt
accumulations, market conditions in his home state, his current  income level in his
adopted state, and the lack of any documented affirmative steps to resolve his
foreclosure deficiencies with his creditors precludes a favorable assessment at this time
of his overall good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant’s proofs fail to
provide sufficient credible indicators of  his ability to be trusted in times of financial stress
and preclude him from  meeting his evidentiary burden of mitigating the covered debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is substantial that Applicant has
performed well during his 20-year tour of military service and is entitled to considerable
credit for his military contributions.  While economic circumstances played a pivotal role in
his inability to avert foreclosure of his two residences in his home state, his efforts to date
to resolve the deficiency balances resulting from the foreclosures of his two homes are
insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the AGs governing his finances.
His two remaining deficiency debts are simply too large to successfully mitigate without
evidence of successful repayment plans with the creditors.  
Formal Fin d  i n gs
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:            Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
12
