 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00156 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 24, 2012, and February 9, 2012, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 17, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 31, 2012, and the hearing was 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled on June 20, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted 
exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE C, 
which was admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding 
memorandum was marked as HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 
3, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e, and 1.i – 1.n. He 
denied ¶¶ 1.f - 1.h. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of 
the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2011. He is a program manager. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He is married and has one child who has a learning disability requiring 
specialized instruction. His wife is a registered nurse (RN) who is not currently working. 
He is seeking a security clearance for the first time.1  
 
 The SOR alleged 14 delinquent debts totaling about $45,703. The debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained on August 16, 2011, and June 8, 2010.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from an employment situation he was in 
from 2007 to 2009. He moved to a different state, leaving his family behind, to start a 
business venture. He and his mentor (boss) worked on an infrastructure project in an 
effort to grow the company. During this time, Applicant was receiving very little 
compensation. The company was paying his living expenses including his rent. 
However, before the project was completed, his boss was diagnosed with cancer. The 
business essentially ceased to operate at that point. Applicant was responsible for the 
remainder of a year lease, but he was no longer receiving financial support from his 
company. He broke the lease and moved back to where his family was located so he 
would not have to continue supporting two households.3 
 
 After returning to his home state, Applicant was unemployed for about 10 
months. He was unable to collect unemployment insurance because he was working as 
a subcontractor in his last job. His wife was working as an RN at a local hospital and 
they relied on her income to pay their expenses.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 49; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 5-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-27. 
 
4 Tr. at 27. 
 
 
3 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,800) is a judgment entered by a collection 
company. This debt originated from the unexpired lease that Applicant broke when he 
left his subcontractor position. He also believes that this is the same debt that is alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.f ($14,030), but he could not explain the different amounts owed, and he 
had no documentation showing the debts were the same. Both debts are listed 
separately on the most recent credit report. These debts are unresolved.5 
  
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a delinquent utility debt in the amount of $334. 
Applicant admitted this debt, which was incurred while he was working as a 
subcontractor. During his security clearance interview in June 2010, he told the 
investigator this bill would be paid in six months. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent cable debt in the amount of $740. 
Applicant admitted this debt, which was incurred while he was working as a 
subcontractor. During his security clearance interview in June 2010, he told the 
investigator this bill would be paid in six months. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a delinquent utility debt in the amount of $149. 
Applicant admitted this debt, which was incurred while he was working as a 
subcontractor. During his security clearance interview in June 2010, he told the 
investigator this bill would be paid in six months. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is delinquent rent owed for an apartment in the 
city where he was a subcontractor. His company failed to pay the last month’s rent in 
the amount of $2,210. Applicant admitted this debt. During his security clearance 
interview in June 2010, he told the investigator this bill would be paid in six months. This 
debt is unresolved.9 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are delinquent medical debts in the 
amounts of $105 and $225 respectively. Applicant admitted both debts, and he supplied 
documentary proof that ¶ 1.g was paid. SOR ¶ 1.h is unresolved.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a delinquent telephone debt in the amount of 
$663. Applicant admitted this debt, which was incurred while he was working as a 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33-35; GE 2, 6. 
 
6 Tr. at 35; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 35; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 35; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 35; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 35; GE 2; AE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
subcontractor. During a subsequent security clearance interview in September 2010, he 
told the investigator this bill would be paid in six months. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k are delinquent credit card debts in the 
amounts of $1,110 and $620 respectively. Applicant admitted these debts during his 
testimony. He previously stated that he owed only one credit card debt. He did not offer 
any documentation disputing either debt. These debts are unresolved.12 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m are delinquent library debts in the 
amounts of $75 and $58 respectively. Applicant admitted these debts during his 
testimony. During his security clearance interviews in June 2010 and September 2010, 
he told the investigator these debts would be paid in six months. These debts are 
unresolved.13 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n, is a delinquent tax debt in the amount of about 
$23,584. Applicant owed for tax years 2007-2009 because as a subcontractor no 
federal income taxes were withheld from his paychecks during that time and he did not 
know how to make the required payments to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 
Applicant reached an offer and compromise settlement with the IRS in the amount of 
$15,000. The final $9,000 payment was made in January 2012. This debt is resolved.14 
 
 Another major expense that Applicant described was the yearly tuition he pays 
for private schooling for his daughter. The tuition is approximately $18,000 yearly. He 
receives about $7,000 in financial aid, but must pay the remaining amount himself. He 
may get some help from his in-laws to pay the tuition. While his wife remains 
unemployed, they are currently meeting their monthly expenses with very little income 
left over. His plan to resolve the remaining debts is to pay them when his wife begins 
working again. He received some financial counseling in 2004 when he consolidated 
and paid off some credit card debts.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
11 GE 3. 
 
12 Tr. 35; GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. 35; GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. 28-29; GE 2; AE A. 
 
15 Tr. 30, 32, 43, 89, 91. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has multiple debts that are delinquent. He was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple. The debts are also ongoing and he has 
not made payments toward those debts, except for the tax debt and one medical debt. 
His poor financial record and his failure to pay most of the debts cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant was impacted by his company’s business downturn, periods of 
unemployment, his daughter’s tuition, and some medical issues. These were conditions 
beyond his control. However, for AG ¶ 20(b) to fully apply, Applicant must also have 
 
7 
 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. While he did act responsibly to resolve his 
tax liability debt and one medical debt, he has done nothing to resolve the remaining 
debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant did receive financial counseling a number of years ago unrelated to 
these debts. However, his finances are not currently under control or being resolved. He 
has debts that he indicated to an investigator would be paid by now but are not. AG ¶ 
20(c) partially applies. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the tax debt and one medical debt, but 
does not apply to the remaining debts since no good-faith effort was made toward 
paying those debts. Since he did not dispute any of the unpaid debts, ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s current service to his employer, his unemployment, and 
his daughter’s medical and education issues. I also considered that beyond resolving 
his tax liability, he has done very little to resolve his debts. His past financial track 
record reflects a troublesome financial history that causes me to question his ability to 
resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h - 1.m  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.n   For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
