 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 11-06892 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
Duffy, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
                                                          
1 The caption of the Statement of Reason incorrectly placed “Sr.” immediately after Applicant’s 
last name.   
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant answered the SOR on January 4, 
2012, and requested a hearing on February 21, 2012. The case was originally assigned 
to another administrative judge and was reassigned to me on May 2, 2012. DOHA 
issued the Notice of Hearing on May, 24, 2012. The hearing was held as scheduled on 
June 6, 2012. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 
that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through D that were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was left open until July 2, 2012, for the Applicant to submit additional matters. 
Applicant timely submitted AE E through U that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum indicating he had no objection to 
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions was marked as HE 1. The transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing was received on June 21, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
that contractor since February 2011. He served honorably in the U.S. Navy from 1986 to 
2006 and retired in the grade of petty officer first class (E-6). He has earned two 
associate’s degrees, one in 1986 and the other in 2005. He is about four credits short of 
earning a bachelor’s degree. He is married and has a son and a stepson, ages 22 and 
24, respectively. He also has adopted his three-year-old granddaughter. He held a 
security clearance in the Navy without incident.2 
 
The SOR asserted that Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004, which was 
later dismissed, and that he had 11 delinquent debts totaling $23,010. In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the bankruptcy allegation (SOR ¶ 1.a) and three of the 
alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.l) totaling $17,132. He denied the remaining 
allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings as fact.3 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to two automobile accidents, two 
periods of unemployment, and identity theft. While serving in the Navy in 2000, 
Applicant was seriously injured in an automobile accident with a truck. He underwent 
five back surgeries. Although selected for promotion to the grade of chief warrant officer 
in the Navy, he was determined to be physically unable to serve in that role. In 2006, he 
was medically retired from the Navy with a 40% disability. In April 2007, he was involved 
in another vehicle accident in which he was struck by a hit-and-run drunk driver. As a 
result of this later accident, he was hospitalized for a week and was unemployed from 
April to August 2007. He was also unemployed from July 2010 to February 2011 when 
he was laid off from a shipyard job due to a large oil spill that negatively impacted the 
                                                          
2 Tr. 4-8, 19-20, 31-32, 57-58; GE 1, 3; AE C, F. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 5. 
 
3 
 
 
shipyard. Additionally, Applicant stated that he was the victim of identity theft. As 
discussed in more detail below, he disputed a number of the debts and most of those 
debts have been deleted from his credit report. Each SOR allegation is addressed 
separately below.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Chapter 7 bankruptcy dismissed in 2004. Applicant’s credit reports 
reflect that he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2004, and that proceeding was 
dismissed in November 2004. Applicant testified that he never intended to file 
bankruptcy. From 2003 to 2005, he underwent surgeries for back injuries resulting from 
a vehicle accident. He described this as a difficult period for him. Around that time, he 
hired a credit counseling company to perform debt consolidation services for him and 
began making regular payments to that company. He later learned no payments were 
being made to the creditors. When he contacted the credit counseling company, he was 
surprised to learn that it filed bankruptcy for him. In informing the company that he never 
intended to file bankruptcy, he stated the company’s representative indicated that it 
might have made a mistake. When he later attempted to contact the credit counseling 
company following a surgery, he initially could not locate it and later learned that it 
moved locations. When he finally contacted the company, he was advised that it had no 
record of him. At that point, he stopped dealing with the credit counseling company. He 
believes that company is now out of business.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – charged-off account for $6,875. This was a $5,000 loan that 
Applicant obtained for car repairs. When he acquired this loan in 2010, he also obtained 
insurance that would cover payments if he was injured or laid off. He made about three 
payments of $324 on this loan before he was laid off in July 2010. He submitted claims 
to the insurance company that included Veterans Affairs documents concerning his 
disability, but the insurance company wanted a letter from a doctor. He obtained a letter 
from his doctor and submitted it. The doctor’s letter, however, was not on letterhead. 
The insurance company then requested that he resubmit the letter on letterhead. At the 
time of the hearing, he was attempting to obtain another letter on letterhead. After 
starting his new job in 2011, he made payments towards this debt in November and 
December of that year. However, based on the advice of his attorney, he stopped 
making payments in January 2012 so that his attorney could negotiate a resolution of 
the debt. At the time of the hearing, his attorney was still attempting to reach a 
settlement agreement for this debt.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $1,710. This was a telephone services 
account. The date of last activity on the account was September 2003. Applicant 
                                                          
4 Tr. 7-8, 19-31, 49, 52-56, 76; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 3, 4. 
5 Tr. 21-24, 26, 48, 81- ; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4-7. 
6 Tr. 31, 39-42, 48-49, 58-61; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 4, 7; HE 1, AE A, B, N, P, R, 
and S. 
 
4 
 
 
claimed he never had an account with this telephone company. He disputed this debt, 
and it was deleted from his credit report.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $10,000. This was a vehicle loan that was 
placed for collection in August 2010. The vehicle was purchased for $24,000 in 2002. 
After his wife stopped working to assist him following a surgery, they could no longer 
afford to make the monthly vehicle payments. The vehicle was voluntarily repossessed 
in 2004. The vehicle was later sold and he was informed he owed a deficiency on the 
loan of $3,780. Following that sale, he made a payment arrangement with the creditor 
and began making payments of about $300 per month. The account was then 
transferred to a collection agency. He continued to make payments to the collection 
agency, but later learned the account was transferred back to the creditor. He was told 
that the payments he was making to the collection agency were being sent to the 
creditor, but he became concerned about who was receiving the money. At that point, 
he stopped making payments and hired an attorney to assist him. In his Answer to the 
SOR, he indicated that he and his attorney were working on a new payment 
arrangement for this debt.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $957. This was a telephone services account. 
The date of last activity on the account was February 2007. Applicant claimed that this 
account was paid. He disputed this debt, and it was deleted from his credit report.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $666. This was a telephone services account. 
It was placed for collection in January 2010. Applicant stated that this was his wife’s 
account, and she paid it. He disputed this debt, and it was deleted from his credit 
report.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $426. This was a credit card account that was 
placed for collection in February 2011. Applicant disputed this debt claiming it was paid. 
On September 29, 2011, the collection agency sent Applicant a letter advising him that 
collection on this account had ceased due to his dispute and requested the credit 
reporting agencies delete this debt from his credit file.11 
 
                                                          
 
7 Tr. 29-30, 61-65; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 7; AE A, P. 
8 Tr. 20-21, 25-26, 30, 65-69, 86-91; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE P. 
9 Tr. 69-70, 76; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 7; AE P. 
10 Tr. 30, 70-71, 76; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 7; AE P.  
11 Tr. 71-72, 76; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 7; AE P. Interestingly, Applicant 
apparently wrote on the letter from the collection agency that this was not his debt. See GE 2. 
 
5 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – state tax lien for $627. This lien was filed in May 2002. A state 
assessed Applicant income taxes in the amount of $262 for tax year 1993 and $609 for 
tax year 1999. Applicant provided documentation to the state showing that he was not 
domiciled there during those tax years. The state rescinded the assessments. His most 
recent credit report indicates this lien has been released.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – collection account for $877.  The date of last activity on this account 
was December 2010. Applicant stated that this debt was for a payday loan. He indicated 
that he never obtained a payday loan. He disputed this debt with the credit reporting 
agencies; however, it still remains listed on his most recent credit report.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j – collection account for $405. This debt also was a payday loan. It was 
placed for collection in January 2009. He disputed this debt, and it is not listed on his 
most recent credit report.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – collection account for $210. This account was placed for collection 
in March 2010. Applicant had no knowledge of this account. He disputed this debt, and 
it was deleted from his credit report.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – unpaid federal taxes of $257. These taxes were for tax year 2008. In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he made a payment arrangement for 
this debt and paid it. However, he provided no proof of payment.16 
 
Applicant signed up for prepaid legal services after his negative experience with 
the credit counseling company. The prepaid legal services determined that he was the 
victim of identity theft and filed a fraud alert with the credit reporting agencies. In this 
regard, Applicant testified that an ex-sailor at some point purchased a house using 
Applicant’s social security number, although that debt is not listed in the SOR. In 
February 2011, he hired a law firm specializing in credit repair to assist him in resolving 
his debts. As discussed above, this law firm has successfully disputed many of his 
debts. This law firm also provides credit counseling. He continues to pay the law firm 
monthly fees and they are assisting him in resolving his remaining debts.17 
                                                          
12 Tr. 26-27, 72-73; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 4, 7; AE A.  
13 Tr. 73-75; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 7; AE A, P.  
14 Tr. 75; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 7; AE A.  
15 Tr. 75-76; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 7; AE A, P.  
16 Tr. 73, 76-77; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4. Of note, however, there is no evidence in 
the record tending to show he did not pay this debt. It was not listed on any of the credit reports in 
evidence. Given the small amount of this debt, it has limited security significance. At the hearing, 
Applicant also testified that he owed $79 to the Internal Revenue Service for last year’s income taxes and 
he paid that amount. 
17 Tr. 23-24, 74, 81-91, GE 2, 4. 
 
6 
 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was open and forthcoming about his financial problems. 
He is meeting his current monthly financial obligations. His wife has been working part 
time since about August 2007. He and his wife are still supporting their adult children. In 
October 2011, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement that reflected his net 
monthly income was $7,159, that his net monthly expenses were $2,900, that his total 
monthly debt payments were $675, which left him a net monthly remainder of about 
$3,500. At the hearing, he estimated that his and his wife’s combined gross income was 
about $100,000 and that they had about $1,800 per month in discretionary income. 
While in the Navy, Applicant was awarded the Navy Commendation Medal, two Navy 
Achievement Medals, six Good Conduct Medals and various unit medals and ribbons.18  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
                                                          
18 Tr. 50-58, 77-91; GE 3, 4; AE C, N.  
 
7 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts totaling over $17,000 that he was unable 
or unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Security clearance adjudications are not a debt collection procedure. These 
proceedings are designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.19 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he or 
she has resolved every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan 
to resolve the financial problems and take sufficient action to implement the plan. There is 
no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor is there a requirement that the debt alleged in the SOR be paid first.20 
 
About eight to ten years ago, Applicant sought the services of a credit counseling 
company. He thought that he hired the company to perform debt consolidation services 
for him. He was making regular payments to the company, but later learned the company 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy for him. He never intended to file bankruptcy. The bankruptcy 
                                                          
19 See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
20 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
9 
 
 
filing was a mistake. This happened under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
that do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
In 2000, Applicant was involved in a vehicle accident in which he incurred serious 
injuries.  As a result of that accident, he underwent five surgeries and was medically 
retired from the Navy. In 2007, he had another vehicle accident that resulted in him 
missing about five months of work. As a result of this latter accident, his wife quit her job 
so that she could care for him during his recovery. In 2010, Applicant was laid off of his 
job and was unemployed for about eight months due to an oil spill. His vehicle accidents 
and periods of unemployment were conditions beyond his control that contributed to his 
financial problems. Applicant further contended that he was the victim of identity theft. 
Since obtaining his current job in February 2011, he has systematically taken steps to 
resolve the alleged debts. He hired a law firm specializing in credit repair. With that law 
firm’s assistance, he disputed many of the debts. As a result of those disputes, seven of 
the alleged debts have been deleted from his credit report. Only two debts that he has 
admitted (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d) remain listed on his credit report. The law firm is taking 
action to resolve those remaining debts. By his action, Applicant has shown that he is 
committed to resolving all of the alleged debts. His financial problems are being resolved 
and are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.e through 1.k. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
10 
 
 
Applicant honorably served in the Navy for 20 years. He was selected for promotion to 
the grade of chief warrant officer, but was unable to assume that grade because of 
physical injuries incurred in a vehicle accident. While in the Navy, he was awarded the 
Navy Commendation Medal, two Navy Achievement Medals, and six Good Conduct 
Medals. He held a security clearance in the past without incident. He was candid, 
sincere, and credible at the hearing. He and his wife are still supporting their adult 
children, and they adopted their granddaughter. By all accounts, Applicant is a 
responsible law-abiding citizen. He is current on his day-to-day living expenses, lives 
within his means, and is working with a law firm to resolve his remaining debts. He is on 
the right track to resolve his financial problems. Both the applicable mitigating conditions 
and the whole-person concept analysis support a favorable clearance decision. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
