      1The Government submitted eleven items in support of its case.
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                      )       ISCR Case No. 11-09333
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On September 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated January 12, 2012.1 Applicant received the FORM on May 24,
2012. He did not submit additional information. On July 17, 2012, the Director, DOHA,
forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge. I received the case
2
assignment on July 19, 2012. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant did not
meet his burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the majority of the allegations
under Guideline F, with the exception of SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.l,1.m, 1.o, and 1.q, which he
denied. (Item 4)  
Applicant is 29 years old. He graduated from high school in 2000 and attended
community college for a short period.  He is married and has two children. He served in
the U.S. Army from June 2000 until June 2010, and he was deployed on several
occasions to Afghanistan. (Item 5) Applicant has been employed with his current
employer since September 2010. (Item 4) He has held a security clearance since
approximately 2004. (Item 11)
 The SOR lists 19 delinquent debts that total approximately $142,382,29. The
credit reports confirm them. (Items 8, 9 and 10) Applicant has recently settled debts
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1j, 1.k, and 1.p, and provided
documentation to verify the paid settlement amounts. (Documentation in file) The
amount not resolved is approximately $126,447, which includes an unpaid judgment
and a home foreclosure with the balance due on the mortgage of approximately
$109,198.00. (Items 1 and 4)
Applicant admits in his answer to the SOR that as to SOR ¶ 1.g for a home
mortgage loan balance of $109,198.00, the account was foreclosed. He did not provide
any additional details or information. Although in a 2009 interview, he stated that he
thought that his wife sold that home while he was deployed to a couple who were going
to fix the home and “flip it.” Applicant also stated that the mortgage balance was zero
and should not have been on his credit report. It is not clear from the latest credit report
that the balance is zero. (Item 10)
Applicant denied several debts including SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, and 1.q,  but
did not provide any documentation for his reasons. (Item 4)  He claims he has disputed
SOR ¶1.n because he has paid the account to the phone company and still has current
service. He also states that SOR ¶1.b is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.n. (Item 4) Applicant
believes that he has provided sufficient evidence to show that he has resolved or is in
the process of getting information on “questionable” accounts. (Item 4) He also
submitted documentation for debts paid in 2011 that did not appear on the SOR.
Applicant did not report long periods of unemployment or provide any insight into
the origin of the debt. When interviewed in 2009, he reported that he made sufficient
income to live within his means. However, when deployed, his wife managed the
finances. He recognized the accounts, but stated that he had no knowledge that the
accounts were past-due. Applicant was cooperative and stated that he would resolve
any unpaid debts that were valid. (Item 6) In 2011, Applicant notified his personnel
security specialist that he was enlisting the services of a credit counseling agency to
      2 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      4 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
3
help him with some of the issues he was encountering with some companies. (Letter in
File)
Applicant has a monthly net income of approximately $8,759, not including his
wife’s net income of $700 a month. After listing total monthly expenses of $3,163 and
his monthly payments on his car and truck, he has a net monthly remainder of $5,895.
He listed bank savings of $14,997. (Item 6)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”2 The burden of proof is something less than a
preponderance of evidence.3 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.4 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
      5 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      7 Id.
4
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”5 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”6 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.7 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant has delinquent debts amounting to $142,382. Although he denied some
debts in his answer to the SOR, he acknowledged others in his interview and his
security clearance application. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns.  
Applicant’s debts are recent and ongoing. He intends to pay his bills but he has
not presented documentation concerning the mortgage foreclosure. He has recently
paid some debts.  Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC)
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
5
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. As noted, Applicant has not had long periods of unemployment. He
suggested at one point that his wife handled the finances while he was deployed, but he
did not present specific information to prove that the delinquencies were beyond his
control. This mitigating condition does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant provided documentation that he
has recently resolved several debts listed in the SOR. He claims that other accounts
have been disputed, but did not produce any evidence to support his assertion. He did
not present evidence that he received financial counseling which obviates the
applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling
for the problem. I do not find that  there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of
persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 29 years old. He served in the military and was deployed to Afghanistan. He
has held a security clearance. He has  worked for his current employer since 2010.  He
has delinquent debts that are still unresolved. He did pay some debts, but he did not
6
produce documentation or evidence that he has resolved the remaining debts, or is in
the process of resolving them.  He has not sought financial counseling.
Applicant submitted insufficient information or evidence to mitigate the security
concerns raised in his case. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.l-1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
