 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02200 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 13, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is indebted to 22 
creditors in the approximate amount of $102,610, raising concerns under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations. He also committed a series of rule-breaking incidents that 
showed poor judgment and raised security concerns under the guideline for Personal 
Conduct. Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and the Personal 
Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 23, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 17, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 17, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on May 17, 2012, scheduling the hearing for June 19, 2012. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 
GE 11, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were also admitted. The record 
was left open for Applicant to submit exhibits and on June 22, 2012, and June 29, 2012, 
Applicant presented two emails that I have marked AE E and AE F. Department 
Counsel had no objections to Applicant’s post-hearing documents and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 27, 2012. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing on June 19, 2012, Department Counsel made a motion to amend 
the SOR in order to conform to the evidence, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17. Applicant 
had no objections to the amendment and the motion was granted. (Tr. 63-64.) The 
amendment changed the dollar amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u from $185,000 to $28,603. 
The allegation, as amended, reads: 
 
1.u. You are indebted to [creditor] for an account placed for collection by 
[creditor] in the approximate amount of $28,603. As of the date of this 
Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a through 1.o, 1.q through 1.t, 1.v, 1.w, 2.c, 
and 2.d. He denied SOR allegations 1.u, 2.a, and 2.b. Allegation 1.p was omitted in the 
SOR. He failed to admit or deny allegation 2.e., which referenced the information set 
forth under the first paragraph of the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He held a security clearance during the 1980’s, while 
working for a government contractor. He is currently unemployed, but has been offered 
a position with a government contractor if he can obtain a security clearance. He has 
been married for 19 years and has four adult children. (GE 4; Tr. 32-33, 39-40, 42.) 
 
Applicant’s credit reports from October 19, 2010; November 3, 2011; March 31, 
2011; and June 12, 2012; and his answers to interrogatories, show that Applicant was 
indebted to 21 creditors in the amount of $74,007;1 as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, through 
1.o, 1.q through 1.t, and 1.v. He failed to present any documentation that he is repaying 
any of his delinquent accounts. Of his delinquent accounts, Applicant is responsible for 
the following unsatisfied bad debts owed for consumer goods, services, and credit card 
purchases: SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($1,003); 1.m ($2,081); 1.n ($3,318); 1.o ($2,664); 1.q 
($11,311); 1.r ($1,591); 1.s ($2,665); and 1.t ($3,956). Applicant owes the creditors 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.l a total of $11,581 on unpaid medical accounts for the 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s total indebtedness of $102,610 was calculated by adding the 21 debts totaling $74,007 to his remaining 
mortgage debt of $28,603, discussed below. 
 
3 
 
treatment of his daughter after an accident. He provided documentation that has settled 
and repaid other medical debts, but acknowledged that these medical debts are still 
outstanding. (GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; GE 11; AE F; Tr. 41-66.) 
 
Additionally, Applicant is alleged to be indebted on his home mortgage totaling 
$185,000, in SOR ¶ 1.w. Applicant testified that he only had one mortgage and it was 
originally for $185,000. However, the home was foreclosed upon in November 2009. He 
submitted a document entitled “Trustee’s Deed Upon Sale” that indicated his home was 
resold for $146,387.82. Applicant no longer owes the full original debt as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.w. Instead, Applicant owes approximately $28,603 on this debt after the 
foreclosure sale, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u, as amended. (GE 9; GE 11; AE F; Tr. 34-35, 
61-67.)  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are directly attributable to his unemployment from 
March 2009 to the present. Applicant’s employment was terminated when he 
intentionally drove a forklift into a table, causing it to bump into and injure a co-worker, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c. Because Applicant was terminated due to misconduct, he was 
not eligible to receive unemployment compensation. He has remained unemployed, 
except for a brief six-week temporary job in October 2009, until the present. He 
currently has no earned income. His wife does not work due to a back injury. Applicant 
and his wife are currently supported by Applicant’s sister, who manages a trust fund for 
their family’s use. He does not know how much is left in the trust fund. He testified that 
he has no funds available to repay his delinquent accounts. He intends to repay his 
debts once he is gainfully employed. (GE 2; GE 8; Tr. 43-66, 68-75, 88-91.) 
 
In 2005, prior to Applicant’s termination, he was reprimanded with a written 
warning from his employer for failing to properly record his time, spending work time on 
personal matters, and insubordination, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant testified that 
he had a new “lead man” at work, who was offended that Applicant had requested a 
transfer to another work location. He felt the lead man singled him out for punching the 
time clock in a different work area and for not being available immediately when he was 
requested to perform a task. As a result of this written warning, Applicant was not 
awarded a holiday bonus. (GE 8; Tr. 35-36.) 
 
On June 24, 2007, Applicant was charged with resisting arrest, delay, and 
obstructing a peace officer, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. Sheriff department records show 
that on June 24, 2007, officers responded to an emergency request for medical aid 
made by Applicant’s wife, caused by her back pain. Applicant’s wife was found by the 
responding officers on her back in the front yard. Applicant approached the officers and 
told them to “get off [his] property.” Applicant appeared angry and had clenched fists. 
Officers requested that Applicant step away. Instead, he advanced toward the officers, 
again requesting that the officers leave. Fearing for their safety, the officers forced 
Applicant to the ground and arrested him. Applicant, however, recalls the arrest 
differently. He testified that a few months prior to this incident, local officers beat up his 
son. As a result, he was weary of all officers. He “asked them nicely to leave” but they 
did not. He indicated he asked the officer for his business card, but the officer “got very 
irate.” He indicated he tried to turn around and go in the house, but the officers “threw 
 
4 
 
[him] to the ground and arrested [him].” Applicant testified that the charges against him 
were never filed with the court. (GE 1; GE 5; Tr. 31-34, 36, 79-84.) 
 
In January 2010 Applicant was cited with failure to obey school attendance 
board, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. His youngest child, who was then 16, was skipping 
school. He was found guilty of failure to obey school attendance board and sentenced 
to enroll his daughter in school and attend one day of school with her. He was unable to 
comply with the court order, because his daughter took and passed a high school 
equivalency exam that meant she no longer had to enroll in school. A bench warrant 
was issued for Applicant’s arrest when he failed to attend school, but it was recalled 
after Applicant explained to the court that his daughter had passed the equivalency 
exam. Applicant paid a fine of $50. (GE 3; Tr. 37-38, 75-79.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by former co-workers, a former supervisor, and 
friends who wrote letters of support on Applicant’s behalf. His former supervisor noted “I 
have never questioned his honesty, integrity or ethics.” Applicant is also actively 
involved in his community. He is the president of a club, of which he is a member. (AE 
A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; Tr. 40.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
 
5 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns for Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are established by the evidence in this case:   
 
(a) Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2009 to the present, Applicant accumulated a significant amount of 
delinquent debt. During that time, he has been unable to adequately address his debts. 
He has no earned income at this time. The Government established a prima facie case 
for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties are recent and on-going. He failed to satisfy any 
of the debts listed on the SOR. Applicant’s debts are attributable to his unemployment; 
however, his unemployment was not a circumstance beyond his control. He lost his job 
after intentional misconduct that caused injury to another employee. Further, he failed to 
establish that he has been acting responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to 
provide evidence that he has received counseling, or to show that his financial problems 
are being addressed. Without any income, Applicant cannot resolve his delinquent 
accounts. Only SOR ¶ 1.w, which was resolved involuntarily through foreclosure, has 
been addressed, and $28,603 remains owing on that delinquent mortgage debt (as set 
out in SOR ¶1.u). None of the above-listed mitigating conditions apply.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concerns for the Personal Conduct guideline are set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
7 
 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
 Applicant exercised poor judgment on multiple occasions under many different 
circumstances. He has acquired excessive debt that he is unable to repay. He has 
injured a coworker, violated workplace policies regarding time recording, and was 
insubordinate to a superior. His actions led to his termination. He was arrested after 
confronting police officers on his property who were there to check on the well-being of 
his wife. He was also cited for his failure to have his daughter attend school. These 
diverse instances of poor conduct show Applicant has a history of poor judgment, 
inappropriate workplace behavior, and rule violations. AG ¶ 16(c) and 16(d) are 
applicable as a disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 In this instance, Applicant’s multiple episodes of irresponsibility and poor 
judgment occurred over a seven year time frame beginning in 2005 and continues 
today, through the failure to satisfy his delinquent accounts. Not enough time has 
passed to safely predict Applicant will avoid questionable decisions in the future. He 
failed to produce evidence that he participated in any type of counseling or 
rehabilitation. His reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment are still in question and he 
has not demonstrated positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. No mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant, a mature man, has demonstrated questionable judgment over a 
number of years on many different occasions. While he is well respected by former co-
 
9 
 
workers, a former supervisor, and friends, it is unclear from their letters whether each 
knows of the scope of Applicant’s financial problems and lapses in judgment. He has 
debts owed to 22 creditors in the approximate amount of $102,610, which he has failed 
to adequately address.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations or the Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.w:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
