 
 
 
 
1 
                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 11-01581   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
For Government: James Norman, Esquire, Chief Department Counsel1   
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
On June 2, 2011, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). On October 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
                                            
1  Mr. James Norman assumed representation for the Department after Mr. Paul Delaney passed 
away in early July 2012.   
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about November 29, 2011 (AR), 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On April 26, 2012, DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for May 16, 2012. On May 12, 2012, 
DOHA re-assigned the case to me due to a medical emergency experienced by the 
previously assigned administrative judge. The case was heard as scheduled.  
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on May 23, 
2012. The recorded remained open until June 15, 2012, to give Applicant an 
opportunity to submit documents. Applicant timely submitted a revised AE C, and AE 
H, which were admitted into the record without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1, except those contained in Paragraphs 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.j. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in 1977 and 
a Master of Business Administration degree in 2003. He served in the Merchant 
Marine from July 1971 to August 1973. In May 2006 he and his wife divorced after 25 
years of marriage. They have two children, ages 27 and 30.  
 
 In April 2006 Applicant’s employer laid him off due to a cancellation of a military 
program. He had worked for the defense contractor for 22 years. His annual salary at 
the time was $115,000. Prior to that position, he worked for another defense 
contractor for many years. After losing his position in 2006 he worked primarily with a 
partner in a start-up company and earned minimal income. (Tr. 29.) In July 2010 he 
obtained his current position as a program manager for a private company.2 (GE 1.) 
He held a security clearance during his previous employment with defense 
contractors. (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose after he divorced in May 2006 and agreed 
to pay his wife $1,900 per month for six years as alimony. He had not experienced 
financial problems before 2006. After losing his job in April 2006, he did not have 
sufficient income to make the monthly alimony payments to his wife. He subsequently 
withdrew about $200,000 from his 401(k) retirement fund to pay his wife, his own 
living expenses, and his daughter’s college costs. (Tr. 53; GE 2 at 4.) In 2009 or 2010 
he sold the marital home and paid his wife $40,000 from the proceeds per the divorce 
agreement.  (AE G.)   
 
 Applicant’s wife filed contempt charges against him three times for not timely 
paying alimony. He was subsequently placed in jail each time and borrowed 
approximately $33,700 from friends to pay alimony arrearages, and to be released 
                                            
2 Applicant’s former employer until 2006, a defense contractor, is sponsoring him for a 
security clearance. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
from jail. (Tr. 40; AR; GE 2 at 4.) In 2011 his former wife obtained an order to garnish 
his wages in the amount of $950 bi-weekly. At the same time he was paying the IRS 
a $400 monthly payment. In April 2012 he completed the alimony payments and his 
IRS payments increased to $2,300 monthly. (AE G.)    
 
 The SOR alleged ten delinquent debts totaling $106,924, of which $67,706 
relates to Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax delinquencies. The debts became 
delinquent after 2006. Applicant stated he apprised some of the creditors of his 
financial situation and lack of money. (AE G.) The status of each allegation is set out 
in AE C, an Excel spreadsheet, and is as follows: 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) The $67,706 debt owed to the IRS is for 2006 and 2007 income 
taxes, and taxes and penalties related to Applicant’s withdrawal of 
money from his 401(k). (GE 2 at 5.) According to Applicant, the total 
amount owed to the IRS was $74,000. He has paid $27,613 on the 
debt, leaving a balance of $46,387. The tax lien has been released. He 
anticipated that the IRS debt will be paid by September 2013. (Tr. 31-
46; AE C.) It is being resolved. 
 
2. (¶ 1.b) Applicant disputes the debt for $367 owed to a satellite TV 
company. He stated he returned the equipment and does not owe this 
bill. He has not disputed the debt through the credit reporting agency or 
filed a written one with the company.  (Tr. 46- 48; AE C.) It is 
unresolved.  
 
3. (¶ 1.c) The $1,743 delinquent debt is owed to a bank credit card. His 
daughter used the credit card while in college and has not provided 
money to pay it. He intends to begin payments in October 2013. (Tr. 49-
51; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
4. (¶ 1.d) The $4,072 debt owed to a credit card company is a marital 
debt that is Applicant’s responsibility per his divorce settlement. He has 
been unable to pay it, but intends to begin payments in October 2013 
when he anticipates having sufficient income after payment of the IRS 
debt.  (Tr. 51-53; GE 2 at 6; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
5. (¶ 1.e) The $11,952 debt is owed to the same company as noted in ¶ 
1.d above. It is a marital debt that remains his responsibility. He intends 
to begin payments in October 2013, after he completes his payment to 
the IRS.  (Tr. 52-53; GE 2 at 6; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
6. (¶ 1.f) Applicant does not recognize the debt for $284 and intends to 
dispute it. (Tr. 53-54; GE 4 at 6; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
7. (¶ 1.g) Applicant does not recognize the credit card debt for $6,209, 
but has not filed a dispute to date. (Tr. 55-57; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
 
 
 
4 
8. (¶ 1.h) Applicant believed the $2,989 debt owed to a collection agency 
related to a washer and dryer he purchased in 2006 and returned a 
year later. He attempted to dispute the bill with the department store. 
(Tr. 58-61; AE C.) It is unresolved.    
 
9. (¶ 1.i) The $8,722 debt owed to a bank remains unpaid to date 
because he lacks sufficient money. He intends to begin making 
payments in October 2013 after he completes his payments to the IRS. 
(Tr. 62; AE C.) It is unresolved. 
 
10. (¶ 1.j) Applicant claimed this $2,880 debt is a duplicate of the one listed 
in ¶ 1.h. He did not provide proof of that assertion. (Tr. 61-62; AE C.) It 
is unresolved. 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $77,000. According to his budget, his net monthly 
income is $4,094 and expenses are $1,640. After making a $2,300 payment to IRS, 
he has $164 remaining at the end of the month. (AE H.) He lives a frugal life, riding 
his bike to work. He does not have a credit card and has not made any major 
purchase over the past several years other than a new sports coat. (Tr. 70-71.) He 
thinks he has paid his wife at least $200,000 since the divorce in 2006, which also 
included attorney’s fees, costs, and her moving expenses. He noted that he paid her 
about $35,000 in 2011. (Tr. 73.)  
 
 To date Applicant has paid $27,613 of the $106,924 SOR-listed debt, leaving 
$79,311 to resolve or pay. (AE C.) If he could negotiate a lesser payment amount 
with the IRS, he would begin paying the other debts. (Tr. 76.)  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he is responsible, as a co-signer, for his 
daughter’s $32,500 of student loans, which are in forbearance. He intended to help 
her with their repayment. (Tr. 64-65.) He has not participated in formal financial 
counseling, but has spoken to an IRS agent many times about his finances. While 
married, his wife managed the family budget. (Tr. 65, 79.) In his closing argument, he 
stated that his life is now moving in a new and more positive direction. (Tr. 82-83.)  
 
 Applicant testified candidly and exhibited embarrassment and remorse over his 
financial situation and tax problems. He understood the scope of his debts and 
organized a feasible plan for slowly resolving them. He will pay all debts as income 
becomes available.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
5 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
 
6 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
   Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2006 after he divorced and 
lost his employment. Since then, his income has been inadequate to pay all of his 
delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those potential 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut and 
prove mitigation. AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate the 
above security concerns: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
There is sufficient evidence to support a partial application of AG ¶ 20(b).  
Applicant=s delinquent debts arose after he lost his employment in April 2006 and 
was divorced a month later. Those were circumstances beyond his control. There is 
evidence that he took responsible steps to manage certain debts, but not all of the 
SOR-listed debts, which is necessary for the full application of this mitigating 
condition.   
 
 
 
 
7 
The facts warrant a limited application of AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant has not 
participated in financial counseling. However, he has regularly paid his IRS debt and 
has a plan to begin paying the remaining financial obligations after he pays off that 
debt in September 2013 and his finances improve. Those facts indicate that his 
financial issues are slowly coming under control. AG ¶ 20(d) also has limited 
application as he reduced the IRS debt by about 37% through his good-faith efforts to 
resolve it. Applicant testified that five of the SOR-listed debts are not his 
responsibility. However, he did not provide documentation that he filed written 
disputes with those creditors or the credit reporting agency, which evidence is 
required for the application of AG ¶ 20(e).  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the 
following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 58-year-old engineer 
who has worked for defense contractors for most of his career. Applicant had not 
experienced financial problems until the spring of 2006 when he lost his job and was 
divorced. Subsequently, he withdrew money from his 401(k) to pay alimony, his living 
expenses, and his daughter’s college costs. That withdrawal resulted in tax liabilities, 
in addition to income tax delinquencies that arose in 2006 and 2007. He was unable 
to begin recovering financially until he began a position with a private firm in July 
2010.  In April 2012 he completed his alimony payments and started sending more 
money to the IRS to pay off the remaining $46,387 liability. To date his outstanding 
SOR-listed debt is approximately $79,000, having reduced the total $106,941 by 
about 25%.   
 
 
 
 
 
8 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrates that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person and understands how to budget and what he 
needs to do to maintain his financial obligations, and resolve outstanding debts. He 
drafted a spreadsheet plan to resolve debts and achieve financial solvency over the 
next two years. There is no reason not to trust him to continue to follow that plan and 
resolve his debts. Moreover, he has demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt 
repayment, as indicated by the reduction of his IRS debt and completion of alimony 
obligations.  
 
Given his budget, he should be able to manage, albeit slowly, the delinquent 
debt. While his lax attitude in aggressively addressing those debts that he claims are 
not his responsibility would be troubling, his long career with defense contractors and 
recent actions alleviate concerns that he would engage in illegal activities to resolve 
the outstanding debts. Furthermore, his knowledge that future financial delinquencies 
will jeopardize his employment opportunities diminishes the likelihood similar 
problems will occur in the future. 
  
Overall, the record evidence does not create doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant fully 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Financial Considerations and the whole- 
person analysis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - j:      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
