1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 11-15161
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq.
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge:
Applicant deliberately omitted material facts from his security clearance
application regarding his repeated travel to Cuba and his former marriage to a Cuban
national in an attempt to mislead the Government. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Exec utive Order and DoD Directive, 1 on January 18,
2012, the Defense O ffice of Hearings and Appeals ( DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was unable to find that it is clearly consist ent with the
national interest to grant Applic ant access to classified information. The SOR, whic h
detailed the reasons for the action under the personal conduct guideline, recommended
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2 
 
the case be submitted to an administrative j udge for a determination to revoke or deny
Applicant’s access to classified information.
Applicant, through counsel, timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
The case was ass igned to me on April 19, 2012. The hearing took place as scheduled
on June 20, 2012. At hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted
without objection. Applicant test ified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through
D, which were also admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record
open until June 22, 2012. He su bmitted one additional document, which I admitted as
AE E without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2012. 
Findings of Fact 
  
Applicant, 66, is the owner of a company seeking to obtain a facility security
clearance. After submitting his s ecurity clearance application in De cember 2009, both
Applicant and his facility received an interim security clearance in January 2010.2
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his security clearance application by
deliberately omitting his prior marriage to a Cuban national and his repeated trips to
Cuba between 2002 and 2 003. Although not alleged, Applicant reported a nine-year
relationship, with a girlfriend who is a Cub an expatriate living in the United States. The
girlfriend is actually the ex- wife he failed to disclos e in response to the marital status
question. The couple’s almost two-and-a-half-year marriage was dissolved by an
annulment in 2005, af ter Applicant sponsored his ex-wife and her son’s immigration to
the United States.3
Applicant initially completed the secu rity clearance application on his own,
consulting the personal files he kept in his office. He felt that the task was too time
consuming. Applicant believed that if he ent ered all of the required information into the
electronic form that the task would take an exorbitant amount of time, which as the
owner of a busy com pany, he c ould not s pare. Accordingly, Applica nt submitted the
security clearance applic ation knowing it contained incomplete and inaccurate
information. He testified that his intentio n was to provide complete and accurate
information during his subject interview.4
Between February and May 2010, two investigators interviewed Applicant. In the
first interview, Applicant stated that he mistakenly listed his th ird wife as his girlfriend on
his security clearanc e application. He als o informed the investigat or that he met and
married his ex-wife during his trips to Cuba between 2001 and 2002. He did not disclose
the extent of his trav el to Cuba, which did not end unt il October 2003. In May 2010,
another investigator conducted an interview with Applicant that lasted five days.
                                                          
2 Tr. 39, 62; GE 1-2.
3 GE 1, GE 2.
 
4 Tr. 25-26, 40-41, 55-56, 63-64.
3 
 
Applicant, with the help of t he investigator, scoured the f iles in his office and made
phone calls to third parties to gather the in formation needed to completely and correctly
answer the questions on the security clearance application. At the end of the interview,
Applicant executed a 53-page affidavit, with attachments detailing his financial holdings,
his former marriages, and his travel to Cuba between June 2001 and October 2003. He
also provided explanations for the omissions on his December 2009 securit y clearance
application.5
The record contains Applic ant’s conflicting explanations regarding the omissions
of material facts from his security clearance application. Applicant, who according to the
chief financial officer of his company, is ve ry impatient with computers and has difficulty
with electronic forms, claimed that the elec tronic version of the applic ation would n ot
allow him to input his multiple div orces, his annulled marriage, or his extensive foreign
travel. He also reasoned that because his marriage to his Cuban wife was annulled, she
was never his wife and that the term girlfri end most accurately described her. In his
opinion any other description would have been a mis representation of facts. However,
the two have not had any contact since at least 2009. A pplicant further justified h is
actions asserting that the mere disclosure of a Cuban citizen on his security clearance
application was sufficient information to prompt further investigation by the
Government.6
In attempt to explain away his failure to report his travel to Cuba, Applicant
avowed that at the ti me he completed his security clearance application, he believ ed
that his travel occurred outside the seven- year reporting window. Contrarily, he offered
that he did not list his travel to Cuba because he did not think of it as travel outside the
United States, despite havi ng to clear Cuban customs upon entering and exiting the
country. Applicant contends that his Cuba travel was legal, and that he complied with all
U.S. rules and regulations re lated to travel to that country. However, based on a
document provided by Applicant, he was inve stigated by the Department of Treasury,
Office of F oreign Asset Control (OFAC), after being barred from boarding a plane t o
Cuba in O ctober 2003, for su spicion of unauthoriz ed or unclaimed travel to Cuba for
nine trips he made between June 2001 and June 2003. Applicant vaguely recalls the
investigation, which resulted in no findings against him.7
Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. Eac h testified to Applic ant’s
highly sought after and unique s kill set, which makes him an invaluable resource to the
Government as a federal contractor.8
                                                          
5 Tr. 25-26, 29-30, 45,64, 70; GE 3.
 
6 Tr. 24-25, 37, 43, 46, 57-60, 80-81; Answer; GE 1; GE 2.
7 Tr. 25, 32-35, 42-45; GE 2; AE E.
8 Tr. 75-91.
4 
 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitabi lity for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must cons ider the adjudicative guidelines . In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating condi tions, which are used in ev aluating an
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
The protection of the national sec urity is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning pe rsonnel being cons idered for access to
classified information will be resolved in f avor of national secur ity.” Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the Government must present evid ence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Und er Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applic ant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predic ated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in indi viduals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applic ant may deliberately or inadvertent ly fail to protect classified
information. Such decisions entail a certai n degree of legally per missible extrapolation
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that dec isions shall be “in ter ms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (lis ting multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern:
Conduct involving questi onable judgment, l ack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an indiv idual’s reliability, trustw orthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
5 
 
Under AG ¶ 16, the following disqualifying condition applies to this case:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
a personnel security questionnaire, per sonal history statement, or similar
form used conduct investigations, det ermine employment qualifications,
award benefit status, determine sec urity clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
The SOR alleges t hat Applicant deliberately omitted information from his
December 2009 security clearance application about his travels to Cuba and his Cuban
ex-wife. Applicant denies these allegations, exp laining that while he knew his
application was incomplete, his omissions were motivated by constraints on his bus y
schedule, not by any intent to mislead the Government. An omissi on of relevant and
material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it ,
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genui nely thought the
information did not need to be reported. Conversely, an omission is deliberate when it is
made knowingly and willfully. I find that Appl icant deliberately omitted relevant facts
from his security clearance application in an effort to mislead the Government.
Applicant’s conflicting and incredible explanations fo r the omissions under mine
any finding that the omissions were mer ely innocent mistakes. His c laim that the
electronic form cannot accept the reporting of multiple marriages, annulment s, or large
quantities of foreign travel entri es is not t rue. In addition, the record is replete with
circumstantial evidence of App licant’s intent to mislead the Government regarding the
extent of his connections to Cuba. The magn itude of his deception is shown in the way
he chose to mischaracterize his ex-wife as a girlfriend on h is security clearance
application. His rationalizat ions about the appropria teness of this characterization are
disingenuous and cannot be sust ained under reasonable person s tandard.9 Moreover,
his disclosure and subsequent explanations run afoul the plain language of the marital
status question.10
None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 17 apply; however a brief
discussion of AG ¶¶ 17(a) and (c) are w arranted. Applicant did not make a prompt,
good-faith effort to correct the omissions on his sec urity clearance application. His
insistence that he intended to c orrect his secu rity clearance application at his subject
interview is not supported by the record. Applicant did not provide full disclos ure of the
omitted information at his initial interview. Instead, he provided piecemeal disclosure
over the c ourse of two interviews occurri ng four months apar t. The latter intervie w
required five days f or the inv estigator to develop a complete record. Neither c an
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 98 -0470 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 1999 ) (Given the “cl early consistent with nation al
interest” standard, an applicant’s conduct must be judged against the “reasonable person” standard. An
applicant who is unwilling or unable to act in a reasonable manner does not demonstrate the high degree
of judgment, reliability and trustworthiness required of persons granted access to classified information.)
10 See ISCR Case No. 00-0713 at 3 (Feb. 15, 2002)( the Appeal Board has applied the “plain language”
test to hold that “[h]owever narrowly Applicant seeks to characterize or label the facts and circumstances,”
the Applicant is bound by the plain language of the question)
6 
 
Applicant’s omissions be consid ered minor nor immaterial as they were contrived to
impede the Government’s search for the truth.
An applicant does not have the imperium to decide what information the
Government needs to effectuate a complete and thorough investigation and ultimately
assess an individual’s security worthiness. An applic ant is expected to provide full,
frank, and candid answers throughout the in vestigative and adjudication process.
Failure to do so interferes with the integrity of the in dustrial security program.11 Such
behavior provides a rational basis for finding against an applicant’s security worthiness.
Whole-Person Concept 
Accordingly, I have reservations and doub ts about A pplicant ability to protect
classified information. In reac hing this conclusio n, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. My comments regarding the personal c onduct guideline are
incorporated into this analysis. Howev er, the circumstances surrounding Applic ant’s
deliberate omissions of materi al facts raise concerns about his willingness to comply
with rules and regulations as it pertains to the safeguarding of classified information.
Applicant disregarded his obligat ion to prov ide true, comple te, and correct answers to
the questions on the security clearance application because he found the process
discommoding. Only after Applicant expropriated a background investigator to act as his
personal assistant, unnecessarily expending five days of government resources, did h e
finally provide the inf ormation being s olicited in the questionnaire. Applicant’s actions
call into question his willingness to comply with security procedures when they are time-
consuming or inconvenient. His behavior is an indication that he will put his self-
interests ahead of that of the Government.
Applicant’s continued just ification of his actions prevents a finding of
rehabilitation or other permanent behavior c hange to justify hi s access to classifie d
information. Furthermore, he has not demonstr ated that the mi sconduct is unlikely to
recur. The record leaves doubt as to whet her Applicant would disclos e situations or
circumstances, whether deliberate or inadverten t, that raise sec urity concerns. Overall,
the record evidence leaves substantial doubt about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability
for a security clearance. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns arising from the delib erate falsification of his se curity clearance application.
Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.: Against Applicant
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 01-03132 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002).
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consis tent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
__________________________
Nichole L. Noel
Administrative Judge
