1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-17801
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esquire
April 25, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA) on October
16, 2007.  On February 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
I, D and E for the Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
The Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 15, 2011.  He
answered the SOR in writing on March 14, 2011, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on March 17, 2011, and I received
the case assignment on January 24, 2012.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
January 26, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 22, 2012.  The
Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 10, which were received without
2
objection.  The Applicant testified on his own behalf, as did his Security Officer, and
submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through F, which were received without objection.  DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 7, 2012.  I granted the Applicant’s
requests, one made at his hearing and the other one after his hearing, to keep the
record open until April 10, 2012, to submit additional matters, to include a Closing
Argument.  On March 22, 2012, through Department Counsel, the Applicant’s Counsel
submitted “Applicant’s Closing Argument.”  The record closed on April 10, 2012.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, the Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Subparagraphs 1.a.,~1.e. of the SOR, with explanations.  He denied the factual
allegations in Subparagraphs 1.f.~1.i, 2.a. and 3.a. of the SOR.  He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Psychological Conditions & Sexual Behavior
The Applicant held a security clearance “from 1977 to 1985,” and again from
1995 to 2007.  (TR at page 60 line 17 to page 67 line 10.)  He has never had a security
violation.  (Id.)  His Security Officer speaks most highly of the Applicant.  (TR at page 41
line 9 to page 52 line 18.)
1.a.~1.i. and 2.a.  The Applicant grew up in what was in many ways a
dysfunctional family.  He was “the youngest of three sons”; but in his mother’s eyes, he
“was supposed to be a girl.”  (TR at page 65 line 5 to page 67 line 10.)  His mother
treated him as she would a daughter.  By age five he was cross dressing, and by age
eight he began engaging in sadomasochistic acts by injuring himself.  (Id.)  His
sadomasochistic behavior ceased in about 2004, and his treating Psychiatrist gives the
Applicant injections of medication to control his obsessive behavior.  (GX 3 at pages
9~11.)
It is also alleged that the Applicant is sexually attracted to young girls, has
fantasies about inappropriate conduct with young girls, and has sought non-sexual
contact with young girls.  (GX 3 at pages 14~15, 17~19 and 22~23.)  The Applicant
denies these allegations, and avers that Government polygrapher put words in his
mouth.  (TR at page 80 line 14 to page 84 line 9.)  Based on the extensive outpouring of
support by those who know the Applicant, I find his denials and his testimony to be most
credible.  (AppX B.)
From 1980~1983, the Applicant saw Psychiatrist A for a condition initially
diagnosed as Anxiety Reaction, and later changed to Depressive Neurosis.  (TR at
page 67 line 11 to page 68 line 18, and GX 3 at page 9.)  He was prescribed medication
to treat his Depression.  (Id.)  When Psychiatrist A moved, the Applicant saw
3
Psychiatrist B, who had purchased Psychiatrist A’s practice.  (TR at page 68 line 19 to
page 72 line 13.)
Psychiatrist B saw the Applicant about every two weeks from 1983 until
Psychiatrist B passed away in 1998.  (Id, and TR at page 72 lines 21~23.)  In October
of 1995, this treating psychiatrist answered a “Medical Information Questionnaire”
regarding the Applicant.  (GX 6.)  In part, Psychiatrist B noted that the Applicant was
suffering from, “Depression, anxiety and obsessive-compulsive behavior.”  (GX 6 at
page 1.)  He found “no immoral or deviant behavior.”  (Id.)  His prognosis was “fair good
progress made.”  (GX 6 at page 2.)  He found “no impairment” in judgement or
reliability.  (Id.)
Since 1998, the Applicant has seen Psychiatrist C every two weeks “for
treatment of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder.”  (TR at page 72 line 14 to page 75 line
11, at page 115 line 1 to page 116 line 14, GX 9, and AppX A at pages 3 and 4.)  In
September of 2009, this treating Psychiatrist noted, in part, the following: “I am satisfied
with the current state of therapy.  He has good control of his behavior and is highly
unlikely to be influenced, coerced, or manipulated because of his fantasies.”  (AppX A at
page 4.)  In March of 2011, his treating Psychiatrist further noted that the Applicant “is
truthful and conscientious and would not permit his private fantasies to interfere with his
ability to protect sensitive government information.”
However, in December of 2008, the Applicant met with a Government
Psychiatrist for an hour; and based on that meeting and a review of unspecified
records, he found a “DSM IV diagnosis of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Major
Depression, recurrent, Pedophilia, Transvestic Festishism (sic), and Sexual Masochism
and Sadism.”  (GX 7.)  He further found “a defect in judgment, and less so in reliability
at the time, and it is likely to continue in the future.”  (Id.)
In September of 2010, this same Government Psychiatrist, armed with the
review of specified records, gave a more thorough Psychological Report.  He reiterated
his previous diagnosis, but noted, in part, the following: “There is no evidence of a
defect in judgment, reliability or trustworthiness at work.  When he has sufficient
duties at work to keep him preoccupied, he feels productive, effective,
appropriate, and that he is a valued contributor.”  (GX 8 at page 3, emphasis
supplied.)
Most recently, in February of 2012, his current treating psychiatrist, Psychiatrist
C, opined the following: “This is to verify that my patient, . . . [the Applicant], does not
have a medical condition nor is he receiving medical treatment that impairs his
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness in safe-guarding classified national security
information.”  (AppX A at page 1.)
4
Personal Conduct
3.a.  In February of 2007, another Government Agency denied granting the
Applicant access to SCI, based on allegations similar to those noted above.  (GX 10 at
page 12.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Psychological Conditions
The concern under Paragraph 27 is that, “Certain emotional, mental, and
personality conditions can impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.”  Here, a
Government Psychiatrist saw the Appellant in December of 2008, and made a
diagnosis.  The disqualifying condition under Paragraph 28(b) is applicable as there
appears to be “an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may impair
judgement, reliability, or trustworthiness.”  That diagnosis called into question the
Applicant’s judgement.
This is countered, however, by that same Government Psychiatrist’s September
2010 Psychological Report that found “no evidence of a defect in judgment, reliability or
trustworthiness at work.”  Therefore, the mitigating condition under Paragraph 29(c)
clearly applies, as a “recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a low probability
of recurrence or exacerbation.”  The mitigating condition under Paragraph 29(e) also
clearly applies, as “there is no indication of a current problem.”  Here, most recently, the
Applicant’s treating Psychiatrist opined that the Applicant, “does not have a medical
condition nor is he receiving medical treatment that impairs his judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness in safe-guarding classified national security information.”
Sexual Behavior
Paragraph 12 sets out the security concern relating to Sexual Behavior.  “Sexual
behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or emotional disorder,
reflects lack of judgement or discretion, or which may subject the individual to undue
influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
The disqualifying conditions described by Subparagraphs 13(b) and 13(c) are
arguably applicable here.  Subparagraph 13(b) proscribes “a pattern of compulsive, self-
destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that the person is unable to stop or that may be
symptomatic of a personality disorder.”  The Applicant has a history of sadomasochistic
acts.  Subparagraph 13(c) proscribes “sexual behavior that causes an individual to be
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  These disqualifying conditions are
countered, however, by Subparagraphs 14(b) and 14(c).  Subparagraph 14(b) finds
mitigating where “the sexual behavior happened so long ago, . . . that it is unlikely to
6
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.”  His last act of sadomasochism occurred more than seven years ago,
and he is administered injections to prevent any future such acts.  Furthermore, under
Subparagraph 14(c) “the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation,
or duress.”  The Applicant’s Security Officer, who testified at his hearing, knows of his
condition, and the Applicant’s spouse, who sat through his hearing, is also aware of it.
(TR at page 41 line 9 to page 52 line 18, at page 84 line 24 to page 25 line 5, and at
page 85 line 21 to page 86 line 12.)
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(c), “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.”  Here, the Applicant was denied
access to SCI by another Government Agency in 2007.  This is countered, however, by
Subparagraph 17(c) as “so much time has passed . . . that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement.”
Since then, a Government Psychiatrist and his own treating Psychiatrist have deemed
the Applicant to be trustworthy.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.  The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
7
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Again, the Applicant has the unqualified
support of those who know him in the work place and in the community.  (AppX B.)  The
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns arising from his Psychological Conditions, Sexual
Behavior and related Personal Conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline I: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline D: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
