 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04133 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 17, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns raise by 
his questionable real estate investments. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 30, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 1, 2012, and the hearing was convened 
 
2 
 
as scheduled on February 17, 2012. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through D, 
which were admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. He also 
submitted one post-hearing exhibit marked and admitted without objection as AE E. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 29, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married, but 
considers himself separated from his wife, although he has not yet filed for divorce. He 
has three children, ages 21, 17, and 14. He possesses an associate’s degree in 
electronics. He served on active duty in the Navy from 1978 to 1982. (GE 1; Tr. 34-36.) 
 
 The SOR alleges applicant is indebted to eight creditors in the total approximate 
amount of $1,390,200. In his Answer, Applicant admitted each debt. Each debt can also 
be found listed in credit reports dated September 15, 2007; July 15, 2010; August 4, 
2011; and February 10, 2012. In his Answers to Interrogatories, Applicant 
acknowledged the accounts but indicated that he never made any payments to any of 
these accounts. He noted that the majority of the debts have now been charged off by 
the creditors. At hearing, he indicated that the debts were incurred as a result of fraud, 
and will be removed from his credit report after his state statute of limitations expires in 
October 2012. (Answer; GE 2 through GE 8; Tr. 72.)  
 
 Each of the debts listed in the SOR were incurred in approximately October 
2006, when he purchased five residential properties through an investment company 
(IC). He learned of the investment opportunity through a friend and co-worker who was 
investing in properties in another state through IC. Applicant watched a PowerPoint 
presentation on IC and decided he wanted to participate with IC too. Applicant did not 
conduct any other research on the risks of investment or research into IC. (AE E; Tr. 36-
37, 48-49, 59-61.) 
 
 Applicant agreed to purchase five properties located in another state, in his 
name. He was the sole person listed on both the mortgages and the titles. IC was then 
going to manage the properties for Applicant. IC was to collect the rent, pay the 
mortgage and other bills associated with the properties, and would eventually help the 
owners sell the properties to the people who were renting the homes. Applicant 
expected a return on a “couple of thousand dollars” for lending his name and credit to IC 
for the purchases of the properties. (Tr. 41, 47-49, 56-58.) 
 
 Through the help on IC, Applicant secured two loans on each property. The first 
mortgage for each property ranged between $400,000 to $425,000 and the second 
mortgages on each property ranged between $76,000 to $83,000. Applicant did not put 
any money down in any of the transactions.  He testified that altogether, he financed 
approximately $2,000,000. (Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant indicated that he was curious how he could qualify for all of the 
mortgages. He was told that the requirements for investors were different. However, in 
 
3 
 
order for Applicant to qualify, he followed the suggestion on IC and temporarily added 
his name to his friend’s bank account in order to qualify for the loan. Once the loan had 
been approved, Applicant’s name was removed from the friend’s account. (Tr. 56-58, 
75.) 
 
 Applicant testified he thought it seemed odd to add his name to the friend’s bank 
account, but he was told it was normal for these transactions. He indicated he had 
never purchased real estate before and knew “nothing about real estate.” Applicant 
admitted that he did not use good judgment in these transactions. Applicant’s 
statements, which plead ignorance with real estate transactions, are discrepant with 
Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, which indicate that he owns a condo purchased 
approximately in 2006. (GE 5; Tr. 56-58, 75.)  
 
 Approximately three weeks after the real estate purchases closed, Applicant 
began receiving bills for the new properties, including mortgage statements. He testified 
that he forwarded the statements to IC and changed the address for the bills to reflect 
IC’s address, per his agreement with IC. The bills went unpaid. However, when late 
notices were sent out, the notices only went to IC. Applicant never knew that the 
accounts were delinquent until foreclosure proceedings had already started. (Tr. 59-61.) 
 
 In January 2007, Applicant attended a meeting with several of his friends that 
had also invested in properties along with IC. They were informed that IC had decided 
to “close its doors.” He learned that IC had been unable to pay the mortgages, although 
some of the properties were rented. In fact, only three of Applicant’s properties were 
rented and the rental income was substantially less than the monthly mortgage 
payments due on each property. (AE B; Tr. 50, 59-61.) 
 
 Applicant joined his fellow investors in contacting a real estate agent to attempt 
to do short sales or deeds in lieu of foreclosure. The real estate agent suggested that 
the investors hire an attorney. The group collectively hired an attorney, to whom they 
paid a retainer of $15,000. The attorney contacted the FBI on their behalf. The FBI 
conducted an investigation into the practices of the officers and underwriters of IC, and 
eventually several individuals associated with the real estate transactions were charged 
and convicted of Conspiracy to Commit Mail, Wire and Bank Fraud. (AE B; AE C; Tr. 
42, 50, 65-66, 73.) 
 
 All five of Applicant’s real estate investment purchases have been foreclosed 
upon and have since been sold.  Applicant testified that he has sent letters to each of 
the creditors listed in the SOR telling the lenders that the mortgages were fraudulent. 
He does not intend to pay any of the remaining delinquent accounts. He did not produce 
copies of any correspondence between himself and the creditors listed on the SOR. He 
believes that the accounts will no longer appear on his credit report after October 2012. 
He testified that in the past, he has always paid his bills on time and “never borrowed 
any money” except from his 401K. Again, this testimony is discrepant with his Answer to 
Interrogatories, on which he identified a mortgage for his condo.  (AE D; Tr. 64, 72.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant is well respected by the director of human resources at his company, 
another co-worker, and his supervisor. His human resource director noted that Applicant 
has a strong work ethic and a “clean employment record.” His co-worker indicated 
Applicant is “honest, reliable and hard working.” All recommended Applicant for a 
security clearance. His performance evaluations reflect he is “fully successful” and a 
“high contributor” in all of his assessment categories. (AE A.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily entered into five real estate transactions and accumulated 
significant mortgage debt that he is now unable or unwilling to pay. He hoped that by 
lending his name and credit to IC, he would gain financially. While he contests the debts 
as fraudulent transactions, he is at least partially responsible for the fraud. He 
participated in filing deceptive loan statements (showing his friend’s bank account as his 
jointly held asset) in order to acquire the loans for the five properties which are the 
subject of the SOR. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disputes the validity of his indebtedness to the creditors listed in SOR, 
but he does not deny that he has the underlying mortgage debt that is not being paid. 
Instead, he indicated that the debts have been charged-off and that they will be 
removed from his credit report in October 2012. Even if delinquent debt is legally 
unenforceable under a state law, the Government can still consider Applicant’s 
judgment in acquiring the debt and whether he handled the debt responsibly after its 
acquisition. This forum is not the proper place to litigate the validity of any potential civil 
claims. Overall, his dispute over the legitimacy of his debt does not mitigate his poor 
judgment in fraudulently acquiring the mortgages or his poor judgment in signing his 
name to financial responsibilities, which he could not realistically afford.  Applicant’s 
involvement in these real estate transactions casts doubt onto his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. He has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. There are no indications that the problem is resolved or under control, 
nor has there been a good faith effort to resolve his debts. The concern remains 
unmitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his director of human resources, his co-worker, 
and his supervisor. He also has excellent performance reviews. Yet, he has made 
several questionable financial choices that do not demonstrate the judgment, reliability, 
or trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. There are significant unresolved 
concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.~1.h.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
