 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05418 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations but has mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2000, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On September 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on September 18, 2011.2 On an unspecified date in 2011, DOHA issued 
him another set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on September 
18, 2011.3 On October 21, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (SF 86), dated January 12, 2010. 
 
2
 Item 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 18, 2011). 
 
3
 Item 8 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 18, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) 
applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, 
effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA was unable to find under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 13, 2011. In an 
undated notarized statement, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on 
December 27, 2011, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days 
after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on January 29, 2012, but as of 
March 16, 2012, he had not submitted any further documents or other information. The 
case was assigned to me on March 30, 2012. 
 
Ruling on Procedure 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan 
(Afghanistan), appearing in six U.S. Government publications. Facts are proper for 
administrative notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source and 
relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on source 
information regarding Afghanistan in publications of the U.S. Department of State4 and 
the Director of National Intelligence.5 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,6 as set 
forth below under the Afghanistan subsection. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, Background Note: Afghanistan, 
dated November 28, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: 
Afghanistan, dated July 13, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2010 
Human Rights Report: Afghanistan, dated April 8, 2011; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2010, dated August 18, 2011; and U.S. Department of State, Bureau 
of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Afghanistan, dated December 1, 2011. 
 
5
 Director of National Intelligence, Statement for the Record on the Worldwide Threat Assessment of the 
U.S. Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Select Committee of Intelligence, dated February 10, 2011. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations and foreign influence in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a.-1.c., and 
2.a.-2.c.), adding explanations. Applicant’s admissions and other comments are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a translator in Afghanistan since January 2010. He was previously employed 
in the U.S. as a driver with several different companies from September 1999 until 
December 2009.7 Applicant has never served in the U.S. military,8 and has never had a 
security clearance.9 He attended a college in the U.S. from June 2001 until October 
2004, but did not receive a degree.10 Applicant was married in 1991, and has been 
separated since 1997.11 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 There was nothing unusual about Appellant’s finances until about 2008 when two 
of his credit card accounts became delinquent, and were charged off.12 At some point, 
he apparently had unspecified “medical issues” to which he was attending. He used one 
account for continuing upkeep on his truck, as well as for gambling,13 and another 
account, which was supposed to be his emergency back-up for his truck, also for 
gambling.14 Appellant was unable to pay off the accounts, and it is unclear if he made 
any payments towards those balances. In September 2011, he stated he would take 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
6
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 14-22. 
 
8
 Id. at 24. 
 
9
 Id. at 45-46. 
 
10
 Id. at 13. 
 
11
 Id. at 28-29. 
 
12
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated January 28, 2010), at 5. 
 
13
 Item 8 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 6, 2010), at 2, attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. 
 
14
 Id. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
care of one of the accounts when he returned to the U.S.,15 without specifying a time-
frame. When he responded to the SOR in late 2011, he again reiterated his intention to 
“take care of” both accounts during his next vacation to the U.S.,16 once again, without 
furnishing a time-frame.  
  
The SOR identified the two continuing delinquencies as reflected by a 2010 
credit report totaling approximately $70,827, with both accounts in a charged-off 
status.17 Only one such account appears in a 2011 credit report.18 Applicant’s American 
Express card, with an unpaid balance of $23,103 (SOR ¶ 1.b.) was used for his truck 
($7,000) and gambling ($16,103), and his Bank of America card, with an unpaid balance 
of $47,724 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) was used for gambling. Applicant has offered no documentary 
evidence to indicate he had ever attempted to contact the creditors to make payment 
arrangements or to indicate any payments already made. 
 
Although Applicant furnished an approximate value of his current net worth as 
$100,000,19 he did not specify how that number was arrived at or whether or not his net 
worth is in real estate, cash, bank or credit union accounts, investments, etc. It is 
unclear as to the general state of Applicant’s finances as he has not submitted a 
personal financial statement indicating his monthly net income, monthly expenses, or if 
he has any funds available for discretionary savings or spending.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has received any financial counseling 
regarding money management, debt consolidation, or repayment plans. Although he 
denied that he is still gambling,20 Applicant did not submit any documentation to indicate 
he had received counseling for his gambling.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan,21 but nothing is known regarding his early 
years, or primary education. He served honorably with the Afghan military.22 He 
immigrated to the U.S. in 1997,23 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009.24 Both 
                                                          
15
 Item 5, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
16
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, undated), at 2. 
 
17
 Item 6, supra note 12, at 5. 
 
18
 Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated May 10, 2011), at 1. 
 
19
 Item 8, supra note 3, at 10. 
 
20
 Item 5, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
21
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
22
 Id. at 24-25. 
 
23
 Id. at 29. 
 
24
 Id. at 7. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
of his parents were born in Afghanistan, and they are now deceased.25 Although 
Applicant was married in 1991, he has been separated since he came to the U.S. in 
1997, and has had no contact with his wife since 2008, when she refused to speak with 
him.26 Applicant believes his wife may have remarried.27 Applicant has three sisters who 
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.28 They are homemakers and do not work 
outside their respective family homes.29 Applicant is aware of the full name of one 
brother-in-law, one name of another brother-in-law, and does not know the name of the 
third brother-in-law, and knows one sister has children, but does not know if the other 
sisters have children.30 One brother-in-law has a position with a school in Afghanistan.31 
Applicant speaks with his sisters by telephone between one and two times per year.32  
 
 Afghanistan  
 
Formerly under the control of the United Kingdom, Afghanistan received 
independence in August 1919. It is a rugged and mountainous country in Southwestern 
Asia, approximately the size of Texas, and has common borders with Pakistan on the 
east and the south, Iran on the west, and Russia on the north. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including 
an invasion by the Soviet Union in 1979, occupation by the Soviet Union until 1989, and 
civil war between the occupiers and home-grown freedom fighters, known as 
mujaheddin. Anarchy ensued, and fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, 
and religious warlords and their respective militias even after the Soviet Union withdrew 
from the country. By the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power and controlled significant 
portions of the country, imposing repressive policies and sharia law, guiding all aspects 
of Muslim life. Afghanistan became a sanctuary for terrorist groups. 
 
After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, U.S. 
demands that Afghanistan expel Osama Bin-Laden and his followers were rejected by 
the Taliban. In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations 
in the country, forcing the Taliban out of power. Following a few years of governance by 
an interim government, a democratic presidential election took place in October 2004, 
and a new democratic government took power. Despite the election, many daunting 
challenges remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban 
continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. Terrorists continue to 
                                                          
25
 Id. at 30-32. 
 
26
 Item 8, supra note 3, at 1. 
 
27
 Id. 
 
28
 Id. 
 
29
 Id. 
 
30
 Id. 
 
31
 Id. 
 
32
 Id. at 1-2. 
 
6 
                                      
 
target United States and Afghan interests through suicide bombings, assassinations, 
and hostage taking.  
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor, for there are continuing 
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; widespread official corruption and 
impunity; ineffective government investigations of abuses by local security forces; 
arbitrary arrest and detention; judicial corruption; violations of privacy rights; violence 
and societal discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; trafficking in 
persons; and restrictions on freedoms of religion, the press, assembly, and movement. 
 
Taliban insurgents retain the capability and intent to conduct attacks and 
kidnappings of Americans, other Western nationals, and members of the local populace. 
The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself after 
decades of war, and along with others in the international community, provides 
substantial assistance, focusing on reintegration, economic development, improving 
relations with Afghanistan regional partners, and steadily increasing the security 
responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. Furthermore, there is increased terrorist 
support coming into Afghanistan from Pakistan and Iran. Nevertheless, while the security 
situation remains volatile and unpredictable throughout Afghanistan, there are tensions 
between the U.S. and Afghanistan over limiting U.S. military operations.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”33 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”34   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
                                                          
33
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
34
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”35 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.36  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”37 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”38 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
                                                          
35
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
36
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
37
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
38
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. . . . 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. In addition, AG & 19(f) may apply if there are “financial problems that 
are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling problems, or other issues of security 
concern.” Applicant’s financial difficulties commenced in 2008 when he started using 
two credit cards for gambling. He ran up a total balance of approximately $70,827, and 
as of March 2012, he had not furnished any evidence that the accounts had been paid. 
Both accounts remain in a charged-off status. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) apply.   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ 
In addition, when “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” AG ¶ 20(b) may apply. Evidence that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially mitigating 
under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  
 
To qualify for application of the “good-faith” mitigating condition, an appellant 
should present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the appellant’s debts. There is no 
definition of the term “good-faith” in either the Regulation or the AG. However, it is 
reasonable to interpret the concept of “good-faith” as requiring a showing that a person 
 
9 
                                      
 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.  
  
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. The delinquencies have remained 
unresolved since 2008, and there is no evidence that the financial problem is under 
control. While Applicant contends that he no longer gambles, he has taken no steps to 
resolve his delinquent accounts, or indicated an ability to do so. He has promised to pay 
off his debts when he returns to the United States from Afghanistan, but has furnished 
no time-frame for his anticipated payment of these delinquent debts. Applicant has not 
received any financial counseling. His inaction casts doubt as to his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.39 Applicant’s relationship with his wife, three 
sisters, and one brother-in-law in Afghanistan are current security concerns for the 
Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
                                                          
39
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
                                      
 
information” may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. 
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his family members and 
extended family members who are Afghan citizen-residents, to determine the degree of 
“heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” In this instance, 
Applicant has a non-relationship with his wife and a casual and infrequent relationship 
with his brother-in-law. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) applies as it pertains to them. However, 
considering Applicant’s closer and relatively frequent relationship with his three sisters, 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.40 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”41 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
                                                          
40
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
41
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
11 
                                      
 
 
As noted above, since October 2001, when U.S. forces and coalition partners led 
military operations in Afghanistan, forcing the Taliban out of power, there has been first 
an interim government, and then a democratic government in Afghanistan. 
Nevertheless, many daunting challenges remained largely because terrorists including 
al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. It 
is less likely that the Afghan government would attempt coercive means to obtain 
sensitive information. The real concern in this instance is not the Afghan government, 
but rather al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists. While Applicant’s wife, sisters, and brother-in-
law, still reside in Afghanistan, despite Applicant’s efforts not to contact them while he is 
in Afghanistan, there is substantial risk – a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s wife, sisters, or his brother-in-law are, or 
have been, political activists, challenging the policies of the Afghan government; that 
terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his wife, sisters, or brother-in-law, 
for any reason; that the Afghan government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban have approached 
Applicant; that his wife, sisters, or brother-in-law, currently engage in activities that 
would bring attention to themselves; or that his wife, sisters, or brother-in-law, are even 
aware of Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would be 
targets for coercion or exploitation by the Afghan government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban, 
which may seek to quiet those who speak out against them. Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States, having lived in the United States for 15 years. Moreover, 
he wants his security clearance so that he can remain in Afghanistan and assist U.S. Armed 
Forces. He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in 
Afghanistan, and has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. 
Applicant has not met his burden of showing there is little likelihood that those 
relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. Applicant has “such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [he] can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” As to his wife, three 
sisters, and brother-in-law in Afghanistan, AG ¶¶ 8(a) partially applies, and 8(b) fully 
applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
                                      
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.42       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s situation. Applicant has 
offered to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan, and 
has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. He is fully aware of 
the risks to himself, and he is also aware that his family members in Afghanistan are at 
risk from al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists. These circumstances increase the probability 
that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist 
group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has a history of gambling, using two credit cards to amass a delinquent 
balance of approximately $70,827. That balance was charged off and Applicant has 
made no efforts to resolve the account other than to promise doing so when he returns 
to the United States sometime in the future. Applicant’s inaction in resolving his financial 
delinquencies casts doubt as to his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:    For Applicant 
       
  
                                                          
42
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
