 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-09368 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David Prince, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
concerns. He accumulated over $20,000 in bad debt over the past seven years and did 
not attempt to address this substantial debt until recently. He intentionally failed to 
disclose on his security clearance application that he had been charged in the past with 
a drug-related offense. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 On 
October 17, 2011, Applicant submitted his Answer and requested a hearing. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On January 4, 2012, Department Counsel advised the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed with a hearing. After coordinating with the parties, I 
scheduled the hearing for February 29, 2012.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing 
with counsel, testified, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. These exhibits 
were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open 
to provide him additional time to submit matters for my consideration. He timely 
submitted a letter from a credit counseling firm, a dispute resolution form from a credit 
reporting agency, and a pay stub. These documents were marked and admitted as AE 
E – G. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 9, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his forties, married, with one child. He ran his own construction 
business from 1992 to 2007. He changed ownership of the business to his wife in about 
2003 because she had a better credit rating, which allowed her to secure financing for 
the business on more favorable terms. This move did not pay off as his 
mismanagement of the business and the downturn in the economy resulted in the 
business’s failure in about 2007. Applicant had been working for a private company as a 
carpenter for about two years before his business failed. He continued working for this 
private company until February 2010, when he started working for his current employer 
– a federal contractor. Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 
April 2010, because access to classified information is a condition of his employment.2 
 
 Applicant wrote a number of bad checks between 1995 and 2006. He explained 
that the checks were related to his former construction business and the lack of funds 
was due to financial mismanagement, not any intent on his part to defraud his creditors. 
He was criminally charged and convicted on three separate occasions for issuing bad 
checks. He received suspended sentences ranging from 90 days to 12 months in jail.3 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on behalf of his former business in 2007. 
The bankruptcy petition lists over $110,000 in liabilities and less than $53,000 in assets. 
The liabilities included over $69,000 to the IRS for federal taxes dating back to 1998. 
Applicant was only able to pay about $3,000 of this federal tax debt. Applicant’s 
business was liquidated and its debts were discharged in 2008.4 (SOR ¶ 1.f) 
 
                                                          
2
 Tr. at 21-24; GE 1; GE 4; GE 5; GE 7. 
 
3
 Tr. at 21-24, GE 1 – GE 3; GE 7. 
 
4
 GE 4; GE 5; GE 7; GE 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR lists 18 bad debts totaling over $28,000. The alleged debts range from 
a delinquent $34 telephone bill to a judgment for nearly $6,000. Ten of the alleged debts 
are for judgments secured against Applicant by his creditors and date back to 2005. 
These ten judgments total over $18,000.5 (SOR ¶¶ 1.g – 1.p) Applicant established that 
he paid three of the judgments, including a 2007 judgment for $138 that was satisfied 
after his pay was garnished in December 2011.6 Seven judgments, totaling over 
$13,000, remain unsatisfied.7 
 
Applicant recently secured the services of a credit counseling firm to help him 
resolve the remaining seven judgments and other debts listed on the SOR.8 He claims 
that a majority of the debts alleged in the SOR relate to his failed construction business. 
He was asked by DOHA about his finances and his delinquent debts in May 2011. At 
the time, Applicant reported having over $1,600 a month in disposable income. At 
hearing, Applicant admitted that he had not taken any action to resolve his debts until 
recently.9 
 
Applicant disclosed his two most recent bad check convictions and several of his 
bad debts on his SCA. He failed to list the bankruptcy he filed on behalf of his former 
business because he thought the SCA only asked for information related to personal 
bankruptcies. He also did not list all his delinquent debt because he was unaware of the 
magnitude of the debt he had outstanding. He only listed those debts that he knew were 
delinquent.10 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c – 2.f) 
 
Applicant also omitted from his SCA that he had been charged by State A with a 
drug-related offense in 1989. He initially told a Government investigator that he did not 
list the drug-related charge “because he was falsely accused and had forgotten about 
the incident.”11 At hearing, Applicant initially stated that he omitted the 1989 drug-related 
charge because he had forgotten about it when he filled out his SCA.12 He later 
admitted, however, that the arrest and subsequent imprisonment on the drug-related 
                                                          
5
 Tr. at 24-31; GE 6 (eight of the ten judgments were default judgments). 
 
6
 SOR ¶ 1.g (Tr. at 24-26, 39; AE A); SOR ¶ 1.l (Tr. at 28-30, 41-42; GE 6 at 112-113; AE G); and 
SOR ¶ 1.n (Tr. at 30-31, 42; AE C). 
 
7
 Applicant submitted a letter from a credit reporting agency that the 2008 judgment, alleged in ¶ 
1.k, had been removed from his credit report. However, he did not submit proof demonstrating that the 
judgment had been satisfied or otherwise resolved, i.e., canceled check or satisfaction of judgment. The 
Government submitted a court document establishing that this judgment is still outstanding. GE 6 at 111.  
 
8
 Tr. at 30-33, 43-45; AE B; AE E. Applicant has brought the charged off credit card account for 
$394, alleged in ¶ 1.r, current by accepting a new credit card from the creditor. (AE D)  
 
9
 Tr. at 39-46; GE 8. See also GE 7. 
 
10
 Tr. at 33-38; GE 8. 
 
11
 GE 7, Subject Interview, June 2, 2010 at 3.  
 
12
 Tr. at 35.  
 
4 
 
 
charge was an unforgettable experience, only surpassed in gravity by his parents’ 
death. He emotionally detailed the purported brutality he suffered at the hands of the 
police when he was arrested and the time he spent languishing in jail due to the false 
accusation. He then changed his explanation for failing to list the drug-related charge on 
his SCA. He claimed that, while filling out the SCA, he thought he only had to list drug-
related offenses for which he had been convicted, not simply charged.13 The relevant 
SCA question asked Applicant to disclose if he had “EVER been charged with an 
offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?”14 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.15 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
                                                          
13
 Tr. at 48-56.  
 
14
 GE 1 at 39 (capitalization in original).  
 
15
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
 
5 
 
 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”16 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $20,000 in bad 
debt since approximately 2005 directly implicates this concern. It also establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”17 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
                                                          
16
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
17
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problem began about seven years ago and continues to the 
present day. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 The failure of Applicant’s business was a matter partially outside of his control. 
However, the businesses’ debts were discharged in 2007. Applicant failed to 
responsibly address his delinquent debts, including several judgments, until recently.18 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did satisfy three of the debts listed in the SOR, but only after the 
creditors were forced to secure judgments against him. He recently secured the 
services of a credit counseling firm and brought one of his debts current, but this 
belated action is insufficient to demonstrate that his financial situation is under control. 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. In short, Applicant’s financial situation remains a 
security concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
                                                          
18
 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) (“the second prong of MC 
20(b) requires that an applicant act responsibly under the circumstances”). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16, and only the following warrants discussion: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified. 
Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding 
the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.19  
 
 Applicant’s failure to list his bankruptcy, and all his bad check convictions and 
delinquent debts, was not intentional. His explanation for failing to list this adverse 
information was reasonable, consistent throughout the security clearance process, and 
credible.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s omission of the 1989 drug-related charge from his 
SCA was a deliberate falsification. It was abundantly clear at hearing, from the detail he 
provided and the emotion generated in recounting the events, that this was a singular 
event in Applicant’s life that he will never forget. Applicant’s initial explanation to a 
Government investigator that he had had forgotten about the false accusation was 
implausible. An applicant, especially under the circumstances of the arrest and 
subsequent incarceration as testified to by Applicant, would not simply forget about 
being charged with such a serious drug-related offense. Applicant’s later explanation 
that he misconstrued the SCA as only requiring disclosure if only he had been convicted 
of a drug-related offense, although plausible, was contradicted by his earlier statements. 
In light of the evidence and Applicant’s contradictory statements, I find that he falsified 
his SCA when he omitted the 1989 drug-related charge.20 AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
 
 An applicant may mitigate the personal conduct concern by establishing one or 
more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17. I have considered all the listed 
mitigating conditions and find that none apply. Applicant not only falsified his SCA, but 
also lied at hearing; when he claimed the omission was due to an innocent 
misunderstanding of what was required to be disclosed. The summary of the 
background interview, which Applicant certified as accurate, and the verbatim transcript 
                                                          
19
 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
20
 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-16511 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (an applicant’s inconsistent 
and contradictory explanations for failing to disclose information on a SCA undercuts the applicant’s 
credibility and supports a finding that the applicant intentionally omitted the information). 
 
 
8 
 
 
establish that Applicant initially attempted to explain away his omission by claiming that 
he had forgotten about the drug-related charge. (GE 7; Tr. at 35) It was only after he 
was questioned as to how he could have forgotten such a life-altering event that 
Applicant changed his story to claim that he was confused. Applicant’s falsification of his 
SCA and misleading testimony leaves none of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 
applicable. Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct concern.21 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).22 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s work history, 
the circumstances surrounding his business’s failure, and that the omission at issue was 
as to an old accusation for which he was not even convicted. However, Applicant has 
amassed a substantial amount of delinquent debt that remains unresolved. Further, it is 
not up to an applicant to decide what information that is responsive to a question in a 
SCA to reveal. His concealment of potentially adverse criminal information calls into 
question his trustworthiness. Consequently, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.m:         Against Applicant23 
  Subparagraph   1.n:          For Applicant 
                                                          
21
 In his opening statement, Applicant’s counsel stated that Applicant had forgotten about the 
1989 drug-related charge and that was the reason he had omitted the information from his SCA. (Tr. at 
13) After Applicant testified, both sides were under the mistaken impression that it was Applicant’s 
counsel, not Applicant, who first claimed that Applicant’s lack of memory led to the omission. After a 
thorough review of the evidence and transcript, it is clear that it was Applicant, not his counsel, who 
initially claimed that Applicant’s purported lack of memory led to the omission.  
 
22
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
23
 Although Applicant recently satisfied the 2007 judgment alleged in ¶ 1.h, this debt was only 
satisfied through garnishment of his pay, which does not constitute a good-faith resolution of the debt. 
 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.x:         Against Applicant24 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c – 2.f:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.b:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
24
 Applicant’s acceptance of another credit card to bring his charged off account, alleged in ¶ 1.,r 
current does not mitigate the financial considerations concern. 
