 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08522 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
April 20, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and Personal 
Conduct security concerns that arose out of his illegal drug use and criminal conduct 
during the period of 2005 through 2006. He has not used any illegal substances, 
misused prescription drugs, or committed any criminal offense since 2006. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement; Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 13, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 14, 2012, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on March 1, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through R, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called 
two witnesses. The record was left open until April 5, 2012, for receipt of additional 
documentation. On March 21, 2012, Applicant submitted additional documents, marked 
AE S to AE X. Department Counsel had no objections to AE S through AE X, and they 
were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
March 15, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In the SOR, the Government alleged that from November 2005 through April 
2006, while serving on active duty with the Navy and while holding a security clearance, 
Applicant used heroin 3-4 times per week (allegation 1.a); cocaine once per month 
(allegation 1.b); and marijuana at least twice per month (allegation 1.c). It also alleged 
that while on active duty and holding a security clearance, Applicant used prescribed 
oxycodone (allegation 1.d), and Klonopin (allegation 1.e), in amounts above his 
prescribed dosage. The SOR also alleged that Applicant traveled to Canada, purchased 
heroin and cocaine, brought these drugs across the border into the United States 
(allegation 1.f), and distributed the drugs he obtained to his friends (allegation 1.g.), 
during the period November 2005 through April 2006. It is alleged that by these actions, 
Applicant violated Article 112(a) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) 
(allegation 2.a). He was convicted at a Special Court-Martial of violating Article 112(a) of 
the UCMJ and sentenced to four months confinement, was reduced in grade to E-1, 
forfeited $800 per month for four months, and was discharged from the Navy with a Bad 
Conduct Discharge (allegation 3.a). The Government further alleged that Applicant was 
arrested in July 2005 (allegation 1.b) and November 2005 (allegation 1.c) for two 
separate incidents of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs. During his 
testimony, Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in the SOR. (Tr. 42-44.) 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2010. His is 
single and currently resides with his parents. In January 2004, at the age of 21, he 
enlisted in the Navy. Shortly after he enlisted and completed boot camp, he began to 
notice his anxiety levels increasing and began to experience panic attacks. He sought 
medical treatment in December 2004. His treating doctor diagnosed him with panic 
disorder with agoraphobia, social phobia, and avoidant personality disorder. He also 
suffered with lumbar disc degeneration. He was prescribed a number of medications to 
help with his physical and emotional disorders including oxycodone and Klonopin. After 
several months of treatment, Applicant informed his doctor the treatment was not 
working. She indicated that she would recommend Applicant be separated from the 
Navy for medical reasons. Applicant continued to struggle with anxiety, and in July 
2005, approximately four months after his doctor recommended a medical discharge, he 
began to self-medicate with larger doses of his prescribed Klonopin. (GE 1; GE 4; AE H; 
AE J; AE N; Tr. 44-49, 61-64, 68-80.)  
 
3 
 
 
 In July 2005, Applicant was cited for driving under the influence of intoxicating 
drugs. Applicant pled guilty to this charge on February 14, 2006. He was sentenced to 
jail time of 365 days, with 364 days suspended, required to complete an alcohol 
assessment and victim panel, fined $840, and placed on probation for five years. (GE 2; 
GE 5; Tr. 42-44.) 
 
 In November 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol or drugs. He was sentenced to 90 days confinement, of which 60 
days were suspended. He was also fined and had his license suspended for two years. 
He was placed on probation. (GE 3; Tr. 42-44.) 
 
 Applicant was living off base with roommates at this time. When his roommates 
observed Applicant’s Klonopin abuse, they offered him heroin and cocaine. As he felt 
increasingly “hopeless” that he would get a medical discharge, he agreed to try heroin. 
He was “astonished how [his] problems seemed to disappear as [he] entered a state of 
chemical-induced euphoria.” He quickly became addicted to heroin.  He also used 
cocaine. (GE 4; AE N; Tr. 48-49.) 
 
 Applicant used a detoxifying beverage prior to a urinalysis administered during 
this time by the Navy. Containers of detoxifying beverages were discovered in 
Applicant’s work area by the Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS). (GE 5.) 
 
 In early 2006, he learned from his doctor that he had been recommended for 
administrative separation, but his command had not acted on the recommendation. 
Shortly after that appointment, he went to Canada with a roommate to look for heroin. 
He had made five to ten trips into Canada to obtain heroin and cocaine, which he 
transported into the United States. He would sometimes bring back drugs to distribute to 
friends as well as for his personal use. On his March 2006 trip into Canada, Applicant 
and his roommate were stopped by the Border Patrol on suspicion of drugs. No illegal 
substances were discovered, but the Border Patrol had alerted the NCIS. Applicant’s 
room was searched by NCIS and they found drug paraphernalia. Applicant was arrested 
and charged with violation of Article 112(a) of the UCMJ. (GE 4; AE N; Tr. 48-52.) 
 
 Applicant was found guilty of violating Article 112(a) of the UCMJ at the resulting 
court-martial. He was sentenced to four months confinement, reduction in pay grade to 
E-1, forfeiture of $800 a month for four months, and discharged with a Bad Conduct 
Discharge. The Bad Conduct Discharge was later upgraded to a General Discharge, 
Under Other Than Honorable Conditions. (GE 5; AE N; Tr. 50-52.) 
 
 In July 2006, Applicant was released from confinement and fully discharged. He 
then enrolled in a one-year intensive in-patient religion-based rehabilitation program. 
The program placed Applicant in “many stressful and difficult situations in order to learn 
how to deal with stress and anxiety by using coping mechanisms like positive 
affirmation, exercise, and meditation, without the need for any medication or drug.” 
However, the program was not a recognized drug and alcohol rehabilitation program 
and did not include counseling by any licensed medical staff.  While enrolled in this 
 
4 
 
program Applicant entered college, maintained a 3.7 grade point average, and was 
accepted into a scholastic honor society. In January 2008, together with another 
graduate of the rehabilitation program, Applicant moved out of the rehabilitation center 
and successfully found and held a job, while still attending school. (GE 3; AE F; AE G; 
AE N; Tr. 78-80.)  
 
 In January 2010, Applicant relocated to another state and now lives with his 
parents. He was hired by a Government contractor in October 2010. He continues to 
pursue his associate’s degree at a community college in the state he resides. He holds 
a 4.0 grade point average in his current program. He expects to graduate with his 
associate’s degree in summer of 2012. (AE B; AE I; AE V; Tr. 78-80.)  
 
 Applicant recognizes the serious mistakes he made in his past. He believes that 
he has changed significantly and has been sober for the past five years. He abstains 
“from all intoxicants, including alcohol and tobacco products.” He signed a statement of 
intent indicating that he will “never use illegal drugs again,” and consents to automatic 
revocation of his security clearance if there is a violation with regard to illegal drug use. 
He introduced a drug screening test, dated February 24, 2012, to show that he tested 
negative for controlled substances. He no longer associates with drug users. (AE N; AE 
P; AE Q; Tr. 52-53.) 
 
 In preparation for the instant matter, Applicant received a psychological 
evaluation conducted by a licensed clinical psychologist. That psychologist opined 
“none of the criteria for dependency or abuse have been met at any time during the 
period of at least the last 12 months.” However, the Psychologist noted the Applicant 
“continues to experience problems consistent with his avoidant personality disorder.” In 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission, Applicant presented documentation that he is 
continuing treatment for his psychological condition. He has also recently applied to 
upgrade his discharge to honorable. (AE L; AE M; AE X.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by the commanding officer from the Navy for which 
Applicant works, who “unconditionally recommend[s]” Applicant because he “continues 
to perform his duties in an exemplary manner and is consistently and frequently 
recognized for his performance,” with knowledge of Applicant’s drug and criminal 
history. Applicant also has the support of his father and a friend that testified and wrote 
letters of support on Applicant’s behalf. Each highlighted how Applicant has changed in 
the past five years, since he stopped using drugs. Applicant also introduced letters of 
support from his lab manager, co-workers, and friends, who all find Applicant to be an 
honest and trustworthy person.  (AE A through AE E; AE S through AE V.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 
6 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR 1.a.-1.g.). Applicant began misusing prescription 
drugs in 2004 and used illegal substances from late 2005 through April 2006, after 
being granted a security clearance by the Navy. The facts established through the 
Government’s information and through Applicant’s admissions raise a security concern 
under all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant misused prescription drugs and used illegal drugs from 2005 to 2006. 
He was attempting to self-medicate his uncontrolled anxiety disorders, as his regular 
medical treatment was not successful. He lacked the tools to deal with the stress he 
was under. However, Applicant has demonstrated a concrete and substantial change in 
his life since April 2006. He attended a religious-based rehabilitation program for over a 
year. In that program, Applicant learned tools in therapy to help him deal with future 
stressful situations in a healthy manner. He has successfully enrolled in college and is 
earning high marks. He performs well at work, as attested to by those that know him 
best. He has not used any type of legal or illegal intoxicant since April 2006. 
 
Applicant has signed a statement clearly indicating that he will not use illegal 
substances in the future. He has taken actions to support his promise including learning 
how to deal with future stressful situations in a healthy manner. He no longer associates 
with drug users. He is sincere in his pledge to not allow drugs to interfere with his job or 
future. His circumstances appear to have changed enough to support his current stated 
intentions to abstain from all future drug use. Available information is sufficient to 
 
7 
 
mitigate the security concerns about Applicant’s past drug use while holding a security 
clearance. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant has a history of criminal offenses including: his illegal drug use in 
violation of Article 112(a) of the UCMJ; his July 2005 driving under the influence of 
alcohol and/or drugs charge and conviction; and his November 2005 driving under the 
influence of alcohol and/or drugs charge and conviction. The above disqualifying 
conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal behavior. However, his offenses occurred 
when he was young and less mature. Almost six years have passed since his last 
offense. During that time, he has committed himself to sober living. He has sought an 
education and is earning high marks at his college. He is seeking professional treatment 
for his remaining anxiety. His superiors and co-workers support Applicant’s application 
and speak highly of Applicant. Due to the recent, positive changes in Applicant’s life, 
further Criminal Conduct is unlikely to recur. He has demonstrated that he has 
 
8 
 
successfully rehabilitated himself. His past criminal behavior does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant’s past drug use and criminal behavior, to include using illegal 
substances after being granted an interim security clearance, demonstrates 
questionable judgment. His poor judgment led to a conviction at a Special Court-Martial 
for violating Article 112(a) of the UCMJ for possessing and using a controlled substance 
while on active duty in the Navy. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant has been sober for over five years now. His co-workers, supervisors, 
family, and friends are all aware of his past problems with drugs. Applicant is committed 
 
9 
 
to sober living, and has demonstrated that his past drug and criminal involvement does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Further, he 
has successfully rehabilitated himself and has taken steps to avoid ever using drugs in 
the future, including avoiding contact with drug users. He is unlikely to return to his 
criminal past including the use of illegal substances. AG ¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Independent of my analysis 
under Guideline H, J, and E, I find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
under the whole-person concept. 
 
Applicant’s life has drastically changed in the past five to six years. He has 
focused on his education and started building a future for himself. He was young at the 
time he misused prescription drugs and used illegal substances. He is now more mature 
and uses the religious training he received through rehabilitation to solve his problems. 
He has not used any illegal substances since April 2006 and avoids all intoxicating 
substances. In addition, Applicant is well respected by his colleagues who were aware 
of his drug use and the circumstances of his discharge from the Navy. His co-workers 
and clients consider him to be trustworthy, with knowledge of his confessed past 
indiscretions. There is little potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in 
this instance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a~1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a~2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
