 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06143    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is indebted to one creditor 
for $39,000. Although Applicant’s financial problems were caused by an event beyond 
her control, she has not taken any steps to resolve or reduce her delinquent debt. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 7, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
Reasons (SOR) notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to continue her access to classified information and 
recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke her clearance. The SOR detailed the reasons for the action under 
Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 27, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 31, 2012, 
and chose not to submit a response. Accordingly, the documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The case was 
assigned to me on March 30, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since March 2010. She is married with no children. The SOR 
contains one allegation that Applicant is indebted to one creditor for $39,000. She 
admits she is responsible for the debt, a home equity line of credit (HELOC) loan.2 
 
 Applicant purchased her home in 2005. Later that year, she and her husband 
jointly opened a HELOC. The couple was able to pay the loan and all of their other 
expenses until 2008, when Applicant’s husband injured himself at work. As a result of 
the injury, he could not work, forcing the couple to live on Applicant’s income alone. 
Soon, the couple fell behind on their bills. Unable to obtain a mortgage modification 
based on financial hardship, the couple lost their home to foreclosure in the fall of 2008. 
They stopped making payments on the HELOC.3 
 
 Applicant’s salary continues to be the sole source of income for herself and her 
husband, who is now a full-time student at a technical school. Applicant expects her 
husband will re-enter the workforce after he completes school in early 2012. To date, 
she has not contacted the creditor or made any arrangements to resolve the delinquent 
HELOC. Applicant promises to pay the debt in the future, after she has resolved smaller 
debts. Other than two credit card debts listed on her October 2011 personal financial 
statement, she did not provide any information about the repayment of non-SOR debts.4 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1, 3 – 4. 
 
3 GE 1, 4, 7-8. 
 
4 GE 4 -5. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Both disqualifying conditions apply. After her husband became unable to work, 
Applicant could not meet the couple’s financial obligations on her salary alone. As a 
result, she could not continue payment on her HELOC, and it became delinquent.  
 
4 
 
 
 Of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 20, two are potentially 
applicable to this case:  
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and  
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 The event that caused Applicant’s financial problems, her husband’s loss of 
income after a workplace injury, was beyond her control. Before this incident, it appears 
that Applicant maintained a positive credit history. However, she receives only partial 
credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because she has failed to provide evidence that she acted 
responsibly toward her financial obligations under the circumstances.5 She has not 
provided any information to show what adjustments she made to her finances, if any, in 
response to her financial problems. Furthermore, she has not made any effort to repay 
or otherwise resolve the her outstanding delinquent debt.  
 Consequently, Applicant has failed to mitigate the Guideline F concerns raised in 
this case. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept. Applicant’s financial problems were caused by an event beyond her control 
and are not indicative of poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. An applicant is not required to be 
debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. 
All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given her circumstances and 
develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by concomitant conduct, that is, 
actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.6 She has failed to do so. 
Her promises to repay the debt in the future are not sufficient to mitigate the security 
concern raised by her outstanding delinquent debt.  
 
  This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to justify the granting of a 
security clearance. The award of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. A clearance is not recommended due to Applicant’s current 
circumstances. However, in the future, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence 
of her security worthiness.  
                                                          
5  See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) 
 
6 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
