 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02980 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Albert B. Shahid, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to upgrade a security clearance for access to 
classified information required for his employment with a defense contractor. After an 
investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an Interrogatory to Applicant to clarify or 
augment potentially disqualifying information in his background. After reviewing the 
results of the background investigation and Applicant's responses to the Interrogatory, 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding required to issue a security 
clearance. DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated August 8, 2011, to 
Applicant detailing security concerns for criminal conduct under Guideline J. These 
actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
 
2 
 
 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 On August 24, 2011, Applicant, through his attorney, answered the SOR 
admitting the factual allegation, under Guideline J, that he was arrested for second 
degree sexual conduct, but denied that the case had not been set for trial. It was noted 
by Applicant’s attorney that the case would be dismissed in the future. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 9, 2011, and the case was assigned to 
me on February 2, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 6, 2012, 
scheduling a hearing for February 27, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered six exhibits marked and admitted without objection as Government 
Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 6. Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant offered 
nine exhibits marked and admitted without objection as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A 
through I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 13, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the factual allegation that he was arrested for criminal sexual 
conduct in the second degree. Applicant's admission is included in my findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following 
essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old college graduate with a bachelor’s degree in computer 
science, and is employed by a defense contractor for approximately one year as a 
systems engineer. He is single. (Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated September 24, 2009) 
 
While attending college, Applicant was an intern for a defense contractor and 
was granted access to classified information. He worked about 8 to 16 hours per week 
for the contractor while attending school. Applicant required a higher level of access and 
submitted the September 24, 2009 e-QIP. He worked with the original defense 
contractor until he was hire by his present employer in November 2010. His 
performance rating from his present employer was an overall successful performance. 
(App. Ex. B, Performance Rating, dated January 15, 2012)  
 
On October 24, 2009, a month after submitting his security clearance upgrade 
application, Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal sexual conduct-second 
degree. Applicant was 21 years old at the time and was apprehended by police while 
engaged in consensual sexual intercourse in a wooded area with a 14-year-old girl. The 
girl told the apprehending police officer that she was a willing and consensual partner in 
the sexual intercourse. Applicant was held overnight by police, and released on bail to 
his parents the next day. The girl’s father appeared at the bond hearing requesting that 
Applicant be released on bail. The case was nolle prosequi by the State Circuit Solicitor 
on September 9, 2011. (Gov. Ex. 2, Arrest Warrant, dated October 24, 2009; Gov. Ex. 
3, Response to Interrogatory, dated July 9, 2010; Gov. Ex. 5, State Criminal Statute for 
Criminal Sexual Conduct; App. Ex. C, Bail Proceedings, dated October 25, 2009; App. 
 
3 
 
 
Ex. D, Statement, dated October 24, 2009; App. Ex. H, Court disposition, dated October 
5, 2011) 
 
Applicant lived in a house owned by his parents with other roommates while 
attending college. He joined a martial arts group when he started college in 2006. He 
initially attended the club three nights a week, but eventually spent almost every night 
and week-end with the group. The martial arts group became Applicant’s close circle of 
friends. He even referred to them as his second family. He spent most of his non-school 
and non-work time with them. His normal activities were school, work, and martial arts. 
The martial arts group consisted of older men in their 30s who were basically the 
instructors, college students and others in their late teens and early 20s, and the senior 
instructor’s daughter who was 11 years old when Applicant joined the group in 2006. 
(Tr. 26-33, 37-38) 
 
Applicant became a friend of the instructor’s minor daughter when he started with 
the martial arts group. By the summer of 2009, they started a romantic involvement. 
They had attended a martial arts summer camp with the members of the group and the 
girl rode home from the camp in Applicant’s car. The girls’ father knew they were 
together in the car and he trusted them together. They started riding together to other 
events. They would either talk on the phone or text frequently. Applicant knew at the 
time that the girl was 13 years old and would turned 14 in August 2009. Applicant does 
not believe that the girl’s father, other member of the martial arts group, or his friends 
knew the extent of their talking, texting, or relationship. He was not concerned about 
anyone learning of the relationship, and he did not attempt to hide the relationship. The 
couple was not affectionate in public. They first kissed in July or August 2009. The 
incident of consensual sexual intercourse leading to his arrest on October 24, 2009, 
was their first sexual contact. The girl told the police officer that arrested them that she 
was 17years old and born in 1993. Applicant then told the police officer that the girl had 
lied and that she was only 14 years old. (Tr. 33-47) 
 
Applicant was required to attend psychological counseling after the incident. He 
attended individual counseling with a psychologist once a week for about a year after 
the incident. After a year, the frequency of his counseling was changed to once every 
two weeks. He continues to see the psychologist about once a month. The psychologist 
used several tests to render an initial assessment of Applicant’s psychological condition. 
The tests show that Applicant is in the low nominal risk category for sexual recidivism, 
low current risk for sexual and violent recidivism, and low risk for general criminal 
activity. Applicant’s sexual interests seem to be in adult and adolescent females. His 
greatest level of arousal was to the adult female. He does not have a persistent sexual 
attraction to children, does not appear to have an interest in sadistic/masochistic sexual 
behavior, and does not appear to have chronic sexual interest in deviate sexual stimuli. 
He appears to be emotionally delayed regarding romantic interests. He does not meet 
the diagnostic criteria for pedophilia. The psychologist concluded his report by opining 
that Applicant can be safely maintained in the community, provided that he is in 
treatment with a qualified provider and is monitored regarding his contact with the 
 
4 
 
 
victim. He does not pose a threat to children and adolescents. (Gov. Ex. 6, 
Psychosexual Evaluation Report, Dated December 4, 2009.1
 
) 
Applicant was prohibited from having any contact with the young girl after the 
incident. He agreed to a consent restraining order for non-contact. He has not seen or 
been in contact with her since the incident. He made an inquiry of how she was doing to 
her father but was advised by his psychologist he should not even make such an 
inquiry. He has not had much contact with the martial arts group since the incident. He 
was not able to concentrate on his studies after the incident, so he dropped out of 
school for a semester and worked full time for the original defense contractor. He later 
returned to school, completed his studies, and earned his computer science degree. His 
circle of friends is now his co-workers at the defense contractor. He was recently able to 
purchase a house and has invited his friends to his house. He continues with the 
counseling from his psychologist, and has matured greatly. He has thought a lot about 
the incident and the consequences of his actions. He has thought about what he wants 
from life and he has concentrated on getting his life back on track. (Tr. 33-37, 48-53; 
App. Ex. I, Consent Restraining order, undated) 
 
One of the adult members of the martial arts groups, who has known Applicant 
for five years and the girl her entire life, wrote that he never questioned Applicant’s 
honorable intentions or nature. He knows Applicant made an error in judgment which is 
not indicative of his true character. He explained that the members of the martial arts 
group were very close and spent a lot of time together. Applicant had little experience 
with females, was lonely, and constantly in the presence of a relatively mature girl. The 
relationship should have been avoided but an emotional connection formed. He has had 
many discussions with Applicant since the incident and believes Applicant matured 
significantly and gained wisdom and understanding about life. The incident 
strengthened Applicant’s integrity and made him a more admirable person. (App. Ex. A, 
Statement, dated February 6, 2012) 
 
Applicant’s father testified that he and his wife, Applicant’s mother, were totally 
crushed when they learned of Applicant’s actions with the young girl. They could not 
believe he made such a mistake and was so thoughtless. They were pleased that the 
girl’s father and others in the martial arts groups attended the bond hearing to make 
sure Applicant was able to make bail and pay the bond. They and their other son 
advised Applicant to immediately report the incident to the security personnel for his 
employer. They did not know the details of the incident since that was between 
Applicant and his attorney. They were surprised that Applicant became so depressed 
about the incident and dropped out of school for a semester. They were pleased that he 
worked his way through the incident with the help of counseling, and graduated only six 
months late. His personality has returned to where it was before the incident. He has 
matured greatly and understands the consequences of his actions. He has expanded 
his circle of friends to other than the martial arts group. (Tr. 54-65) 
 
                                                          
1 This same report was submitted as App. Ex. I. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Appellant was arrested in October 
 
6 
 
 
2009 for second degree sexual conduct for having sexual intercourse with a female 
under the age of 16. The charge has been subsequently nolle prosequi. This criminal 
act raises Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime 
or multiple lesser offenses), and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted). 
 
Applicant raised by his testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 
32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement). These 
mitigating conditions apply. The incident happened over two and a half years ago. This 
is the only criminal activity Applicant has been involved in and there has been no 
recurrence of any criminal activity. The circumstances resulting in an inappropriate 
sexual encounter were somewhat unusual. Applicant was sexually immature and was in 
a relationship situation with a girl that he was not emotionally able to manage. He is now 
more mature and understands the consequences of his actions. There is significant 
evidence of rehabilitation. Applicant completed college and earned a computer science 
degree. He is successfully employed by a defense contractor. He saved money and 
purchased a house. He completed psychological counseling but still continues to see 
the psychologist. He understands the consequences of his action. He is more mature, 
and he has broadened the circle of his friends and acquaintances. This type of incident 
is not likely to happen again because of his maturity, counseling, and understanding of 
the consequences. It does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. I find for Applicant under the criminal conduct guideline.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is 
considered a trusted and valued employee who does an excellent job. Applicant's 
criminal action is mitigated since is happened over two years ago and there has not 
been other criminal activity. He completed counseling, has matured, and shown an 
understanding of the reasons for past criminal action. He has taken steps to follow the 
guidance of his counselor, followed the order to not contact the girl, and broadened the 
scope of his friends and acquaintances. Applicant's clear and positive actions to 
understand the reasons for his past criminal conduct and to rehabilitate himself 
indicates he will be concerned, responsible, and careful regarding classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising from criminal conduct and should be 
granted access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
