KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s debts were his own and were not the
responsibility of his father is supported by the record.  The record also supports the Judge’s
conclusion that Applicant’s relatives in Lebanon are a means through which Applicant might be
subjected to coercion or placed in a conflict of interest.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 10-03125.a1
DATE: 04/13/2012
DATE: April 13, 2012 
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-03125
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel 
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 10, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On January 25, 2012, after
considering the record, Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Government met its burden of
production and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge found that Applicant is an intelligence analyst for a Defense contractor.  He held
a security clearance while he was in the Marine Corps.  He receives a disability payment each
month, but there is no record evidence about the nature or origin of the disability.
Applicant was born in Lebanon, becoming a naturalized United States citizen in the late
2000s.  His parents were born in Lebanon.  His mother became a U.S. citizen and lives in the U.S.
with Applicant’s stepfather.  Applicant’s stepmother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon.  She is
employed by the Lebanese government, and she has been his stepmother since he was eight years
old.  He and his stepmother speak by telephone once a month.  He has a half-sibling who is a citizen
and resident of Lebanon and with whom he speaks monthly by telephone.
Lebanon has a poor human rights record.  Its security forces arbitrarily arrest and detain
persons, subjecting them to torture.  Syria maintains troops and intelligence assets in Lebanon.
Lebanon is a “permissive environment” for terrorist organizations.  Hizballah is a radical group
active in Lebanon.  
Applicant’s credit reports list two home foreclosures, as well as credit card accounts that
were delinquent.  A credit report lists one of the credit card debts as having been disputed.
Applicant is a client of a credit service, although there is no evidence as to the nature of the services
provided.
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s family circumstances raised concerns
under Guideline B.  The Judge stated that, given the totality of these circumstances, there exists a
“heightened risk” that Applicant could be subjected to foreign coercion.  He also stated that it is
foreseeable that Applicant could be placed in a conflict of interest between his ties to his family and
the interests of the United States.  
The Judge concluded that the evidence demonstrated Guideline F security concerns, relying
upon his findings about the nature and extent of the debts attributed to Applicant in the credit
reports.  He stated that Applicant had known about these debts since 2007, yet he had done little to
address them, save his agreement with the credit services agency.  The Judge stated that the only
evidence in the record of circumstances outside Applicant’s control was his statement that his father
had incurred the debts in Applicant’s name.  The Judge noted that this claim was not corroborated.
He went on to say that “Even were that true, he has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts.”
Decision at 8.  He stated that the record contained no evidence that (1) Applicant had received
financial counseling; (2) Applicant’s finances were under control or that he  had a plan to bring them
under control; or (3) Applicant had made a good-faith effort to pay his debts.
Applicant’s arguments on appeal rely on new evidence, including detailed evidence of his
military service.  This evidence was not before the Administrative Judge.  The Board cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.   
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his analysis of Guideline B.  He states that he has
no ties to Lebanon, but rather his obligations are to  the United States.  To the extent that Applicant
is contending that the Judge did not consider record evidence favorable to him, we note that the
Judge made findings about Applicant’s military service.  However, he also stated that the record was
silent as to the qualities of that service, the reason for Applicant’s disability, etc.  Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
10-10068 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2011).  Regarding mitigation, the Judge made findings such that
a reasonable person could infer that Applicant has ties of affection and obligation to his Lebanese
relatives.  When viewed in the context of the geopolitical situation in Lebanon, these findings
support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s relatives are a means through which Applicant might
be subjected to coercion or be placed in a conflict of interest.  Given these concerns, the Judge did
not err in concluding that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  Indeed,
in the whole-person analysis the Judge explicitly commented on the paucity of evidence on the issue
of mitigation.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that the debts alleged in the SOR were his,
citing to his reply to the SOR and his answers during a security clearance interview attributing his
debts to his father.  We construe this as a contention that the Government did not meet its burden
to produce substantial evidence of security concerns under Guideline F.  In a DOHA proceeding,
the Government must produce evidence of those allegations in the SOR that have been controverted.
Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, including those under Guideline F.
Accordingly, these allegations were not controverted.  Nevertheless, the Government produced six
credit reports, the most recent post-dating the SOR.  Taken together, and when read in light of
Applicant’s admissions, these credit reports are sufficient to constitute substantial evidence of
Financial Considerations security concerns.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.
7, 2010) (“It is well settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the
substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations under ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent
allegations”).  
The Judge discussed in some detail Applicant’s contention that his father was responsible
for the debts alleged against him.  The Judge’s position appears to be that, despite having been aware
of the debts for several years, Applicant had failed to take such steps that a reasonable person in his
situation would have taken to clear them up, whether by demonstrating that he did not owe them or
by paying or settling them.  Such a dilatory response impugns Applicant’s trustworthiness and
reliability.  Given the record that was before him, including the lack of corroboration for Applicant’s
contention about his father,  the Judge’s treatment of the Guideline F allegations is sustainable.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
