 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 10-06632 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions signed on 
April 1, 2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
make a preliminary affirmative finding1
 
 that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
                                                 
1 See Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
2 
On June 15, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Applicant 
signed his notarized Answer on July 25, 2011, in which he admitted the five allegations, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The first Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 16, 2011. The 
case was assigned to me on September 27, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
October 14, 2011, setting the hearing for November 17, 2011. In a memorandum dated 
November 4, 2011, the subsequent Department Counsel requested a continuance to 
obtain additional relevant evidence. By Order dated November 8, 2011, I granted the 
Government’s request. At the re-scheduled hearing on December 13, 2011, the 
Government offered eight exhibits, which I admitted without objection as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented two 
witnesses. He also offered 12 exhibits, which were admitted without objection as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through L. I held the record open until January 6, 2012, to 
allow him to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted four exhibits, which I 
admitted without objection as AE M through P. DOHA received the transcript on 
December 21, 2011. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 On November 30, 2011, Department Counsel submitted a Motion in Limine 
requesting that collateral estoppel be applied to prevent Applicant from contending at 
the hearing that he did not commit the offense for which he was convicted at a general 
court-martial. By memorandum dated December 6, 2011, Applicant objected. By Order 
dated December 12, 2011, I granted the Government’s motion.2
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant is a 30-year-old single employee of a defense contracting company, 
where he has worked as a logistician since March 2010. Following high school, 
Applicant enlisted in the Air Force, serving on active duty from 1999 to 2001. From 2001 
to 2006, he attended college on an ROTC scholarship and received a bachelor’s 
degree. He was commissioned as an officer in January 2007 and served on active duty 
until 2009. Applicant held a security clearance and access to sensitive compartmented 
                                                 
2 Applicant failed to disclose his arrest on a 2002 DUI charge, and was convicted of fraudulently 
obtaining his appointment as an Air Force officer. He can present extenuating and mitigating information 
about the offense, but cannot re-litigate the guilty finding. However, I allowed sufficient testimony to 
evaluate Applicant's behavior under the personal conduct guideline. 
 
 
3 
information (SCI) since 2001. He was court-martialed in 2008, and in 2009, he was 
administratively separated from the Air Force. (GE 1, 7; AE I; Art. 32 Investigations 
Report (IR); Tr. 89-95, 156-157) 
On October 26, 2002, while an Air Force cadet, Applicant went out with a friend 
and drank “a large quantity of alcohol.” (A1 at 7; Tr. 95) Later, he became lost and 
drove onto a railroad track. An approaching train was able to stop approximately ten 
feet before hitting Applicant. Applicant was arrested, given breathalyzer tests, 
fingerprinted, and spent the night in jail. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was 0.16 at 
the scene, and 0.14 later at the police station. He was charged with two 
misdemeanors: driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), and driving at 0.08 or 
above. Applicant testified at the hearing that he was aware he had been charged with 
DUI. He described his day in court as, 
 
I am waiting for the public defender to come out, and the public defender 
comes out, and I’m a wreck because I don’t know if it’s a DUI, under my 
assumption at that time, if it was a DUI, it was like literally nail in the coffin. 
(Tr. 105-106) 
 
He pled no contest, and on April 16, 2003, he was convicted on lesser charges of 
drunk in public and reckless driving. He paid a $400 fine, and his attorney told him the 
charges would be removed from his record after one year. On March 21, 2005, 
Applicant withdrew his plea of no contest, and the complaint was dismissed on April 
11, 2005. (AE A1, A2; Art. 32 IR at 7, 15; Tr. 105-110, 159-160)  
 
Upon entry into the ROTC program, and at the beginning of each fall term, 
cadets were counseled on the requirement to report all contacts, citations, or charges 
by civil or other authorities, regardless of how slight or serious the event, or the ultimate 
disposition. Any arrest, charge, or conviction was required to be reported within 72 
hours on Form 35, and the obligation continued throughout the cadet’s enrollment. 
These warnings were repeated during Applicant's college career.3
 
 In accord with this 
policy, Applicant reported a speeding ticket in 2001. Counseling about this requirement 
occurred on September 30, 2002, less than 1 month before Applicant's DUI, and also on 
November 11, 2002, 16 days after his DUI. Between October 2002 and early 2005, he 
did not report that he was arrested, charged with DUI, or convicted on charges of drunk 
in public and reckless driving. (ROT 207-208, 230; Forms 16, 24, 35) 
Applicant testified about the consequences of having a DUI while a cadet: 
 
                                                 
3 Among the pertinent Air Force forms were the following: AFOATS Form 35 – Certification of 
Involvement with Civil, Military or School Authorities/Law Enforcements Officials (AE H; ROT at 230) 
Prosecution Exhibit (PE) 3); Form 4 – to provide a detailed description of civil involvement (ROT 230); 
Form 16 – Officer Candidate Counseling Record (ROT 106; 207; PE 5); AF IMT Form 24 – Application 
for Appointment as Reserve of the Air Force or USAF Without Component. (PE 4)  
 
 
 
4 
In fact actually, I remember somebody asking during the sophomore year, 
a fellow cadet asked our instructor who was a Major, active duty person, 
and said, “What would happen with a DUI?” Well, “DUIs are really 
serious,” blah, blah, blah. I mean, you’re, you know, “You’re facing 
termination from ROTC.” (Tr. 106-107) 
 
According to trial testimony of the Deputy Registrar for ROTC, if the deputy had 
discovered Applicant had not reported his arrest and DUI charge, Applicant would have 
been investigated for an integrity breach. He also would have been dis-enrolled from 
ROTC for a DUI involving a BAC of 0.14, regardless of the fact that he was later 
convicted on lesser charges. (ROT 33-39, 226-232) 
 
In spring 2005, Applicant asked the commandant of cadets, then-Captain R, if he 
needed to report a 2002 civil involvement. Applicant testified,  
 
A: Which I, upon talking to Captain [X], I say, “I have all the paperwork and 
everything. This is not a DUI.” I literally say, “It’s a reckless dr[u]nk in 
public. It’s been off my record.” And I show him the order on that.  
And I go, “I paid $400 in fines, and that was it.” Well, I tell him, and I was 
like, ‘and that was it. That’s all that became of this.” And he goes, “And 
you were never found guilty of a DUI? Or you were never found guilty of 
DUI?” I was like, “No.” Then he goes, “Okay, fine. I’m not going to worry 
about this then.” 
 
Q: Okay. Did he say anything about whether you needed to then report 
that further? 
 
A: Well, and then I said, I was like, “Well, what do we do as far as the 
ROTC? Because I want to make sure this is okay.” He goes, “As far as 
ROTC is concerned, you don’t have to report it. You just did.” (Tr. 112-
113) 
 
 Now-Major R testified during Applicant's court-martial that, in 2005, Applicant 
asked him if, before getting his physical examination for pilot training, he should report a 
certain event. The Major stated that Applicant gave him no details other than that “he 
had been [in] an incident back in 2002, where he got in trouble, went to court, paid a 
fine, and that the incident had been wiped of (sic) his record.” Major R stated that 
Applicant did not tell him what he had been arrested for, or the initial charges. Major R 
asked him if he had been fined for a DUI, and Applicant answered “No.” Major R told 
Applicant that since it did not involve a DUI, and had been removed from his record, he 
should go ahead and report it, because it was not a problem.4
                                                 
4 Applicant reported convictions for Drunk in Public and Reckless Driving on a Form 8500-B, Medical 
Certificate and Student Pilot Certificate. Although it concerns a physical examination for pilot training, I 
cannot determine if this is the report that Applicant discussed with then-Capt R in 2005 because the form 
is not properly dated; in the date block, Applicant wrote his birth date. (AE A-4) 
 Major R testified at 
 
 
5 
Applicant's court-martial that he did not learn Applicant was convicted of public 
intoxication and reckless driving until two weeks before the May 2008 court-martial.5
 
 
(ROT at 20-26) 
 Several months later, in October 2005, Applicant was interviewed as part of his 
security clearance investigation. He described the 2002 alcohol-related incident 
involving the police, and told the agent the following: he was alone in a bar; had 48 
ounces of beer over two to three hours; was approached by police while he was walking 
outside the bar; he did not know the results of his breathalyzer, but he was not 
intoxicated; he was held in jail for two hours; no charges were filed; he did not have to 
go to court. Because no charges were filed, he was not “arrested,” and had no further 
contact with authorities. He considered the matter dropped, did not tell anyone, and did 
not have to report it on his security clearance application. He did not consider it a 
serious matter. When asked two times during the security interview if he had ever been 
arrested, charged, or convicted of any crime, he answered “No” both times. He 
explained in his interrogatory response that he answered “No” because it was expunged 
and because he thought Major R’s statement that he was not required to report it to 
ROTC leadership also applied to the security clearance process. (GE 2) 
 
 At his 2010 security interview, Applicant’s provided a different description of the 
events surrounding his 2002 DUI arrest: he was with a friend; had 64 ounces of beer; 
drove after leaving the bar; became stuck on railroad tracks; was arrested and held until 
the following morning; later received legal papers notifying him that he was charged with 
DUI and was required to appear in court; was assigned a public defender; and was 
found guilty in court of reckless driving and public intoxication. DOHA provided copies of 
both interview summaries to Applicant as part of the current adjudication. He adopted 
the 2010 summary as accurate. However, he provided corrections to the 2005 
summary, maintaining that the summary was “not an accurate reflection” of the 
information he gave the investigator. (GE 2) 
 
 When Applicant was asked at the hearing why he waited three years to inform 
his command of the 2002 arrest, he testified, 
 
Because in my mind it was not resolved yet. At the time I was like, “Well, 
as long as it gets resolved, and as long as I take care of it before I 
graduate,” you know, I will go hat in hand and here we go. That was a very 
incorrect though[t] process. (Tr. 185) 
 
                                                 
5 This statement conflicts with Major R’s letter of August 27, 2009, in which he states that (1) Applicant 
told him he was convicted of reckless driving and public intoxication in spring of 2005; and (2) that 
Applicant “did not need to further document or report his civil involvement from 2002 to anyone.” 
[emphasis added] However, in that letter, Major R reiterates that Applicant told him “that it was not a 
DUI.” (GE 2; AE A-3) 
 
 
 
6 
He admitted he should have reported it earlier. He testified that, “There’s - I learned 
definitely a huge lesson, don’t get me wrong. Granted, it’s a very expensive one. But, 
really at the time, it was just - it ended up being just a huge mistake on my part.” (AE A-
1, A-2; Tr. 108-110, 159-160, 185) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant applied to become an Air Force officer by completing AF IMT 
Form 24, which asked if he had ever been arrested or convicted of any civil law 
violation, including minor traffic violations. Applicant answered “No.” He was appointed 
as a second lieutenant. (ROT-Prosecution Exhibit (PE) 3) 
 
In summer 2007, Applicant attended the six-week Air and Space Basic Course 
(ASBC). He began a sexual relationship with a female second lieutenant. On June 16, 
after a party where he admits he had “a lot of alcohol,” they had sexual relations. The 
next morning, she accused him of rape, although she later changed her statements. As 
a result of this incident, Applicant’s Squadron Commander (Lt. Col. Z) ordered 
Applicant, on June 18, 2007, not to consume alcohol during his temporary duty (TDY) at 
ASBC. On July 3, 2007, Lt. Col. Z issued Applicant a Letter of Reprimand (LOR-1) 
stating that, while inebriated, Applicant forced a classmate to engage in sexual acts. In 
his written response to the LOR, he denied the allegation. He provided his cell phone to 
support his claim of the ongoing relationship, and contended that the sex was 
consensual. Applicant’s witness, who had read the report of the investigation, testified 
that within the first day after the incident, the woman who accused Applicant changed 
her mind and said he did not rape her. Applicant was interrogated by the Office of 
Special Investigations (OSI), but he was not arrested. In a letter dated July 9, 2007, 
Applicant's defense counsel provided facts that undermined the accuser’s credibility, 
including the contradictory statements she made in sworn statements. Criminal charges 
were not filed against Applicant. (GE 2, 3, 4, 5; AE B1, D1, D2; Tr. 68-69, 121-135, 161-
167) 
 
In an LOR dated July 12, 2007 (LOR-2), Applicant was reprimanded for failing to 
obey the order not to consume alcohol. The squadron commander noted in the LOR 
that Applicant's team leader saw three six-packs of beer in Applicant’s room, and that 
Applicant told him not to say he had seen the alcohol. The squadron commander also 
found full and empty alcohol containers and an empty 12-pack box in his room. 
Applicant testified that the empty boxes were trash he collected in the dorm. He 
admitted he possessed full containers of beer, some of which he intended to offer to 
people who visited his room, and three six-packs that he intended to give it to a friend. 
He denied he consumed alcohol. In a letter dated July 16, 2007, Applicant's defense 
counsel submitted a statement that there was no direct evidence showing that Applicant 
consumed alcohol. A written statement by the person who received the gift of beer 
supported Applicant's claim. (GE 2, 4; C1, C2; Tr. 135-141, 168-170) 
 
Based on the two LORs, Applicant was dis-enrolled from ASBC, with prejudice, 
in July 2007. On July 17, 2007, Lt. Col. C, deputy commander of Applicant's operations 
group, accompanied Applicant from state A, where he had been attending ASBC, to his 
 
 
7 
duty station in state B. On that day, according to Applicant's statement dated October 5, 
2007, Lt. Col. C ordered him not to consume or possess alcohol. (AE D1, M) 
Applicant’s operations commander, Col. P, learned Applicant had been involved 
in an alcohol-related incident in 2002. In October or November 2007, he held a meeting 
to counsel Applicant about his drinking, and also asked about the circumstances of the 
2002 incident. Applicant stated that he drank at a party, started driving, realized he had 
too much to drink, pulled over, left his car, and called for help. He also said he could not 
be convicted of DUI because the police had not seen him driving, and the charge was 
thrown out of court. Col. P. subsequently requested a copy of the police report, and 
discovered that the facts differed from what Applicant reported to him. (Art. 32 
Investigation Report) 
 
At the same meeting, according to Applicant, Col. P. said that he was “not sure 
about the issuing of a no alcohol order” and that “…he would assume that I should stay 
away from alcohol, especially since I could not afford any further problems…” At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that, when he met with Col. P, “There was nothing said or 
written at the time with regard to saying, ‘Do not drink alcohol.’” During the meeting, 
Applicant told Col. P he would be taking action “… in order to remedy an already bad 
situation, along with an apology for embarrassing the [X] Operations Group as a 
member.”6
 
 (AE M; Tr. 145, 171-173) 
In a memorandum dated October 5, 2007, Applicant admits that he consumed 
alcohol on August 31, 2007, September 21, 2007, and September 27, 2007, at public 
events, where he was observed by his chain of command. He was not intoxicated. Lt. 
Col. C informed him his actions violated the orders not to consume alcohol. In his 
response to LOR-2, Applicant stated he thought the order applied only to his return trip 
from state A to state B in July 2007. However, at the hearing, Applicant testified that he 
thought LOR-2 covered the period of his TDY at ASBC. On December 5, 2007, Lt. Col. 
C issued a third letter of reprimand to Applicant (LOR-3). It noted that Col. P had “re-
issued the no drinking order previously given by me.” It also noted that Applicant had 
violated two orders not to possess or consume alcohol, that neither order had a 
termination date, and that Applicant had violated Art. 92 of the UCMJ. Applicant was 
offered a choice of a non-judicial punishment (NJP) or court-martial, and chose the 
latter. (GE 2, 5; AE M; Tr. 42-46, 143-152) 
 
The Director for Administrative Law, Office of the Judge Advocate General, in an 
April 14, 2009 case review, found that Applicant's file contained “insufficient evidence to 
support the misconduct Respondent [Applicant] was alleged to have committed in two of 
the three letters of reprimand he received. Additionally, the legal basis for two of the 
                                                 
6 Applicant’s first witness, who was Applicant's squadron commander in summer 2007, testified that Col. 
P described Applicant as “wired wrong” and commented to the witness, “I just don’t think he thinks like 
us.” The witness described Col. P as having a vengeful attitude toward Applicant, and testified he told 
Col. P that he disagreed with his actions concerning Applicant. (Tr. 39-48) 
 
 
 
8 
letters of reprimand (failure to obey orders not to drink) are questionable.”7
 
 The letter 
also stated Applicant “admits he should have disclosed the reckless driving conviction in 
2002,” but noted that Applicant characterized his failure as a “mistake” and “minor 
misconduct.” (GE 7)  
In May 2008, a general court-martial tried Applicant for violating Art. 83 of the 
USMJ--Fraudulent Enlistment, Appointment, or Separation--for accepting the 
appointment after deliberately concealing his 2002 arrest and DUI charge.8 He was 
found guilty and sentenced to a $25,000 fine and a reprimand. Applicant was not 
dismissed and continued to serve as an officer until 2009.9
 
 (GE 6; AE H; ROT) 
 Applicant was promoted to first lieutenant in January 2009. The same month, the 
Deputy Chief of Standardization/Evaluation wrote a referral letter of evaluation covering 
February 2007 to April 2008. It described Applicant as proactive, and having displayed 
tenacity and selfless volunteer leadership. It also noted “questionable integrity” because 
of Applicant's failure to report the DUI on his pre-commissioning paperwork. He also 
noted Applicant's “problematic judgement” [sic] because he violated an order not to 
drink during the period and received a letter of reprimand. Applicant’s response noted 
that he had not had any integrity or judgment issues since July 2007. He also stated, 
“Although I continue to assert my innocence with regard to the Art. 83 offense, I 
acknowledge and respect the findings of my case.” (AE E1, E3) 
 
 Shortly after his promotion, Applicant was informed he was being processed for 
administrative separation. He was separated in June 2009, with a general discharge, 
under honorable conditions. He was required to “repay the United States Government 
the unearned, pro-rata share of the funds” that the Air Force expended on his AFROTC 
scholarship and tuition assistance. (GE 7; Tr. 153-156) 
                                                 
7 The Art. 32(b) Investigation Report discusses the legality of military orders not to consume alcohol. In 
U.S. v. Wilson, (12 USCMA 165, 30 CMR 165, 1961), the court held that, for an order that restricts 
individual rights to be legal, “…it must be connected with the morale, discipline and usefulness of military 
service.” The court further noted that, “In the absence of circumstances tending to show its connection to 
military needs, an order which is so broadly restrictive of a private right of an individual is arbitrary and 
illegal.” [emphasis in original]. In Wilson, the court found no military connection and held the order not to 
consume alcohol to be illegal. The court later overruled Wilson to a limited extent, when the order not to 
consume alcohol occurred under certain circumstances not applicable to this case. (U.S. v. Blye, 37 M.J. 
92, CMA 1993) (GE 8) 
 
8 Applicant also failed to disclose his 2002 arrest and DUI charge on his March 2005 security clearance 
application (Question 24. “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to 
alcohol or drugs?”) and provided an inaccurate description of the event to an investigator during his 2005 
security interview. These failures to disclose are not alleged in the SOR. (GE 2; Art. 32 Report, Exhibit 9) 
 
9 Applicant testified that the fine and the scholarship repayment are the same debt. During the eight 
months he remained in the Air Force after the court-martial, repayment was accomplished through 
deductions of approximately $1,000 to $1,500 per month from his pay. Since his separation, the 
government has applied his income tax refunds to the debt. He is unaware of the remaining balance, is 
not making any other payments, and has not been contacted by the Department of the Treasury 
regarding the debt. (Tr. 186-196) 
 
 
9 
 In June 2009, Applicant's commander during the period April 2008 to June 2009 
wrote a letter of evaluation describing him as a selfless volunteer, a team builder, and 
take-charge leader “with unlimited potential.” The ROT lists numerous citations and 
certificates of recognition and appreciation, all awarded between 2001 and 2008. (AE F, 
G, N-P; ROT, Defense Exhibits K through AF). 
 
Applicant's colleagues attest to his performance and character. A Lt. Col who 
worked with him after the general court-martial found him to be a “valuable and trusted 
member of the unit” who performed in an outstanding manner. More than one reference 
mentioned his participation in community and volunteer work with the Company Grade 
Officer’s Council (CGOC) and the Special Olympics, as well as his work with homeless 
veterans, and terminally ill children. A colleague who is an Air Force captain describes 
him as honest, hardworking, and trustworthy. Several military members who were 
colleagues during the time period when the LORs were issued described Applicant as 
professional, dedicated, and trustworthy. Applicant’s recognitions include being selected 
Company Grade Officer (CGO) of the Quarter, three nominations for CGO of the month, 
and nomination for Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal for his many volunteer 
activities. (GE 7; AE J-L, N-P; ROT-PE 14) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent adjudication policy in the AG.10
 
 Decisions must also 
consider the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented require consideration of the security 
concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest11
                                                 
10 Directive at § 6.3. 
 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
11 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
10 
burden of persuasion.12 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as her 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the Government.13
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
                                                 
12 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
13 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
11 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing….  
 
Applicant received three LORs in 2007. The first was based on an accusation of 
rape by a victim who gave contradictory statements, and then withdrew the accusation. 
Applicant was never arrested or charged. The second and third LORs stemmed from 
Applicant's alleged violation of orders to forego consuming alcohol. It appears, based on 
U.S. v. Wilson, that these were not lawful orders; therefore, Applicant did not have an 
obligation to obey them. On review of the case, the JAG office determined that the legal 
basis for the alcohol-related orders was questionable. I find for the Applicant as to the 
LORs listed in the SOR. 
 
After being granted an ROTC scholarship, Applicant failed to report a civil 
involvement--his 2002 DUI arrest–during his years as a cadet, a period when he was 
repeatedly counseled on the requirement to complete Forms 4 and 35 to report and 
describe any civil involvement. He was informed of this obligation less than 1 month 
before his DUI, and again 16 days after his DUI. Believing that a DUI charge would 
have dire consequences for his military career, he deliberately ignored his obligation to 
report. In 2005, he provided the Commandant of Cadets, then-Capt. R, with an 
incomplete and misleading description of events. The true facts were not revealed until 
Col. P sought out the police report in 2007. Applicant's conduct demonstrates a pattern 
of dishonesty. AG ¶¶ 16(a), (b), and (d) apply. AG ¶ 16(e) also applies because 
Applicant's concealment of these facts, which he believed could have ended his Air 
Force career, made him vulnerable to exploitation during the years he concealed the 
truth.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
 
 
12 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Rather than acting in good faith by disclosing his DUI arrest, Applicant 
repeatedly concealed it for three years, each time he failed to disclose his civil 
involvement on the Air Force forms while a cadet. Applicant’s concealment cannot be 
considered minor, as it led to a criminal conviction. The DUI is ten years old, and the 
court-martial conviction is four years old. Generally, distance in time supports at least 
some mitigation. Here, however, Applicant's contention at hearing that he simply made 
a “huge mistake” brings his poor judgment into the present. Moreover, Applicant's 
failure to admit that he deliberately chose to hide his DUI charge because of the 
damage it would cause to his career, undermines a claim of rehabilitation, and does 
not engender confidence in his trustworthiness or support a conclusion that he will not 
engage in self-serving conduct in the future. AG ¶ 17 (a), (c), and (d) do not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 (b) is not relevant because it applies to improper advice that specifically 
relates to the security clearance process. As to AG ¶ 17(e), Applicant's vulnerability to 
coercion is no longer a security concern because once his command became aware of 
the true facts, his secret was no longer a source of exploitation. However, over the 
years from 2002 to 2007, while he held a security clearance and kept the knowledge of 
his DUI arrest from his command, he was vulnerable to exploitation. His actions to 
conceal the true nature of his civil involvement demonstrate his desire that his 
command never learn of events that would jeopardize his military career. Moreover, his 
concealment was revealed not through his own positive steps, but by Col .P’s request 
 
 
13 
for the police report. He is no longer vulnerable, and AG ¶ 17(e) applies to his current 
vulnerability. However, Applicant allowed himself to be vulnerable to coercion for the 
years that he kept the secret from his command14
 
 and AG ¶ 17(e) does not does not 
mitigate his conduct during those years. AG ¶ 17(e) can only be applied to mitigate AG 
¶ 16(e); the remaining personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 In evaluating the whole person, I considered that Applicant has provided 
evidence of a strong work ethic, high-quality job performance, willingness to engage in 
volunteer activities, and to encourage others to do so. On the other hand, Applicant’s 
pattern of concealment does not reflect good judgment or reliability and demonstrates 
a troubling willingness to place his own interests above those of the government. 
 
 Applicant engaged in a serious violation of trust when he deliberately and 
repeatedly concealed information that he was on notice he was required to disclose. 
After hiding the information completely until early 2005, he disclosed misleading facts 
to his command. He did so for his own benefit, to avoid jeopardizing his career. His 
actions resulted in a conviction at general court-martial, and his administrative 
separation from the Air Force.  
 
 Applicant failed to disclose his 2002 arrest and charge of DUI on his March 2005 
security clearance application. In addition, October 2005 security interview summary 
differs substantially from the true facts of his DUI arrest. Applicant did not explain why 
                                                 
14 See ISCR Case No. 91-0259 (App. Bd. October 7, 1992) 
 
 
14 
these discrepancies occurred and, certainly, an agent might inaccurately record a few 
details. But to claim that the agent recorded a 25-line version of events that differs in so 
many details from what Applicant told him is not credible. I conclude Applicant 
deliberately provided the agent with incomplete, inaccurate, and misleading information 
during his 2005 security interview. This conclusion is supported by the fact that 
Applicant minimized and misrepresented the events to then-Capt R just a few months 
before the security interview. The failures to disclose in the security clearance 
application and security interview are not alleged in the SOR, and I did not consider 
them in drawing my conclusions on the SOR allegations. However, under the whole-
person concept, I find that these additional falsifications and misrepresentations further 
undermine Applicant's credibility and claims of rehabilitation.15
 
 
 Applicant left himself vulnerable to exploitation from 2002 to 2007 while he held 
a security clearance and concealed the true facts about his DUI. He demonstrated 
persistently poor judgment over a period of several years, continually minimized his 
serious misconduct, and continues to maintain that his concealment was the result of 
mistake rather than his deliberate choice. His behavior indicates lack of rehabilitation 
and raises serious questions about his reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant placed his own desires above the Government’s need for those who 
hold security clearances to be candid and forthright. Overall, his conduct raises doubts 
about his suitability for access to classified information. Such doubts must be resolved 
in favor of the national security. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.e  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
15 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006) at 4.  
