 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05595 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 9, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on January 26, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on February 16, 
2012. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but did not call 
 
2 
 
any witnesses or offer any exhibits. The record was left open until February 23, 2012, to 
provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. He submitted one 
document that was marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum reflecting that she 
had no objection to that document was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. In another 
memorandum dated April 2, 2012 and marked as HE 2, Department Counsel withdrew 
¶ 1.a of the SOR. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 6, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2009. He graduated from high school in 1993. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from January 1998 to June 2003 and 
received an honorable discharge. He served in the Marine Corps Reserve from January 
2006 to January 2008. He has been married twice. His first marriage was from April 
1999 to September 2001. He married his current wife in September 2005. He has four 
children, ages three, five, seven, and eight. He currently holds a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 22 delinquent debts totaling about $36,926. 
In his answer, Applicant admitted each of the alleged debts. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. Department Counsel pointed out that the SOR alleged 
two sets of duplicated debts. Specifically, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.s are duplicates, as are ¶¶ 
1.g and 1.v. Excluding the two duplicate debts and the withdrawn allegation, the 
remaining alleged indebtedness is $33,561.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to periods of unemployment and 
financial strains arising from multiple moves to obtain employment. He was unemployed 
from July 2003 to August 2003 and from October 2005 to April 2006. He also indicated 
he was a car salesman at a dealership from about August 2004 to October 2005 and 
stated managers took credit for many car sales that he initiated, which resulted in a 
reduction of his sales commissions. Since his discharge from the Marine Corps, 
Applicant and his wife have moved thirteen times. Some of those moves were in the 
local area, but at least five were long-distance moves of hundreds of miles or more. 
Those long-distance moves were made to obtain employment. Additionally, his 
youngest son was born prematurely and his lungs did not develop fully. His son has 
asthma and is susceptible to respiratory infections. However, Applicant has always had 
medical insurance since his youngest son was born.3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleged that Applicant had a student loan of $12,000 that was placed 
for collection. He obtained student loans between 1993 and 1995 while he attended 
college for two and a half years. They became delinquent in about 2000. At the hearing, 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 18, 22-24, 27-28, 30; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 13, 38-39, 46, 63; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1-5; AE A.  
 
3 Tr. at 18-36, 64-67; GE 2.  
 
 
3 
 
he testified that he recently made payment arrangements for this student loan. In his 
post-hearing submission, he provided a letter dated January 1, 2012, from the creditor. 
It indicated that his loan was placed in forbearance for three months while the creditor 
waited for him to submit his adjusted gross income information. While in forbearance, 
he was to make interest-only payments of $60 per month. Once the creditor received 
the adjusted gross income information, it would calculate his revised monthly payment 
amount. He did not provide documentation showing that he made the interest-only 
payment that was due on February 14, 2012. He also indicated that his tax refund for 
2010 was withheld and applied to the student loan.4 
 
 The date of first delinquency/date of last activity for the delinquent debts spans 
from April 2007 to January 2010. Applicant provided no proof of payments towards the 
delinquent debts. He testified that he has not made any payments on the alleged debts 
in the last year. Except for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g (the student loan), he has not 
contacted any of the creditors in the past year. He indicated that he was waiting to 
reach a settlement agreement on the student loan before contacting the other creditors. 
He also indicated that he failed to file his federal and state income tax returns on time 
for tax years 2007 through 2009. In 2010, he filed all his late federal income tax returns 
and his 2009 state tax return. However, he has not yet filed his state income tax returns 
for 2007 through 2009, which must be filed in other states.5 
 
 Applicant’s wife has worked in the past, but is not currently working. She is 
attending cosmetology school in the evenings. He expects that she will graduate in May 
2013. He anticipates she will obtain a good job soon after graduating.6 
 
 Applicant stated that he spoke to an attorney about filing for bankruptcy, but has 
not obtained other financial counseling. His Personal Financial Statement (PFS) dated 
July 28, 2011, indicated that his net monthly income was $3,066, that his total monthly 
expenses were $2,975, and that his total monthly debt payments were $460, which left 
him a negative net monthly remainder. Due to vehicle problems he was experiencing, 
he purchased a used vehicle for $19,000 in August 2011. His monthly payments on this 
vehicle are $437. Because he purchased this vehicle after he submitted the PFS, the 
monthly payments for that vehicle are not reflected in the PFS. At the hearing, he 
testified that he is just breaking even financially at the end of each month. He stated that 
he was current on his rent and utilities payments, but was a month behind on his car 
payment.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 9-10, 34-36, 41-46, 62-64; GE 2; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 36-53, 62-67; GE 1, 2. The date of first delinquency/date of last activity for the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h was April 2007, while the date for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j was January 2010. See GE 
4 and 5. 
 
6 Tr. at 21, 25-36, 33-34, 60-61; GE 3.  
 
7 Tr. at 18-21, 53-62; GE 2, 3.  In his PFS, Applicant did not include his monthly debt payments in 
computing his net monthly remainder. He indicated his net monthly remainder was $91, when it was 
actually a negative figure, i.e., -$389. See GE 3.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
over a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has multiple delinquent debts totaling over $33,000 that remain 
unresolved. His financial problems are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced periods of unemployment and underemployment. For the 
past five years, however, he has been gainfully employed. Despite his steady 
employment, he took no meaningful steps to address his past-due obligations. While his 
periods of unemployment were conditions outside his control, he failed to show that he 
acted responsibly in the intervening period to address his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant provided no proof of payments on the alleged debts. He talked with an 
attorney about filing for bankruptcy, but has not obtained other financial counseling. 
With the exception of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, he has not attempted to contact the 
creditors in the past year. In short, he has not taken meaningful steps to resolve his 
delinquent debts or bring them under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
 Department Counsel indicated two of the alleged debts were duplicates. A review 
of the credit reports supports her contention. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.s and 1.v. 
 
 Applicant has failed to mitigate the alleged delinquent debts. His financial 
problems remain a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and his years of service in the defense 
industry. His debts arose from periods of unemployment and multiple moves to obtain 
employment. He is barely meeting his current financial obligations. He failed to present 
any plan for resolving the alleged delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.r:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.t – 1.u:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.v:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
