1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-09448
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns generated by his 2008
conviction for molesting his daughter. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On November 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines D, sexual behavior, J, criminal conduct, and E, personal conduct. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2011, admitting the allegation
and requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2012. On
March 6, 2012, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for April 2, 2012.
The counseling was unrelated to the issues of molestation. Rather, the family had been  receiving counseling1
for issues related to Applicant’s son. (Tr. 116)
2
The hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received three Government exhibits (GE 1-
3), and 36 Applicant exhibits (A-JJ). Also, I considered the testimony of Applicant, eight
character witnesses, and a psychologist qualified to testify as an expert in family and
mental health counseling. (Tr. 87-88) The transcript was received on April 10, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old man with three children, ages 21, 19, and 18. He has
been married for 27 years. Applicant is a U.S. Navy veteran, serving from 1971 to 1973.
He was honorably discharged.
Applicant earned an undergraduate degree in geography in 1981, and a master’s
degree in the same field in 1983. Also, he earned a master’s degree in information
systems in 1993.
Applicant has worked in the systems engineering field since 1983. He held a
security clearance from 1984 to 2008. He has worked for the same employer since
August 2009.
Between February and June of 2006, Applicant sexually molested his then 13
year old daughter. (AE H at 3) The sexual abuse occurred approximately two to three
times per week in the mornings after the rest of the family had left for school or work. As
a pretext for the abuse, Applicant told his daughter that he was teaching her sex
education, in addition to tactics to repel a sexual assault. (GE 2 at 41) Such “teaching”
exercises included engaging his daughter in several role playing situations in which he
was the hypothetical attacker. Among other things, he groped her breasts and made her
hold a mirror to her genitals. He admits touching her genitals, but denies fondling them.
(GE 2 at  41) 
Approximately one year later, Applicant’s daughter reported the abuse to a
counselor.  Subsequently, in August 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with1
aggravated sexual battery and indecent custodial liberties with a minor. (GE 2 at 24)
Applicant pleaded not guilty to both charges and the case went to trial.
On February 20, 2008, the jury found Applicant guilty on both counts, and the
court sentenced him to two years incarceration and six months probation. While in
prison, Applicant underwent 12 weeks of intensive therapy. (Tr. 58) He served 17
months of the sentence before being released early in July 2009, for good behavior.
(Answer at AE L at 3; Tr. 155) As a condition of applicant’s probation, he was required
to register as a sex offender, undergo sex offender treatment, and not have contact with
anyone under the age of 18. (Tr. 155)
3
Applicant began his post-prison counseling in July 2009. It consisted of a three
phase program known as “the offense cycle.”  Phase I included a review of the offense
and is sexual history, in addition to the basic concepts of sex offender treatment. Phase
II consisted of group therapy, and Phase II consisted of the development of a relapse
prevention plan. The counseling was conducted by a licensed clinical psychologist. (GE
2 at 45) 
Applicant successfully completed the first two phases, but quit attending the
program once probation expired. He never completed Phase III. (GE 2 at 46) The
psychologist concluded that Applicant “may be lacking in certain knowledge and/or skills
that could potentially further mitigate the risk for reoffense.” (GE 2 at 44) 
It is unclear from the record whether Applicant was required to complete the
counseling program that he had begun as part of his probation. According to his
probation officer, he completed probation satisfactorily. (AE KK)
After Applicant quit working with the court-ordered counselor, he returned to a
counselor with whom he had previously consulted from September 2007 to February
2008, before his conviction. (Tr. 72) He continues to work with her once per week. (Tr.
72) According to this counselor, Applicant “is not the typical sex offender” because
when the offense occurred, his thinking was impaired by  an extremely stressful set of
circumstances. Specifically, at work, he had recently been tasked to lead the completion
of a challenging project, and while at the same time, he was dealing with a hostile,
litigious subordinate who was not following his orders, while at home, he was dealing
with issues related to his son who had serious behavioral issues. The management of
these issues led to marital strife, as he and his wife disagreed on how their son should
be treated. (Tr. 44-45) Applicant was working with his counselor to address these issues
when the offense occurred. (Tr. 44)
Applicant’s counselor questioned the conclusion of the court-referred counselor,
characterizing it as “cookie-cutter,” and fixated on squeezing Applicant into a “pre-
existing mold” rather than addressing the underlying emotional issues that triggered the
behavior. (Tr. 79) Consequently, rather than focus on the offense, the counselor
focused on the underlying emotional stressors. She diagnosed Applicant with
adjustment disorder with depression and anxiety. (Tr. 97) Her therapy consists of
identifying triggers that cause stress and helping Applicant develop ways to handle his
stress so that it does not become overwhelming. (Tr. 72-74) 
According to Applicant’s counselor, her therapy has been successful. She
characterized Applicant as “one of the most mentally healthy clients that [she has]
worked with.” (Tr. 76) Applicant’s counselor is not an expert on sexual offender
treatment. (Tr. 89)
 In August 2007, Applicant joined a church and sought spiritual counseling from
the pastor. (Tr. 146) Since then, Applicant’s pastor has been working closely with
Applicant and his family. (Tr. 146) Having sat through Applicant’s trial, Applicant’s
4
pastor is well aware of Applicant’s criminal offenses. Since leaving prison, Applicant has
worked hard to restore his relationship with his family members.
Since leaving prison, Applicant has also developed close relationships with  other
church members. (Tr. 148) He is active in the church, participating in fundraising and
ushering. His fellow parishioners know about his crime. According to one parishioner,
she would have no problem allowing Applicant to supervise children at the Sunday
school. (Tr. 173)
Currently, Applicant is a registered sex offender. (Tr. 48) He and his spouse are
separated, but are attempting to reconcile. Applicant’s daughter is a freshman in
college. They are also attempting to reconcile. Since leaving prison, Applicant has seen
his daughter during holidays. 
According to Applicant’s second-line supervisor, he is an outstanding, trustworthy
employee with a passion for assisting the company’s clients. Applicant’s immediate
supervisor, who recently left the company, was equally impressed with Applicant’s work
performance. According to both supervisors, Applicant was candid about his crime. (AE
N, O)
 
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
5
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
Under this guideline, “sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 12) Applicant’s molestation of his daughter in 2008 triggers the
application of all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13, as follows: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has
been prosecuted,
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior
that . . . may be symptomatic of a personality disorder,
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
and
 
(d) sexual behavior . . . that reflects a lack of discretion or judgment.
Applicant was prosecuted, convicted, and imprisoned for his conduct. He was
released early from prison and completed probation.  His testimony was contrite, and he
has been working diligently to repair his relationships with his family through counseling.
Also, Applicant is active in church, volunteering and participating actively in ushering
and fundraisers. His friends, fellow parishioners, and coworkers know of his crime.
Applicant contends his offense did not reflect a prurient interest in his daughter or
in children generally. Instead, he contends that it was caused by significant stress at
home and on the job, which impaired his thinking. Further, he contends that, through
counseling, he has gained the tools to deal with stress, thus minimizing the possibility of
recurrence.
Applicant’s counselor supports Applicant’s conclusion. Applicant’s counselor,
however, is not an expert on sexual offender treatment. Consequently, her prognosis
about either the possibility of recurrence or the merits of Applicant’s initial treatment has
minimal probative value. 
Applicant attended court-ordered sex offender counseling while on probation, but
never completed it. Under these circumstances, I am not persuaded he has mitigated
the security concern. 
6
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 30) Moreover, “by its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(Id.) Applicant’s molestation of his daughter led to his conviction for custodial indecent
liberties and aggravated sexual assault. AG ¶¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses,” and 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or formally convicted,”
apply.
It is unclear from the record whether Applicant was required to finish the court-
ordered rehabilitation program. Consequently, I conclude that AG ¶ 31(e), “violation of
parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program,”
does not apply.
In light of the nature and seriousness of the crime, the amount of time that has
elapsed since it was committed is insufficient to conclude that the crime was not recent.
AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is
inapplicable.
Applicants’ testimony that his decision to molest his daughter was influenced by
outside stressors was not credible. AG ¶ 32(b), “the person was pressured or coerced
into committing the act and those pressures are no longer present in the person’s life,”
is not  applicable. 
Applicants’ church involvement, good employment record, and good-faith
attempts at rehabilitation are sufficient to trigger the application of AG ¶ 32(d), “there is
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but no limited to . . . remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement.” Absent the completion of therapy specifically geared toward
sex offenders, I cannot conclude that Applicant has mitigated the criminal conduct
concern.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of AG ¶ 16(e),
“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities
which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”
7
Applicant’s evidence of mitigation, as discussed in the previous paragraphs,
triggers the application of AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce
or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” Applicant has not
mitigated the personal conduct security concern for the same reasons as set forth
earlier in the Decision. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I conducted an evaluation of the whole-person factors in my analysis of the relevant
guidelines, and it does not warrant a favorable conclusion.      
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a : Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
