 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-06107 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in United States, and he has substantial connections to the 
United States. He served in Colombia while he was on active duty in the Army and on 
behalf of the U.S. State Department for more than five years. He honorably retired from 
the U.S. Army. He had numerous contacts with Colombian government officials and 
advisors as part of his official duties, with his spouse’s Colombian family members, and 
with friends living in Colombia. Although these contacts raise a security concern, 
Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 22, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On November 
3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2)) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which were promulgated by the President. The SOR 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and it recommended 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. DOHA set forth the basis 
for its action in the SOR, citing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
(HE 2) 
 
On November 28, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. (HE 2) On December 21, 2011, Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed. On February 8, 2012, DOHA assigned the case to 
me. On February 15, 2012, DOHA issued a hearing notice. (HE 1) On March 1, 2012, 
the hearing was held. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits (Tr. 19; 
GE 1-2), and Applicant did not offer any exhibits. There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-2. (Tr. 19, 22-27) Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR 
and the hearing notice. (HE 1-3) I held the record open until March 9, 2012, to afford the 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional evidence. (Tr. 151-152)  He did not submit 
additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 12, 2012.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested Administrative Notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Colombia. (AN Request with Ex. I to V; Tr. 8-9) Department Counsel provided 
supporting documents to show detail and context for these facts. Applicant did not 
object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 9-10) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1
 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a to 
1.c with explanations, and he denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.d-1.o with 
explanations. (HE 2) His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
   
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GE 1) He was born 
in the United States. (Tr. 91) When he was 12 years old, he and his family moved to 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, and 
names of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited 
sources contain more specific information.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Puerto Rico. (Tr. 90-91) In 1981, when he was 20 years old, he returned to the United 
States and joined the Army. (Tr. 91-92) In 1984, he was commissioned as an officer. 
(Tr. 93) He honorably retired from the Army. (Tr. 110; GE 2) He has 22 years of active 
service and six additional years of reserve service. (GE 2 at 188) In 1987, he earned a 
bachelor’s degree in business administration. (Tr. 93-94) In 1996, he was awarded a 
master’s degree in international relations. (Tr. 95) He is an in-resident graduate of the 
U.S. Army’s Command and General Staff College. (Tr. 95; GE 2) 
 
Applicant received imminent danger pay while he served in Colombia from 
January 2003 to April 2008. (Tr. 111-112) Towards the end of his military career, he 
was entrusted with access to top secret and sensitive compartmented information (SCI). 
(Tr. 150)  
 
Applicant married the first time in 1984, and he was divorced in June 2008. (Tr. 
96) He married his second and current spouse in December 2008. (Tr. 96) Applicant’s 
spouse is a citizen of Colombia, and lives in the United States with Applicant as a 
permanent resident alien. (Tr. 96, 99; SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant and his spouse have not 
been in Colombia for more than one year. (Tr. 109-110) Applicant’s stepdaughter is 18 
years old, she lives in the United States, and she is a permanent resident of the United 
States. (Tr. 98)  
 
Applicant’s son is 27 years old, and he is currently an Army first lieutenant 
serving in Afghanistan. (Tr. 100-101) His son is married, and his wife is expecting a 
baby in April 2012. (Tr. 101) His son’s home is in the United States. (Tr. 102) 
Applicant’s daughter is 23 years old, and she works for a defense contractor. (Tr. 103, 
162)  
 
Applicant’s mother lives in Puerto Rico, and he communicates with her almost 
every day. (Tr. 97) Applicant’s brother is retired from employment at Homeland Security. 
He now lives in Puerto Rico. Applicant communicates with his brother about twice a 
month. (Tr. 103-104) Applicant’s sister is married and she is also in Puerto Rico. 
Applicant communicates with her about twice a month. (Tr. 105) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. (Tr. 106) Applicant’s mother-in-law is a 
citizen and resident of Colombia. (Tr. 106; SOR ¶ 1.b) She is currently visiting Applicant 
in the United States. (Tr. 106) Applicant’s spouse occasionally sends her mother money 
on special occasions, such as her birthday. (Tr. 145) Applicant’s stepson lives in 
Colombia. (Tr. 103) His contact with his mother-in-law and stepson is infrequent, but 
cordial. (Tr. 107) Applicant’s spouse has one brother, who is a citizen and resident of 
Colombia. He is a full-time student attending law school. (Tr. 146; SOR ¶ 1.c) 
Applicant’s spouse has affection for her family members (mother, brother, and son) 
living in Colombia. 
 
 
Investments in Colombia 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In 2009, Applicant made a $10,000 investment to start a company in Colombia. 
(Tr. 134-137) The company had five listed owners, including Applicant’s spouse, 
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and his spouse’s cousin. (Tr. 137)   
 In about 2008 or 2009, Applicant invested about $25,000 from his Thrift Savings 
Account in another Colombian company. (Tr. 138-143) Applicant worked closely with 
two employees of this company, who were vetted by the U.S. Embassy so that they 
could receive U.S. Aid funds. (Tr. 139-140) His Colombian investment has been 
liquidated, and he does not have any financial interest in either Colombian company. 
(Tr. 143) His most recent contact with an employee of this Colombian company was 
about six or eight months ago. (Tr. 144)   
  
Applicant does not own any foreign property or have a bank account in a foreign 
country. (Tr. 108; SOR ¶ 1.d) All of Applicant’s banking is in the United States. (Tr. 108) 
He exercises his rights, such as voting, in the United States, and not in Colombia. (Tr. 
109) 
 
Applicant’s Contacts with Non-family Colombians 
 
Applicant had numerous frequent contacts with Colombian government officials, 
military officers, government advisors, businessmen, and friends during his five years of 
U.S. military service in Colombia. One of his primary objectives was to develop 
relationships with Colombian citizens, especially Colombian government officials, to 
encourage the Colombian government to make decisions which would result in positive 
outcomes in their war against terrorists and lawless elements. During his Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interview, he disclosed these contacts with Colombian 
citizens and residents.  
 
Applicant’s most recent contacts with advisors to a high-ranking Colombian 
government official and several senior officers in the Colombian Army were in 2008, 
when he worked for the State Department and was living in Colombia. (Tr. 122-125; 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h)  
 
Applicant has not had contact with two lawyers (alleged in the SOR) in Colombia 
(one officiated at Applicant’s wedding in Colombia), for more than two years. (Tr. 123-
124, 133; SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.o) He called the lawyer who officiated at his wedding once after 
he left his State Department employment in 2008. (Tr. 124-125; SOR ¶ 1.g) Applicant’s 
most recent contact with another senior officer in the Colombian Army was 30 to 36 
months ago. (Tr. 126; SOR ¶ 1.i)  
 
Applicant had contact with a civilian advisor to the Colombian Army about 18 
months ago, and he has her phone number pre-programmed on his cell phone. (Tr. 
127-128; SOR ¶ 1.j) She left a message for Applicant last week on his birthday. (Tr. 
128; SOR ¶ 1.j) They worked together when Applicant was in Colombia for over five 
years. (Tr. 129) 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant had contact with a civilian advisor to the Colombian government about 
12 months ago. (Tr. 130; SOR ¶ 1.k) He has the civilian advisor’s phone number pre-
programmed on his cell phone. (Tr. 128, 130; SOR ¶ 1.k) 
 
Applicant had frequent contact with a Colombian business associate, who is a 
civilian advisor to the Colombian government and owner of a large Colombian business. 
(Tr. 130-132; SOR ¶ 1.l) The U.S. Government has made substantial progress on an 
important initiative because of Applicant’s relationship with him. (Tr. 130-132; SOR ¶ 1.l) 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with another Colombian business associate, who 
is a civilian advisor to the Columbian government. (Tr. 132; SOR ¶ 1.m) Applicant had 
contact with her in the last seven days. (Tr. 132; SOR ¶ 1.m) 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with a retired senior Colombian military official, 
who now has an important Colombian government job. (Tr. 132-133; SOR ¶ 1.n) 
Applicant had contact with him in the last 14 days. (Tr. 133; SOR ¶ 1.n) 
 
In sum, all of Applicant’s contacts with non-family Colombians were in the course 
of official duties on behalf of the U.S. government or his employer, whose goal was to 
further the interests of the U.S. government in Colombia. (Tr. 147) He maintained 
contact with them to establish a network to better support the U.S. government and U.S. 
government contractors. (Tr. 147-148)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s former supervisor when Applicant served in Colombia from 2003 to 
2008 is now Applicant’s colleague, as they both work for the same defense contractor. 
(Tr. 21-22) He retired from the Navy as a commander and held a security clearance for 
40 years. (Tr. 24, 41) Following his retirement from the Navy, he worked for 16 years in 
the area of drug interdiction for the State Department primarily in Latin America. (Tr. 24-
30) When he met Applicant in 2002, Applicant was an Army major. (Tr. 29) During their 
service together in Colombia, Applicant was a valuable U.S. government asset, who 
made substantial contributions to mission accomplishment. (Tr. 32-37) Applicant was on 
a five-person team, with the other team members being Colombian nationals. (Tr. 35-
36, 49-50, 53-54) Applicant’s team met frequently with numerous Colombian officials as 
part of their official duties. (Tr. 32-50) He believed Applicant was completely loyal to the 
United States, and that his contacts with Colombians were for official U.S. government 
purposes. (Tr. 40-41, 48)   
 
   Applicant’s current supervisor served on active duty in the Air Force for 20 
years and retired as a lieutenant colonel. (Tr. 68-69) He first met Applicant when 
Applicant was serving in Colombia. (Tr. 70-71) Applicant was very knowledgeable and 
professional. (Tr. 71) He hired Applicant for his current job because of his knowledge of 
Colombia and his contacts in Colombia. (Tr. 72) He described the necessity of Applicant 
being able to network with Colombians as “extremely important.” (Tr. 75) Applicant is 
loyal to the U.S. government. (Tr. 76-77) 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A retired Navy intelligence officer and corporate officer in Applicant’s company 
has known Applicant and had daily contact with him for three years. (Tr. 80-81, 88) He 
described Applicant as very experienced in Latin America and professional. (Tr. 81) His 
position working for the contractor requires him to have a solid network of contacts in 
Latin America and to interact with senior leaders in Latin America. (Tr. 81-82) Applicant 
is trustworthy and loyal to the U.S. government. (Tr. 84) 
 
Colombia2
 
 
Any person born in Colombia is considered a Colombian citizen. Colombian 
citizens are required to present a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. 
 
The United States has provided more than one billion dollars over the last ten 
years assisting Colombia in its war against terrorists. The success of Colombia’s war 
against terrorists is an important U.S. government interest that has received substantial 
U.S. resources especially in the last 10 years. The United States and Colombia are 
allies in the war on terrorism, and the United States is committed to a free and 
independent government in Colombia. Colombia and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
On July 22, 2011, the Department of State issued a travel warning to U.S. 
citizens of the dangers of travel to Colombia. Violence by narco-terrorist groups 
continues to affect some rural areas and cities. The potential for violence by terrorists 
and other criminal elements exists in all parts of the country. Three terrorist groups also 
pose a threat in Colombia. Terrorist organizations and other criminal organizations 
continue to kidnap and hold persons of all nationalities and occupations for use as 
bargaining chips. U.S. government officials and their families have strict limitations on 
travel to and within Colombia due to these dangers. Robbery and other violent crimes 
are common in major cities while small towns and rural areas can be extremely 
dangerous due to the presence of narco-terrorists. 
 
The Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) – as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations. These groups have carried out bombings and other attacks in and 
around major urban areas, including against civilian targets. The FARC has targeted 
civilians, government representatives and politicians, soldiers, and the civilian 
infrastructure. FARC held three U.S. government contractors (U.S. citizens) hostage for 
five years, until the Colombian military rescued them on July 2, 2008. 
 
Although the government’s respect for human rights continues to improve, 
serious problems remain. Unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, 
insubordinate military collaboration with criminal groups, torture and mistreatment of 
detainees, overcrowded and insecure prisons, and other serious human rights abuses 
were reported during 2010. 
                                            
2The facts in the section concerning Colombia are from Department Counsel’s factual summary 
and source documents I-V. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 
7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude Guideline B (foreign influence) is the relevant security concern with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she] may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant served in Colombia from January 2003 to April 2008 on behalf of the 
U.S. government. Applicant made numerous contacts with Colombian government 
officials, military officers, government advisors, and businessmen over those five years. 
Some of them became friends and remained business associates after he left 
Colombia.  
 
Applicant married his spouse in December 2008 in Colombia. She currently lives 
in the United States, she is a citizen of Colombia, and she is a permanent resident of 
the United States. Applicant’s stepdaughter is 18 years old, she lives in the United 
States, and she is a permanent resident alien of the United States. Applicant’s mother-
in-law is a citizen and resident of Colombia. She is currently visiting Applicant and his 
spouse in the United States. Applicant’s spouse sends her mother money on special 
occasions, such as her birthday. Applicant’s stepson lives in Colombia. His contact with 
his mother-in-law and stepson is infrequent. Applicant’s spouse has one brother, and he 
is a citizen and resident of Colombia, who is attending law school.  
 
Applicant’s spouse has ties of affection for family living in Colombia. She also 
provides funds for her mother on special occasions. In 2011, the Appeal Board stated: 
 
[I]n-laws represent a class of persons who are contemplated by the 
Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.  
 
ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-26176 
at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2005)). 
 
Applicant has not rebutted this presumption. His relationship through his spouse 
with her family living in Colombia is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” his family and in-laws living in Colombia. See ISCR Case No. 
09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011). He has affection for his spouse, and she has 
affection for her family living in Colombia. His communications with his in-laws living in 
Colombia are less frequent, and accordingly, that relationship does not raise a security 
concern.  
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The mere possession of close family ties with family living in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative, who has a relationship with another family 
member living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential 
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or the 
country has a significant problem with lawless elements or terrorists. The relationship of 
Colombian government with the U.S. government reduces Applicant’s burden of 
persuasion to demonstrate that his or his spouse’s relationships with family in a foreign 
country do not pose a security risk. The United States and Colombian governments 
have close ties forged through several years of being allies in a conflict against 
terrorists. Nevertheless, Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might 
be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his in-
laws, friends, or contacts living in Colombia.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Colombia or terrorists seek 
or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his in-
laws. Nevertheless, his relationship with his spouse, in-laws, friends, and contacts living 
in Colombia create a potential conflict of interest. His relationship with them is 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist them by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with his spouse, friends, business contacts, and his spouse’s 
contacts with her family living in Colombia. His and his spouse’s relationships with 
family members, friends, and business contacts living in Colombia raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. In addition, Applicant made two 
investments in Colombia, one for about $10,000 and one for about $25,000, which are 
sufficient to subject Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
and affection for his spouse, who lives with him, and she has a close relationship with 
her family living in Colombia, which includes her son, mother, and brother. Applicant 
continues to have frequent contact with some business associates and friends in 
Colombia. He is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that 
[his relationships with his relatives, friends, and business associates who are Colombia 
citizens and living in Colombia] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be 
weighed against the potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his 
spouse and through her with her family living in Colombia. Although there is no 
evidence that terrorists or criminals have approached or threatened Applicant because 
of his work for the United States, he is nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats and 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
coercion made against his in-laws living in Colombia. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) 
analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” 
Applicant has established that “[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant was born in the United States. He served 22 years 
on active duty in the U.S. Army and six additional years in the reserves. He served more 
than five years in an imminent-danger zone, Colombia. Applicant’s son is currently an 
Army first lieutenant serving in Afghanistan. His son is married, and his wife is expecting 
a baby in April 2012. His son’s home is in the United States. Applicant’s daughter is 23 
years old, and she works for a defense contractor. None of Applicant’s children live in 
Colombia. Applicant’s parents and siblings do not live in Colombia. Through his many 
years of Army service, he has repeatedly shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the 
United States.    
 
AG ¶ 8(d) applies to Applicant’s non-family relationships with Colombian citizens. 
All of Applicant’s contacts and relationships with non-family Colombian citizens were on 
behalf of the U.S. government. One of his key objectives was to develop relationships 
with Columbian citizens, especially Colombian government officials, and to encourage 
the Colombian government to make decisions, which would result in positive outcomes 
in their war against terrorists and lawless elements.    
 
AG ¶ 8(e) does not apply. Applicant is not required to report his contacts with 
family members and others living in Colombia. Applicant reported his Colombian 
contacts and relationships in detail to an OPM investigator and described those 
contacts at his hearing.   
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.d because Applicant has divested 
himself of any interest in property or businesses in Colombia. This mitigating condition 
can only fully mitigate AG ¶ 7(e).  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections through his spouse to her family living in 
Colombia and his relationships on behalf of the U.S. government to Colombian citizens 
are much less significant than his strong connections to the United States. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. 
 
 
  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are important factors supporting a foreign influence security concern and 
tending to support revocation of Applicant’s security clearance because of Applicant’s 
connections to Colombia, and the risk that his in-laws face in the event that terrorists or 
criminals discover his relationship to them. In ISCR Case No. 09-06457 (App. Bd. May 
16, 2011), the Appeal Board concluded that an Applicant’s father, who was prominent in 
the Afghan Government and who had guards for protection because of his position, 
might receive additional danger or threats because his son wanted to be a linguist in 
Afghanistan. The Appeal Board explained their rationale for reversing that grant of 
access to classified information stating: 
 
In the case before us now, those who might be tempted to use Applicant’s 
father as a means of coercion include terrorist organizations that are 
hostile to the U.S. and that are engaged in operations designed to defeat 
our geopolitical goals. As we have previously stated, terrorist activity in a 
foreign country is an important consideration in Guideline B cases. See, 
e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
Applicant has emotional ties to his spouse, and she has emotional ties to her 
mother, son, and brother, who are citizens and residents of Colombia. Should 
insurgents, terrorists, or criminals discover their connections to Applicant, his family 
living in Colombia would face some increased probability of reprisal, especially 
kidnapping for ransom. They are vulnerable should terrorists or insurgents seek to harm 
them. Applicant’s five years of Army service included liaison with numerous Colombian 
government officials, government advisors, business associates, and military officers. 
He formed a social relationship with some of them, which was encouraged by the U.S. 
government. His cordial relationships with these same officials remain an important 
aspect of his current employment. Applicant invested $10,000 in one Colombian 
company and about $25,000 in another Colombian company.      
 
The whole-person factors weighing towards reinstatement of Applicant’s security 
clearance are more significant. He was born in the United States 50 years ago. He 
served 22 years on active duty in the U.S. Army and six additional years in the reserves, 
including more than five years in an imminent-danger zone, Colombia. His son is 
currently an Army first lieutenant serving in Afghanistan. His son is married, and his wife 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
is expecting a baby in April 2012. His son’s home is in the United States. Applicant’s 23-
year-old daughter works for a U.S. Government contractor, and provides support for the 
Department of Defense. None of Applicant’s children live in Colombia. Applicant’s 
parents and siblings do not live in Colombia. Through his many years of Army service, 
he has repeatedly shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. All of 
Applicant’s contacts and relationships with non-family Colombian citizens were on 
behalf of the U.S. Government. He developed relationships with Colombian citizens, 
especially Colombian government officials, and encouraged the Colombian government 
to make decisions that would result in positive outcomes in their war against terrorists 
and lawless elements. Applicant credibly reported his Colombian contacts and 
relationships in detail to an OPM investigator and described those contacts at his 
hearing. Applicant divested himself of any interest in property or businesses in 
Colombia. His employer lauds his duty performance and contributions to mission 
accomplishment. He mature and responsible.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Colombia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Colombia, as well as the dangers existing in Colombia.3
 
 
Colombia is a dangerous place because of violence from criminals and terrorists. 
Criminals and terrorists continue to threaten the Colombian government, the interests of 
the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. The United 
States and Colombia are allies in the war on terrorism, and the United States is 
committed to a free and independent Colombian government. Colombia and the United 
States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
Applicant has often put himself in harm’s way, working for five years in an 
imminent-danger zone, Colombia. He has made significant contributions to national 
security, fully aware of the risks to himself. All these circumstances demonstrate that 
Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist 
group, or insurgent group at coercion or exploitation. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 
(App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Three character witnesses lauded his loyalty, trustworthiness, 
and responsibility while serving in Colombia. Applicant’s strong connections to the 
United States and especially to his U.S. family, community, and his employment 
establish “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” See 
Discussion of AG ¶ 8(b), supra.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has fully 
mitigated the foreign influence security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
                                            
3See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.o:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
