 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10612   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 7, 2011, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He later changed his request to 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 9, 
2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 14, 2012, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
March 27, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 4, 2012.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
Applicant affirmatively waived his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days 
notice before the hearing. 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted documents that 
were marked AE D through Q and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s e-
mail forwarding AE D through Q is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2010. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He is a graduate of a technical institute. He married in 1992 and divorced in 
1999. He married again in 2001 and divorced in 2010. He has four children, ages 19, 
17, 12, and 8.1 
  
 Applicant has had financial problems for a number of years. He filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 2000, and his debts were discharged in 2001. Applicant continued to have 
financial difficulties after his bankruptcy. Applicant and his second wife both had two 
children when they married, and they had an additional two children together. Applicant 
was supporting a family of eight on a limited income. He has had serious medical 
problems with his legs requiring nine surgeries since he was a teenager, most recently 
in 2009. He had extensive periods of unemployment, underemployment, and time away 
from work because of his leg problems. He received workers’ compensation and 
unemployment benefits, but it was less than his normal income. Applicant received a 
settlement of about $22,000 for his injury on the job, and he received about $75,000 
from an inheritance. He used those funds for living expenses when he was out of work. 
He was unable to pay all his bills, and debts became delinquent.2 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2011. The bankruptcy petition 
did not list any debts under Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured Claims, or 
Schedule E – Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims. Under Schedule F – 
Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed claims totaling 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 30-32, 92; GE 1; AE G. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-30, 41-42, 46-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE D, L, P. 
 
3 
 
$58,342. Claims included $22,069 owed in child support arrearages and $24,132 in 
student loans. Schedule I – Current Income of Individual Debtor(s), listed Applicant’s net 
monthly take home pay as $2,355. That figure was after $718 was deducted from his 
pay for child support for his two youngest children. Under Schedule J – Current 
Expenditures of Individual Debtor(s), the petition listed Applicant’s average monthly 
expenses as $3,143. That figure includes $788 in child support for Applicant’s two 
youngest children. When Applicant’s average monthly expenses are subtracted from his 
average monthly income, the remainder is negative $788. That figure is inaccurate, as 
Applicant’s child support payments were counted twice. Applicant testified that he is 
paid every two weeks, and the $718 figure is the garnishment taken out of two pay 
checks, which equates to $788 a month. If $788 is used as the monthly deduction for 
child support and not counted twice, the net, after subtracting expenses from income, 
would be negative $70.3 Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged in June 
2011.4  
 
 Applicant and his second wife separated in 2007. She has custody of their two 
children. The child support order requires him to pay $622 per month plus $378 per 
month for past-due child support. Court records from November 2011 indicate that 
Applicant owed $21,743 in arrearages as of December 2010. He paid $1,075 in 
December 2010 and June 2011; $817 in September 2011; and $717 in January, 
February, March, April, May, July, August, and October 2011. Payments were made by 
garnishment. He owed $21,515 in November 2011. The total owed in arrearages did not 
significantly decrease because the arrearages were accruing interest and the $717 
payments were not sufficient to cover the current child support plus the monthly interest 
owed for the past-due child support.5 
 
 The U.S. Department of Education certified in March 2012 that Applicant’s 
student loans are in forbearance. The forbearance is effective from November 2011 
through February 2013. He was notified that he is responsible for the interest that 
continues to accrue on his principal balance of $43,570. Since his November 2011 
statement, additional interest of $1,436 has accrued.6   
  
 Applicant owed a $747 delinquent debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
telephone services company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant settled this debt on 
June 24, 2011. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $585 delinquent debt for an overpayment of 
Applicant’s unemployment compensation. Applicant paid the debt with a $1,013 
payment on June 24, 2011.7  
                                                          
3 The correction of the mathematics does not assume the accuracy of the underlying figures upon which 
the mathematical computations are based.  
 
4 Tr. at 93-95; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 30-38, 65-68; GE 2; AE E, G. 
 
6 Tr. at 69-75; AE I. 
 
7 Tr. at 38, 58; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, C. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy. He 
also sought additional financial counseling. He testified that his job provides sufficient 
income to pay his debts, and that he is living within his means. His two oldest children 
live with him. A nephew, who is in college, also lives with him. Shortly after his debts 
were discharged in bankruptcy in June 2011, Applicant bought a used 2008 car for 
about $22,000. His payments are $530 a month for six years. As of the hearing, he was 
a month late on his car loan payment, which he attributed to a family emergency. He 
has three credit cards, and he testified that he was 30 days late on one card.8 
 
 Applicant’s February 2011 bankruptcy petition included his average monthly 
income, expenses, and net income. He submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) 
in response to DOHA interrogatories in March 2011. He included a copy of his budget in 
his post-hearing submission. The budget shows actual monthly income of $2,962, plus 
$600 in child support received, for a total monthly income of $3,562. Applicant testified 
that the mother of his two oldest children was not paying child support, so the $600 
figure is unexplained. The budget shows total expenses of $2,687, leaving a monthly 
remainder of $875. The bankruptcy petition, PFS, and budget show different and 
sometimes contradictory information. They provide little clarity into Applicant’s current 
financial situation.9 
 
A witness testified and Applicant submitted a number of documents and letters 
attesting to his excellent job performance, integrity, dependability, professionalism, work 
ethic, reliability, trustworthiness, and honesty.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 27-28, 38-40, 77-91, 95-96; AE E, J. 
 
9 Tr. at 93; GE 2; AE K. 
 
10 Tr. at 17-26; AE E, F, J, M, Q. 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. His debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2000 and 
2011. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant had extensive periods of unemployment, underemployment, and time 
off work because of his long-term medical problems, which required nine surgeries. He 
is raising his two oldest children without the benefit of child support from their mother. 
He and his second wife divorced in 2010. These events constitute conditions that were 
beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant paid two debts and had other debts discharged in bankruptcy. His 
student loans of more than $43,000 and child support arrearages of more than $20,000 
were not discharged. His student loans are in forbearance until February 2013. 
Applicant’s child support is being paid by garnishment. Since December 2010, he has 
consistently paid more than the $622 per month owed for current child support, but the 
total owed in arrearages has not significantly decreased because the arrearages were 
accruing interest and the usual amount paid was not sufficient to cover the current child 
support plus the monthly interest owed for the past-due child support. Applicant 
received financial counseling. He testified that his job provides him sufficient income to 
pay his debts and that he is living within his means. However, shortly after his debts 
were discharged in bankruptcy, he bought a used 2008 car for about $22,000. As of the 
hearing, he was a month late on his $530 car loan payment, which he attributed to a 
family emergency, and he was 30 days late on one of his three credit cards. 
 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s financial counseling established the first section of AG ¶ 20(c). His 
bankruptcy discharged many of his debts, but it had no impact on his two largest debts: 
child support arrearages and student loans. I am unable to find that Applicant acted 
completely responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to 
pay his debts.11 His finances are not yet under control. His financial issues are recent 
and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. The second section of AG ¶ 20(c) is 
not applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is only applicable to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
I find that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
                                                          
11 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant’s debts were 
discharged twice in bankruptcy, most recently in June 2011. He is already behind on a 
credit card and the loan on the car he bought shortly after his debts were discharged. 
He still has more than $20,000 owed in child support arrearages and more than $43,000 
in student loans that are scheduled to come out of forbearance in February 2013. His 
bankruptcy petition, PFS, and recent budget are muddled. Instead of clarifying 
Applicant’s current financial situation, they make it more confusing. Applicant has not 
convinced me that his finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
