 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04790 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on June 10, 2011.2
                                                          
1 Item 5 (SF 86), dated December 3, 2010. 
 On August 23, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 10, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 30, 2011. In a statement 
notarized September 16, 2011,3
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on 
December 30, 2011, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days 
after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on January 10, 2012, but as of 
March 21, 2012, he had not submitted any further documents or other information. The 
case was assigned to me on April 2, 2012. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations pertaining to 
drug involvement in the SOR (¶ 1.a.), adding explanations for his actions. Applicant’s 
admissions and other comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an engineer with his current employer since April 2007. He was previously 
employed as a content engineer (part-time) from June 2003 until June 2005; an intern 
from June 2005 until August 2005; and a graduate student instructor (part-time) from 
August 2005 until December 2006.  During the period December 2006 until April 2007, 
he considered himself unemployed while traveling around South America.4 A May 2001 
high school graduate, he received a bachelor’s degree in civil and environmental 
engineering in May 2005, and a master’s degree in structural engineering and 
mechanics of materials in December 2006.5 Applicant has never served in the U.S. 
military.6 He has never been married.7
                                                          
3 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 16, 2011). 
 
 
4 Item 5, supra note 1, at 21-27. 
 
5 Id. at 17-20. 
 
6 Id. at 35. 
 
7 Id. at 37. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant is a substance abuser whose substance of choice is marijuana. He 
started using marijuana in about August 2001 at a friend’s house, and continued doing 
so, through a “joint” or a bong, about once every month until about May 2006, while in 
college as an undergraduate and graduate student in the same city. His usage 
decreased to about two to three times per year, and remained at that frequency until 
about November 2010, when he purportedly ceased using marijuana.8 The marijuana 
was “freely” supplied to him by his friend.9 Applicant has never sold, distributed, or 
manufactured marijuana.10 He attributed his use of marijuana to two reasons: it was 
“freely” supplied to him, and it made him feel relaxed and euphoric.11
 
  
In January 2011, Applicant indicated the last time he used marijuana was in 
November 2010, and he acknowledged that he “is considering stopping usage of 
marijuana completely at this point because [Applicant] does not want health insurance 
companies to label him as a smoker.”12 He also added that “if it is offered and it is the 
right time, he will smoke the marijuana.”13 In June 2011, he clarified his comments by 
stating that he did “not intend to use it in the future.”14 In September 2011, Applicant 
acknowledged that his statement of intent accompanies with it an automatic revocation 
of clearance for any violation.15
 
 There is no evidence that he has used marijuana since 
November 2010.  
Applicant has never tested positive for any illegal drug.16 He has never been 
professionally evaluated or diagnosed for drug abuse, and has never received any drug 
treatment.17
 
 
Applicant has not disassociated himself from his marijuana-supplier-friend, but 
that friend has purportedly decided to severely limit his use of marijuana and 
understands Applicant’s reasons for stopping.18
 
   
                                                          
8 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 26, 2011), at 3, attached to Applicant’s Answers to the 
Interrogatories; Item 5, supra note 1, at 49-50. 
 
9 Item 6, at 3. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
15 Item 4, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
16 Item 6, supra note 8, at 3. 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Item 4, supra note 3, at 1-2. 
 
4 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”19 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”20
 
   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”21 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.22
 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
20 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
21 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”23
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”24
 
 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
                                                          
23 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
24 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition),” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” may 
raise security concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 25(h) may apply if there was “any expressed 
intent to continue drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue 
drug use.” During the period August 2001 – November 2010, Applicant obtained and 
used marijuana. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(h), have been established.   
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is “a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation.” 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 
August 2001 until November 2010, a period of nearly nine and one-quarter years, 
because it was free and available, and his friend furnished it to him. He used it in a 
university setting while both an undergraduate and a graduate student, as well as in a 
non-school setting while working for a Government contractor. Marijuana made him feel 
relaxed and euphoric. The issue of marijuana’s status as an illegal drug was not a 
concern for him. His decision, as it pertains to his continuing use of marijuana over such 
a lengthy period, is troublesome. Applicant’s abstinence over the past 17 months is 
encouraging, but in light of the foregoing, the period is still too brief to establish that his 
substance abuse is unlikely to recur or that it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.   
AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies. Applicant has taken certain efforts to demonstrate 
his intent not to abuse any drugs in the future. He has abstained since November 2010 
and he has signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation. However, while 
Applicant’s marijuana-supplier-friend has purportedly decided to severely limit his own 
use of marijuana, Applicant still associates with him. In addition, Applicant has not really 
changed or avoided the environment where marijuana was used. He used it in a 
 
7 
                                      
 
university setting while both an undergraduate and a graduate student, as well as in a 
non-school setting while working for a Government contractor, all in the same city. In 
addition, the demonstrated intent seems to be a fluid concept. In January 2011, 
Applicant indicated the last time he used marijuana was in November 2010. He also 
stated that he was considering stopping the use of marijuana completely because he 
did not want health insurance companies to label him as a smoker. He added that “if it is 
offered and it is the right time, he will smoke the marijuana.” Under those 
circumstances, it appears that a more thorough demonstration of intent, supported by a 
longer period of abstinence, complete disassociation from drug-using associates, and 
avoidance of the environment where the marijuana was used, is appropriate. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.25
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s 
marijuana use ceased in November 2010, and he has been abstinent since that time. 
Applicant has never tested positive for any illegal drug, and he has never been 
professionally evaluated or diagnosed for drug abuse.  He signed a statement of intent 
with automatic revocation.  
       
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has a nearly nine and one-quarter year history of marijuana use, ending in 
November 2010.  Equally troubling is his statement that he was considering stopping 
the use of marijuana because he did not want health insurance companies to label him 
as a smoker. The legal status of the substance was of no concern. He added that if 
                                                          
25 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
marijuana is offered to him and it is the right time, he will smoke the marijuana. 
Applicant’s actions over such a lengthy period, as well as his changing views and 
intentions, indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations, all of which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
         
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
