 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01594  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the financial 
considerations guideline. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on August 4, 2010, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 3). On November 23, 2011, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DoD directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on 
 
2 
 
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR listed security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the AG. In his answer to the SOR, dated 
December 16, 2011, Applicant admitted all seven allegations, and requested a decision 
without a hearing. (Item 2) 
 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)1
 
 in support of 
the Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant on January 31, 2012, and he received it on February 15, 2012. 
He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to file a response. Applicant 
did not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on April 17, 2012. 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s response to 
the SOR, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years of age. He married in 1985, and has two adult children. 
After two years of training in aeronautics from 1982 to 1984, he received an airframe 
and power plant license. As of August 2010, he was employed by a defense contractor 
as a sheet metal mechanic. (Item 3) 
 
 At his 2010 security interview, Applicant admitted that he had numerous credit 
card accounts. They started to become delinquent in 2007, when he could not both pay 
his children’s college expenses and his credit card debt. He stopped making payments 
in 2008. Applicant provided evidence that he has retained a consumer credit counseling 
agency. He stated he made monthly payments of $427. In early 2010, the agency 
negotiated settlements and paid two large credit card debts. At the time, he stated that 
his current bills were paid timely and he planned to be debt-free within three years. 
Applicant provided evidence of payments he made to the company in 2011, but no 
evidence of recent payments. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant’s October 2011 personal financial statement and pay statement show 
net monthly income of $6,861 and expenses of $3,175. In addition, he listed debt 
payments of $2,930. Subtracting his expenses and debt payments ($6,105) from his 
income leaves a monthly remainder of $756. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant admitted the seven debts alleged in the SOR, which are currently 
charged off or in collection status. These debts, which total $65,345, appear in 
Applicant's credit reports of August 2010 and September 2011. In his interrogatory 
response of October 2011, Applicant noted that he has made two $1,000 payments on 
a $5,000 credit card debt, and provided evidence that he is making monthly payments 
of $100. He now owes approximately $2,100. The debt is not listed in the SOR, and 
                                                          
1 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant's August 2010 credit report shows it is current. Applicant also stated in his 
interrogatory response that he is unable to pay the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 
and 1.g, because of insufficient funds, but plans to establish a payment plan in place 
when the money is available. (Items 2, 5, 7, 8)  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. His debts started to become 
delinquent in 2008, because of college expenses for his children. As of the date of the 
SOR, he had past-due debts totaling approximately $65,000. His history of failing to 
meet his financial obligations supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions can potentially mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay his debts did not occur in the distant past, because his 
debts are still delinquent. His unresolved financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, 
and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant had numerous credit card accounts and in 2008, his ability to pay them 
timely was affected when he had the financial burden of his children’s college expenses. 
However, he did not list any financial circumstances that were beyond his control, such 
as unforeseen medical expenses, or the sudden loss of income due to divorce or death. 
Applicant acted responsibly when his debts became overwhelming by obtaining the 
assistance of a debt-resolution firm. It has helped him pay two substantial debts that do 
not appear in the SOR. His evidence shows that he was making payments in 2011, but 
the file contains no evidence of recent payments. Applicant receives partial mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (c). 
 
 The file contains evidence that Applicant has made efforts to meet his financial 
obligations, and receives credit for his efforts between 2008 and 2011. However, he 
provided no evidence of recent payments to the debt-resolution firm. In addition, he has 
several large debts for which he has no payment plan, despite having a monthly net 
remainder of more than $700, which could be used for this purpose. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies 
in part.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is a mature 47-year-old adult. Over the past four years, he has 
accrued approximately $65,000 in delinquent debt. He has been aware that delinquent 
debts are a security concern since he completed his security clearance application in 
August 2010.  
 
 In response to the Government’s concerns, Applicant offered proof that he has 
a relationship with a debt-resolution firm, and has paid off two delinquent credit card 
accounts. However, there is no evidence that the debts alleged in the SOR are included 
in his plan with the debt-resolution firm. Applicants are not required to be debt-free; 
however, they are expected to develop a plan to resolve their SOR debts, and provide 
evidence of conduct to implement that plan. Applicant has not provided evidence that he 
has established a payment plan for the SOR debts, and has begun making payments 
 
6 
 
 
on them. Accordingly, the Government’s doubts about Applicant's suitability to hold a 
security clearance remain.6
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
