1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-00421
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows Applicant has a
history of financial problems or difficulties. He defaulted on two credit card accounts and
they were placed for collection for $11,000 and $6,032, respectively. The creditor for the
lesser amount has obtained a judgment against him. Applicant is now seeking relief
from these and other debts via a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which was filed in
December 2011. His bankruptcy case is pending with the court. His bankruptcy
paperwork indicates a negative cash flow of several hundred dollars per month. It is too
soon to tell if or when his financial situation will stabilize. Applicant failed to present
sufficient evidence to overcome the security concerns stemming from his problematic
financial history. Accordingly, as discussed below, this case is decided against
Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on or about1
October 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
statement of reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.
The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me January 17, 2012. The hearing took place March 14, 2012. The transcript (Tr.)
was received March 29, 2012.  
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged two accounts placed for collection for $11,000 and $6,032,
respectively. In Applicant’s reply to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations,
indicated he had initiated bankruptcy proceedings, and provided additional explanations.
His admissions are accepted and adopted and incorporated herein as findings of fact. In
addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a company that provides security
monitoring and surveillance services. He has been continuously employed by that
company since 1998. He is seeking to retain a security clearance for his current job,
which pays him about $46,000 annually.
Applicant has never married and has no children. His mother is deceased, and
his father has lived with him since receiving a diagnosis of throat cancer. His father’s
illness is now in remission, and his father has been able to pay for his past medical
expenses via health insurance. From time to time, his father provides Applicant money
when he falls short. 
Applicant had a long-term relationship with a girlfriend during 1998–2005. During
that period, they bought the home in which Applicant now resides. They bought the
home with a joint mortgage loan, but she did not participate in repaying the loan. The
loan and house were placed in Applicant’s name after the relationship ended.
 Exhibit 1. 2
 Exhibit 4. 3
 Exhibit 6. 4
 Exhibit A. 5
3
Applicant completed a security clearance application in August 2010, and it is
that application which is under review here.  In completing the application, he reported2
that he had been delinquent on debts (180-days delinquent and currently 90-days
delinquent), and he disclosed the two credit card accounts at issue. He also stated that
he was in the process of working out repayment schedules with each creditor. 
Applicant was interviewed as part of his background investigation a few months
later in October 2010.  During that interview, he stated, in relevant part, that (1) his3
financial problems were due to a reduction in income due to a shift change at work, and
(2) he was not capable of meeting his financial obligations at that time.
In December 2012, a few months after the SOR was issued, Applicant filed a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case.  As part of that process, he obtained credit counseling as4
required by bankruptcy law.  The bankruptcy case includes the two debts at issue here5
and others as well for a total of $31,037 in unsecured debt listed on Schedule F of the
bankruptcy paperwork. In addition, Schedule J of the bankruptcy paperwork indicates
that his current expenditures exceed his current income in the amount of $595 per
month. The bankruptcy case was pending at the time of the hearing in this case. 
Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney, in a letter dated February 2, 2012, provided an
explanation for the bankruptcy case and Applicant’s efforts to resolve his financial
problems, in relevant part, as follows:
[Applicant’s] debt was caused in no small part from an adjusting ARM
loan, which caused his mortgage to spike to the point where living
expenses needed to be supplemented by credit cards. He responsibly
attempted to meet his debt, but like so many other victims was unable to
do so without incurring additional debt. This loan has since adjusted to a
reasonable value and [Applicant] is now stable in his finances, but the
damage to his credit was already done and had to be mitigated through
bankruptcy.
It should be noted that prior to retaining my services, [Applicant] attempted
to resolve his credit card debts through payment plans and negotiations,
but as he was current was instructed to “just let them get behind a few
months” before anyone would talk to him. I can personally attest to this
insane attitude as a bankruptcy attorney as well as my practice of debt
renegotiation. It is a credit to [Applicant’s] personality and moral character
 Exhibit B. 6
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
4
that he made this good-faith effort rather than just look for an easier way
out.6
  
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As7
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An9
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  10
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting11
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 18
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant19
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  20
5
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it17
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant18
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline19
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  20
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
 AG ¶ 19(a).  21
 AG ¶ 19(c). 22
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a23
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
 
6
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The two credit card accounts placed for collection, one of which
was reduced to a judgment, raise security concerns. These matters indicate inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within21 22
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions, and the facts also suggest a degree of financial irresponsibility.   
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;23
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).24
7
None of the mitigating conditions, individually or in combination, are sufficient to
overcome and mitigate the security concerns. The evidence shows Applicant
overextended himself, first with an ARM loan, and then with credit card debt when he
was unable to meet living expenses. The situation deteriorated further when he followed
advice, which was probably unwise, to allow his credit card accounts to become
delinquent to improve his negotiating position with creditors. The result is that both
accounts went into collection, a judgment was taken for one account, and he is now in
Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceedings with more $30,000 in unsecured debt. His current
financial situation is precarious as shown by a negative monthly cash flow of several
hundred dollars per month. At this point, there is no indication of a favorable upward
trend upon which to rely, and it is too soon to tell if or when his financial situation will
stabilize.
The evidence of Applicant’s ongoing financial problems justifies current doubts
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-
consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept.  Based on the evidence before me,24
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
