 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-05268 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concern. His financial problems 
were due to an unexpected layoff and his former employer illegally withholding money 
that was due to Applicant as part of a severance package. Applicant has addressed his 
debts and established that he is resolving his financial situation. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On November 29, 2011, Applicant submitted 
his Answer and requested a hearing. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 22, 2011, Department Counsel advised the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed with a hearing. On January 12, 2012, I was assigned 
the case. I scheduled the hearing for February 29, 2012.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing, 
testified, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I. These exhibits were admitted 
without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to provide him 
additional time to submit matters for my consideration. He timely submitted proof of 
payments and completion of a financial counseling course. These documents were 
marked and admitted as AE J – N. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 12, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his forties, married, with four children. He served in the Army 
National Guard (ANG) from 1989 to 1997 in several different positions, including as a 
forward observer. He had access to classified information throughout his service with 
the ANG, and was honorably discharged. He is currently employed as a computer 
support technician with a federal contractor. He has held this job for three years and has 
helped avert the “spillage” of classified and sensitive information. In total, Applicant has 
held a security clearance for over 10 years without issue.2 The Deputy Director for 
security and protection for the Government program Applicant is assigned to writes: 
 
I have known [Applicant] since he began working at the [Government] 
program and, in the median, have interacted with him frequently. In these 
dealings, I can say without reservation he is among our most upstanding 
employees. This program routinely handles highly classified information 
and media, and [Applicant’s] duties require his contact with these 
materials. By all indications, this security office assesses his fidelity in 
handling controlled data and equipment as outstanding (with zero major or 
minor security incidents noted.) He demonstrates himself as a highly 
responsible, intelligent, and focused worker. . . . [Applicant] is routinely 
trusted with most sensitive responsibilities. On a personal note, I find 
[Applicant] a morally and ethically solid individual. He is honest, forthright, 
and very loyal to this program and the Department of Defense. With good 
conscience, I would recommend him for any clearance and access for 
which he may be nominated.3 
 
 Applicant’s financial trouble began in 2009 when he was laid off by his former 
employer. Applicant’s former employer had promised to pay him about $12,000 as part 
of severance package, but did not follow through and filed for bankruptcy. The former 
employer recently settled a lawsuit for wrongfully failing to pay Applicant and other 
                                                          
2
 Tr. at 26-30, 70-77, 89-97; GE 1. 
 
3
 AE H at 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
employees their severance packages. Applicant received a small portion of the 
severance payment he was owed, approximately $1,200, in November 2011. He did not 
use this money to purchase consumer goods, go on vacation, or in other frivolous ways. 
Instead, he used the money to satisfy some of his debts, which he accumulated after 
being laid off. He anticipates receiving an additional $1,200 settlement payment this 
year. He will use this money and any other money he receives from the settlement to 
satisfy his debts.4 
 
 Applicant was out of work until he was able to secure a job with his current 
employer. His starting salary was approximately $11,000 less than he was making at his 
former job. Applicant cut back on expenses by moving to a smaller house, eliminating 
cable service, and slashing other monthly expenses. Yet, as the sole bread winner, he 
was unable to keep pace with expenses and fell behind on his bills.5 
 
 The SOR lists 18 delinquent debts totaling about $18,000. A large portion of this 
delinquent debt is attributable to Applicant’s student loans. Applicant addressed his 
delinquent student loans prior to the SOR being issued. He consolidated a majority of 
his student loans and they are current.6 (SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.o, and 1.q) The only student 
debt Applicant was unable to consolidate was for coursework he took in pursuit of his 
master’s degree. Applicant’s tuition and other expenses were to be reimbursed through 
his employer’s education assistance program. However, he did not meet the eligibility 
requirements and the program did not pay for his educational expenses. Applicant has 
worked out a payment plan directly with the school to satisfy this debt.7 (SOR ¶ 1.d)  
 
Applicant paid the $1,200 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b through monthly payments 
of $250.8 He also submitted proof that he paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 
1.j.9 The non-student debts that remain outstanding total less than $4,000. Applicant 
has contacted his overdue creditors, worked out payment plans with those he was able 
to reach, and has a plan in place to satisfy his debts. He is going to allot the $250 that 
he was using to pay the debt in ¶ 1.b to satisfy his remaining debts. He does not have 
overdue taxes and has not accumulated any other bad debt. He and his wife own two 
old cars that they paid off in order to avoid monthly car payments that would drain their 
finances. They have completed a financial counseling course, and have a budget in 
place to meet their monthly expenses and pay off their old debt. Applicant disclosed his 
                                                          
4
 Tr. at 58-61, 88-89; GE 1; GE 2. 
 
5
 Tr. at 45-48, 71-74, 88. 
 
6
 Tr. at 30-34, 61-63; AE E; AE G. 
 
7
 Tr. at 49-51, 78, 85-88; AE K; AE G. 
 
8
 Tr. at 38-41, 48; AE J; AE K; AE M; AE N. 
 
9
 Tr. at 34-38, 48-55; AE B - AE C. 
 
 
4 
 
 
delinquent debts on his security clearance application and fully discussed his finances 
during his background investigation.10  
 
Applicant misused his company credit card in 2010, after returning from a 
business trip. He purchased gas and groceries totaling $300 for his family. At the time, 
Applicant thought he could charge his personal expenses to his company credit card, 
because he had used his own money to pay for business-related travel expenses. Also, 
the $300 in personal charges would easily be covered by the amount that he would be 
reimbursed by the company for his travel-related expenses. Applicant did not submit his 
travel voucher in time and the bill for his company credit card became delinquent. He 
was reprimanded by his supervisor. He then submitted the voucher and paid the 
overdue bill in full. Applicant’s employer has since sent him on numerous business trips, 
including to Hawaii and Japan. He has used his company credit card solely for 
business-related travel expenses. In light of Applicant’s responsible use of his company 
credit card, the limit on the amount he can charge to the card was recently raised. 
Applicant’s employer did not submit an adverse information report regarding his misuse 
of the company credit card, because the security officer determined that it did not need 
to be reported. However, Applicant voluntarily disclosed this incident during his 
background investigation. He credibly testified that this one-time lapse in judgment will 
not recur.11 (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
                                                          
10
 Tr. at 41-48, 63-64, 78-80; GE 1; GE 2, 11/30/10 Subject Interview at 6; AE I; AE J - AE L. 
 
11
 Tr. at 66-70, 80-85; GE 2, 11/30/10 Subject Interview at 2-3. 
 
 
5 
 
 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.12 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s delinquent debt and misuse of his company credit card implicates the 
above concern. It also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.13 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
                                                          
12
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
13
 I considered AG ¶ 19(d). However, Applicant’s misuse of his company credit card was not an 
intentional or deliberate breach of trust. Nonetheless, his misuse does implicate the general Guideline F 
concern because it raises questions as to his judgment and ability to abide by rules and regulations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”14 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt is directly tied to being laid off and his former 
employer withholding payment of a substantial severance payment. Further, Applicant’s 
starting salary with his current employer was $11,000 less than he was making at his 
former job. However, in order to meet his burden, Applicant must demonstrate that, 
despite the issues outside of his control, he handled his financial obligations in a 
responsible manner.15 Applicant met this heavy burden. He consolidated and brought 
his student loans current, paid a number of his past-due debts, and is in the process of 
satisfying his remaining overdue creditors. He has received financial counseling and, 
more importantly, demonstrated that he is resolving his financial situation. Applicant’s 
past debts no longer cast a doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20 (a) through (d) apply to Applicant’s debts. 
 
 Applicant’s misuse of his company credit card was not caused by a matter 
outside of his control. However, it was a one-time lapse in judgment that did not rise to 
the level of deliberate, criminal conduct. Instead, Applicant mistakenly thought he could 
use his company credit card to charge necessities for the home, because he had used 
the money he normally sets aside for household purchases on business-related travel 
expenses. Applicant has since proven his trustworthiness by properly using his 
company credit card on numerous business travels. He voluntarily disclosed this 
information during his background investigation, even though his own security officer did 
                                                          
14
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
15
 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
7 
 
 
not believe it needed to be reported. Applicant’s honesty speaks volumes as to his 
character and evidences the sort of integrity one would expect of an individual entrusted 
with this nation’s secrets. AG ¶¶ 20(a) applies to Applicant’s misuse of his company 
credit card. Applicant mitigated the financial considerations concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).16 I incorporate my Guideline F analysis herein and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant has handled highly classified 
information without issue, and has prevented the disclosure of classified and sensitive 
information. His employer and the Government employees he works with have full faith 
and confidence in his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. These whole-
person factors, in conjunction with the mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate the 
financial considerations concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.s:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
