 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04364 
                                                                      )                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, but 
she failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Her 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                             Statement of the Case 
 
On November 22, 2010, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 7, 2011, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant provided an answer to the SOR, dated December 13, 2011. She also 
requested that her case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 6, 2012. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9. On January 9, 2012, 
DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any 
additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
file on January 16, 2012. Her response was due on February 15, 2012. Applicant did 
not file any additional information within the required time period. On March 30, 2012, 
the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.), and one allegation of disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a.). In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all Guideline F and Guideline E allegations. Applicant’s admissions 
are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government. 
The record evidence includes Applicant’s 2010 e-QIP; official investigation and agency 
records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 and Applicant’s credit reports 
of November 17, 2011, and December 17, 2010. (See Items 4 through 9.) 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old, divorced, and the mother of an adult son. In 1974, she 
earned a bachelor’s degree. She is currently employed as a senior quality engineer. 
She has worked for her present employer, a federal contractor, since 2006. In her 
personal subject interview, she acknowledged that she had been awarded a security 
clearance by an independent government commission in 1995. (Item 4; Item 5 at 7.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in October 2005, 
and her bankruptcy was discharged in March 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a.). Additionally, the SOR 
alleges that Applicant owes $12,560 on an unsatisfied federal tax lien and $1,051 on an 
unsatisfied state tax lien (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.).  Applicant’s credit report of November 
17, 2011, establishes that the original amount of the federal tax lien was $16,830 and 
the original amount of the state tax lien was $7,827. (Item 1; Item 6 at 1.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she had a payment plan in place 
to pay her delinquent federal tax lien. She stated that the delinquency arose in tax years 
2003 and 2004. She provided a statement from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
                                            
1
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on January 6, 2011. On November 9, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed 
a notarized statement affirming that she had read the summary of the interview and found it to be 
accurate, true, and correct. She added additional information about the current amounts of her tax liens. 
(Item 5.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
acknowledging a payment of $240 in September 2011, and listing her remaining 
balance under her payment plan as $12,560. (Item 2; Item 5 at 27.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted she also had a payment plan in 
place for the state tax lien. She stated in her personal subject interview that the tax debt 
arose when her tax preparer failed to file her 2006 state income tax. Applicant provided 
documentation from the state taxing authority, dated November 22, 2011, establishing 
that the state tax lien arose from a 2003 tax debt. Additionally, Applicant provided 
documentation from the state taxing authority approving her request for a monthly 
electronic funds transfer from her account, beginning August 28, 2011.2 The state taxing 
authority’s balance summary for the account shows that Applicant made a total of 
$1,850.31 in payments and owed a balance of $1,051. (Item 5 at 23.) 
  
 Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP on November 22, 2010. Section 26a 
on the e-QIP asks: “[In the last 7 years], [h]ave you filed a petition under any chapter of 
the bankruptcy code? If ‘Yes,’ indicate Chapter 7, 11, or 13.” Applicant responded “No” 
to Section 26a. She did not reveal that she had filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
in October 2005. Applicant’s failure to reveal this information is alleged as a deliberate 
falsification in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Section 26d on the e-QIP asks: “[In the last 7 years], [h]ave you had a lien placed 
against your property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?” Applicant responded “No” 
to Section 26d. She did not reveal the state and federal tax liens alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. 
and 1.c. Applicant’s failure to reveal this information is alleged as a deliberate 
falsification in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Section 26p on the e-QIP asks: “Are you currently delinquent on any Federal 
debt?” Applicant responded “No” to Section 26p. She did not reveal the unsatisfied 
Federal tax lien alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s failure to reveal this information is 
alleged as a deliberate falsification in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 1; Item 4.)  
    
 On November 22, 2010, after completing her e-QIP, Applicant signed the 
following certification:  
 
My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, 
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in good 
faith. I have carefully read the foregoing instructions to complete this form. 
I understand that a knowing and willful false statement on this form can be 
punished by fine or imprisonment or both (18 U.S.C. 1001). I understand 
that intentionally withholding, misrepresenting, or falsifying information 
may have a negative effect on my security clearance, employment 
prospects, or job status, up to and including denial or revocation of my 
security clearance, or my removal and debarment from Federal service. 
                                            
2 The record also contains a request from Applicant, dated September 29, 2010, requesting the $150 
monthly electronic funds transfer from her bank.  
 
4 
 
 
 In January 2011, when she was interviewed by an authorized investigator, 
Applicant claimed her incorrect answers to financial questions on her e-QIP were the 
result of oversight. She did not acknowledge her financial delinquencies until after she 
was questioned about them by the investigator. (Item 5)  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
I admit that I was not openly honest about my financial indebtedness with 
the Federal Govt, Bankruptcy and . . . state taxes. I admit that during this 
time I admit my patience was very limited to the detail questionnaire. I 
admit that I was experiencing some very difficult times, I admit meaning 
family crisis. I admit my only sister was diagnosed with brain cancer and 
was given a very short life expectancy. I admit this took a tremendous toll 
on my entire person. I admit that by not answering all of the questions 
honestly is a big mistake and for that I admit that I am truly sorry. 
 
I admit that I falsified financial obligations; I admit that I did not disclose 
them truefully [sic]. I admit this was a mistake I admit that I am sincerely 
sorry. I admit that I am indeed an honest, trustworthy, reliable, 
dependable, respectable, hardworking, generous person. I admit that I 
have [self-control] and a great [sense] of judgment. I admit that I am 
human and have made some unfortunate financial decisions in my life 
time. I admit that because of these financial downfalls I admit this should 
not be my punishment or judgment of who I am today. I admit that I have 
high standards and morals. (Item 3 at 1.)  
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement in response to DOHA 
interrogatories. She reported a net monthly salary of $2,811 from her job as a 
government contractor and an additional $600 each month from a second job. She 
reported monthly living expenses of $1,325. She reported $2,364 in monthly debt 
payments.3 She listed a monthly net remainder of $1,046. Applicant reported paying a 
financial consulting and debt consolidation company a professional fee of $2,253 for its 
services. She further stated that the firm “did not do one thing to help her.”  (Item 5 at 
10, 14-15.) 
 
                    Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
                                            
3 The monthly debts identified by Applicant for payment included the delinquent federal and state tax 
liens alleged on the SOR.  (Item 5.) 
 
5 
 
 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
Applicant admitted that her debts were discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
March 2006. Bankruptcy is a legitimate and legal financial tool to use in dealing with 
financial difficulties. It is not per se a disqualifying condition under Guideline F. 
However, Applicant’s tax liens were of security concern. She admitted a federal tax lien 
of $12,560 and a state tax lien of $1,051. This evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
 
7 
 
 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. However, in response to 
DOHA interrogatories, she provided credible documentation showing she had made 
good-faith efforts to pay or otherwise resolve the two tax liens alleged on the SOR. Her 
documentation showed she negotiated payment plans with the IRS and the state taxing 
authority. Her documentation established that she had paid $1,850 to the state taxing 
authority and was continuing to pay $150 each month to resolve her state tax lien. 
Additionally, she provided documentation corroborating her claim that she was also 
paying the IRS $240 each month to resolve her federal tax lien, which had been 
reduced from $16,830 to $12,560. A review of her personal financial statement reveals 
current stability and a monthly remainder of over $1,000. I conclude that while AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b) are not applicable, AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do apply in mitigation under 
the facts of this case.4   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and certified her e-QIP in November 2010, she failed 
to provide truthful answers to queries about her 2006 discharge in Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
and her two tax liens, one of which was a delinquent federal debt. The SOR alleged that 
Applicant’s “No” responses to Sections 26(a), 26(d), and 26(p) were deliberate 
falsifications. Applicant admitted the falsifications but denied that they were willful and 
deliberate. She stated that personal stress over family difficulties caused her lack of 
honesty in answering Sections 26(a), 26(d), and 26(p). 
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing 
falsification cases: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind 
when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
                                            
4 AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) are not raised by the facts of this case. 
 
8 
 
 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under 
Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to 
present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
(App. Bd. June 9, 2004)).  
 
  Applicant’s false answers raise a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which 
reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
Applicant is educated and holds a bachelor’s degree. She was entrusted with 
protected information in the past as a contractor. As a person previously entrusted with 
access to protected information, she had reason to know that she was required to 
answer all questions on the e-QIP truthfully. She knew that her financial problems were 
serious and long-standing. She also knew when she applied for a security clearance as 
a government contractor that her background would be investigated thoroughly. 
 
Applicant wanted to receive a security clearance. She had good reason to know 
that her current financial delinquencies might prevent her from receiving a security 
clearance. Instead of revealing these matters on her e-QIP, Applicant chose to conceal 
these matters from the Government.  
 
  Several Guideline mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the individual cooperated fully and 
completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 17(d) might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if 
 
9 
 
 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”   
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant argued that the stress she felt as a result of 
family problems and the illness of her sister impacted her ability to read the e-QIP 
questions thoroughly and to answer them truthfully. She denied intentionally falsifying 
her answers to the e-QIP questions. These assertions lack credibility when viewed 
against Applicant’s age, education, and work experience. She knew, or should have 
known, the importance of telling the truth to the Government. Moreover, Applicant’s 
statements that stress caused her to falsify her answers on her e-QIP raise concerns 
about her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. The interests of the Government in 
protecting classified information are not well-served when individuals entrusted with 
security clearances cannot be relied upon to be honest in times of stress. 
 
Applicant falsified material facts on the e-QIP that she executed and certified as 
true in 2010. Nothing in the record suggests that she took prompt good faith action to 
correct the omissions, concealments, or falsifications before she was confronted with 
the facts. Nothing in the record suggests that her failure to report her several financial 
delinquencies was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice specifically about the security clearance process from authorized individuals or 
legal counsel. (AG ¶ 17(b).) When she executed her security clearance application, 
Applicant knew or should have known that she had a record of financial delinquency. As 
a mature adult, she knew that her financial problems were not minor, so remote in time, 
so infrequent, or had occurred under such unique circumstances that they would not 
seriously impact her eligibility for a security clearance. (AG ¶ 17(c).) Applicant failed to 
provide documentation that she obtained counseling or had taken other positive steps 
that might alleviate the circumstances that caused her unreliable conduct and, as a 
result, such behavior was unlikely to recur. (AG ¶ 17(d).) Nothing in the record suggests 
that Applicant took positive steps to reduce or eliminate the vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress that her behavior caused. (AG ¶ 17(e).) I conclude, therefore, 
that none of the applicable personal conduct mitigating conditions applies to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. I also conclude that Applicant’s falsifications on her 2010 e-QIP were 
deliberate. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
10 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant deliberately falsified her 
answers on the e-QIP she completed and certified in 2010. She failed to reveal that her 
debts were discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2006, that she had liens placed 
against her property for failing to pay taxes or other debts, and that she was delinquent 
on her federal tax debt. Applicant’s lack of candor in reporting these matters on her 
2010 e-QIP raises concerns about her judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude that while 
Applicant mitigated security concerns about her financial delinquency, she failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her personal conduct.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:                     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a.:                                  Against Applicant 
 
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
