 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-06965 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 19, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his case 
be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on February 2, 2012. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
February 2, 2012. Applicant received the FORM on February 7, 2012. He had 30 days 
to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit additional information. On March 
29, 2012, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to me on 
April 3, 2012.   
 
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR allegations 1.a – 1.j, 1.l, and 
denies SOR allegations 1.k and 1.m. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old male employed by a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  He has been employed with the company since 
June 2006. He divorced in 2008 and has an 19-year-old son who currently resides with 
him. Applicant indicated on his security clearance questionnaire in response to question 
25(b) that he applied for and was denied a security clearance in 2007 because of “bad 
credit/debts.” (Item 4; Item 6 at 5, 7)   
 
After Applicant completed his most recent security clearance questionnaire on 
January 13, 2011, a background investigation was initiated. (Item 4) His background 
investigation revealed 13 delinquent accounts, a total approximate balance of $47,633. 
The delinquent accounts include a $7,344 unpaid judgment filed against Applicant in 
March 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 7 at 1,13; Item 8 at 3; Item 9 at 3-4); two vehicle 
repossessions with an outstanding balance of $5,592 and $9,735 (SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h: 
Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 3; Item 9 at 6); four accounts that were charged off, a total 
approximate balance of $19,849 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.j: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 2-3; 
Item 9 at 4-5, 12-13); and six delinquent accounts placed for collection, a total 
approximate balance of $5,473 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m: Item 7 at 1-2; 
Item 8 at 1-2; Item 9 at 6-7, 11). 
 
On August 10, 2011, Applicant prepared a budget with the assistance of his local 
credit union. Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,400. Monthly expenses include: $747 
rent; $85 electric; $75 cell phone; $130 cable; $50 water and gas; $196 groceries; and 
$365 transportation expenses; and $84 life insurance. He pays $47 each month towards 
a credit card account. The creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a is garnishing his wages approximately 
$640 each month. He appears to have sufficient income to cover his monthly expenses, 
but is unable to pay his delinquent accounts. (Item 5 at 7-11) 
 
On February 11, 2011, Applicant was interviewed as part of his background 
investigation. He admitted most of the debts. He did not recognize the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m. He indicated the debts became delinquent because of 
poor financial planning. From April 2006 to April 2008, he lived with a friend, her six 
children, and grandchildren. He took out loans in his name for his friend’s benefit on the 
condition that she make the loan payments. She defaulted on all of the loans that 
Applicant took out on her behalf, which include debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 
1.j. Several of the debts alleged in the current SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f) became 
delinquent in 2006 and may have been considered in his previous security clearance 
investigation. Applicant currently lives alone with his son. He states that he is not 
creating additional debt and his expenses are simple. (Item 6)  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c), (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that he has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past five years. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. The 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is being resolved through garnishment. All remaining 
delinquent accounts are unresolved. Applicant was previously denied a security 
clearance in 2007 for unresolved debts. Some of his unresolved delinquent accounts 
date back to that time. Applicant did not take steps to improve his financial situation 
even after he was denied a security clearance five years ago. Applicant’s extensive 
unresolved debt indicates irresponsible behavior and continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because of Applicant’s 
separation and divorce from his wife in 2008. However, Applicant has been consistently 
employed since June 2006. Most of his delinquent accounts resulted from purchasing 
items he could not afford or trusting friends to repay loans which he signed in his name 
for their benefit. Applicant has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 
5 
 
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant recently prepared a budget with the assistance of his local 
credit union. However, his budget reveals that he is not capable of paying his delinquent 
accounts. Applicant’s financial situation is unlikely to be resolved in the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. The only delinquent account that is being 
repaid is being repaid through involuntary garnishment, not through a voluntary act on 
Applicant’s behalf. He has not initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his debts.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment history with a defense contractor. I considered his divorce in 2008 may 
have had an impact on his financial situation. I also considered that Applicant was 
denied a security clearance in 2007. He does not appear to have learned from that 
experience. Several of the accounts alleged in the most recent SOR have been 
delinquent since 2006. Applicant incurred additional delinquent debt after he was denied 
a security clearance. He incurred more debt than he could afford.  
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations which 
raises questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. In other words, if an individual has trouble managing their 
 
6 
 
 
finances, this can raise doubts about an individual’s ability to handle and protect 
classified information. Applicant’s history of financial problems raises doubts about his 
ability to handle and protect classified information. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases 
where there is doubt in favor of national security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
