 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-02494
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about her finances. Her request for a
security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On January 19, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
interrogatories  to Applicant seeking to clarify or augment information contained therein.1
Based on her responses to the interrogatories and the results of the background
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
2
investigation, DOHA adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information.  2
On December 22, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative
guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant answered the SOR3
(Answer) on January 11, 2012, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2012, and I scheduled it to be
heard on March 13, 2012. At the hearing, the Government presented six exhibits, which
were admitted without objection, as Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 6. Applicant
testified and proffered five exhibits, which were admitted, without objection, as
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - E. I also left the record open after the hearing to receive
additional relevant information. The record closed on March 19, 2012, when Department
Counsel waived objection to Applicant’s timely post-hearing submission, which is
admitted as Ax. F. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on March 21, 2012. 
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in
October 2002 and was discharged of her debts in January 2003 (SOR 1.a); that she
had ten delinquent debts totaling $24,917 (SOR 1.b - 1.j); and that in May 2007, she
was charged with forging, uttering and obtaining money by false pretenses (SOR 1.k).
Applicant admitted, with explanations, all but one (SOR 1.i) of the allegations. Her
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed all of the
information and testimony provided, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 48 years old. She was married from April 1994 until obtaining a
divorce in February 2004. She has one child, now age 26. In addition to her full-time
employment, Applicant is studying for a bachelor’s degree in business administration.
She currently has a 3.875 grade point average. (Gx. 1; Ax. A)
From September 1988 until December 2010, Applicant worked as a state
employee, the last seven years as a real property manager for the state’s department of
military affairs. During her state career, Applicant accumulated approximately $47,000
in retirement savings through a state-sponsored 401(k) plan. She is eligible to retire
from her state job, but can only access, without penalty, the money in her state 401(k) if
she has, in fact, retired. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. B; Tr. 62 - 63) 
On December 19, 2011, Applicant was offered a real property manager’s position
with a private defense contractor not connected to her state position. That company is
sponsoring her request for a security clearance, as required by the contract for which
she was hired. Applicant submitted her retirement papers to her state employer and
3
reported to work with the defense contractor on January 18, 2011. She submitted her
eQIP on January 18, 2011. Soon, thereafter, because of adverse information about her
finances, she was advised she would not be given an interim clearance. Because her
defense contractor offer of employment was conditioned on her ability to obtain a
security clearance, Applicant could not continue working there. However, she was able
to withdraw her state retirement papers, and returned to work at her previous state job
in February 2011 pending the outcome of this case. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. B; Tr. 62
- 65)
Applicant and her ex-husband experienced financial problems in about 2002.
They decided to seek discharge of their debts through bankruptcy. In January 2003,
they received a Chapter 7 discharge. (Gx. 3; Gx. 4) After her divorce in 2004, she
struggled to make ends meet; however, her financial problems became considerably
worse after 2006, when she and her ex-husband attempted to reconcile. Her ex-
husband had been abusive during much of their marriage, and that did not change
during their reunion. They stayed together for nine months before parting ways for good.
(Tr. 56 - 57)
Credit checks conducted during Applicant’s background investigation attributed to
her the nine delinquent debts at SOR 1.b - 1.j, totaling nearly $25,000. The largest
debts, alleged at SOR 1.b and 1.c, are for delinquent or past-due car loan payments.
The debt at SOR 1.c is for a car Applicant bought when she and her ex-husband tried to
reconcile. He agreed to pay the car note if she paid the rent, but he did not hold up his
end of the bargain and the car was repossessed. Applicant owes $12,377 for the
remainder due after resale. Applicant has paid about $1,000 on this debt and the
creditor has offered to settle the debt for $9,802. (Ax. E; Tr. 76) 
As to the car loan debt alleged at SOR 1.b, Applicant still has the car. When she
bought the car in 2005, she thought she could use money from her 401(k) as a down
payment. However, she later learned, after securing a loan for the balance of the sales
price and taking possession of the car, that she could not access her 401(k) for that
purpose. The dealer obtained a judgment against Applicant for $8,820, which
represents the down payment plus interest. Applicant has been repaying this debt since
June 2008 and now owes only $695. (Ax. B; Tr. 58)
In March and June 2010, Applicant was interviewed by government investigators
as part of her background investigation. She discussed the status of the debts attributed
to her by credit reports the investigators had obtained. At the time of her interviews,
Applicant was already paying some of her past-due debts or negotiating with her
creditors for resolution of her debts. As of her hearing, Applicant had paid or otherwise
resolved the debts at SOR 1.d - 1.i. (Ax. B; Ax. F; Tr. 35 - 45) If she finds employment,
either with the defense contractor or another employer, that will allow her to retire,
Applicant will be able to access her 401(k) funds, without penalty, and use them to pay
off the remaining debts listed at SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.j. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2)
In 2005, Applicant was renting an apartment from a friend. In October 2005, the
apartment and Applicant’s belongings in it suffered smoke damage from a ventilation
system mishap. Applicant had renter’s insurance and contacted the company to make a
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
4
claim. An adjuster for the insurer documented about $3,000 in damages that would be
paid to Applicant. However, Applicant was also told that, after Applicant’s claim was
paid, the insurer would move to recover the costs from Applicant’s landlord friend.
Applicant decided she did not want her friend to bear the cost of the accident and told
the insurer she no longer wanted to pursue the claim. Applicant cleaned the apartment
and replaced her damaged belongings at her own cost, never receiving any money from
the insurer. 
In 2007, Applicant was charged with attempting to obtain money by false
pretenses by filing a false insurance claim, a felony. Applicant did not qualify as indigent
for purposes of having court-appointed counsel, and she could not afford the legal fees
needed to contest the charges at trial. She decided to plead guilty to a lesser included
misdemeanor version of the same charge. Applicant was fined and ordered to be of
good behavior for two years. Applicant recently petitioned the court to have this offense
expunged. Applicant has not been involved in any other criminal conduct. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Gx. 5; Gx. 6; Ax. D; Tr. 48 - 51)
Applicant’s current finances are sound. In addition to paying her past-due debts,
she meets all of her current expenses, such as rent, car loan, insurance, and utilities.
She estimates that she has about $500 remaining each month after expenses. That
figure would increase once she starts receiving her state retired pay along with her
income from the defense contractor position, which will pay about $88,000 annually.
(Gx. 2; Ax. B; Tr. 60 - 61)
Applicant has an excellent reputation in the workplace and in her community.
She provided several written references that noted her honesty, her hard work, and her
professionalism. (Ax. A)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies5
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept,
those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
5
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The Government presented information that showed Applicant owes almost
$25,000 in past-due debts. As of the close of the background investigation, it appeared
most of those debts had not been paid or otherwise resolved. The Government’s
information also showed that Applicant accumulated her debts after being discharged of
other debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Finally, Applicant pleaded guilty to a
misdemeanor charge of attempting to obtain money by false pretenses. All of this
information raises a security concern about Applicant’s finances addressed, in relevant
part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
6
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
19 disqualifying conditions:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust.
In response to the Government’s information, Applicant established that the
circumstances that caused her and her ex-husband to file a Chapter 7 petition, and that
caused her to accumulate numerous past-due debts, were largely related to the demise
of her marriage, and to an ill-advised attempt at reconciliation. She also established that
she has been paying off her past-due debts since before she applied for her security
clearance. Her current finances are sound. She has paid or resolved all but three of the
debts alleged in the SOR, and she has the means to resolve those debts in the near
future. Finally, Applicant established that her finance-related criminal conviction was an
aberration, and that it is unlikely she tried to defraud her insurance company. Based on
all of the foregoing, I conclude that, of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20, the
following apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant’s financial difficulties do not reflect poorly on her overall judgment and
reliability. She has mitigated the security concerns under this guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
I have assessed these facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative
factors, pro and con, under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record in the context
of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I conclude that Applicant is a mature,
7
responsible person, who exhibited sound judgment and reliability in her response to her
financial problems, which were largely beyond her control. She is a career state
employee with a reputation for reliability and professionalism. Applicant’s character is
also reflected in her superior academic record. A fair and commonsense assessment of
all available information shows that her financial problems do not pose an unacceptable
security risk. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.k: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to be eligible for access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
