 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00260 
                                                            )                                                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the administrative record, I conclude that Applicant 
failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On September 9, 2010, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 17, 2011, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated November 28, 2011, 
and requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 30, 2011. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9. By letter dated January 5, 
2012, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
file on January 19, 2012. His response was due on February 18, 2012. Applicant did not 
submit additional information within the required time period. On April 17, 2012, the 
case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the allegations at ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. SOR ¶1.a. alleges that Applicant 
owes a judgment debt of $21,483. SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges that Applicant owes a judgment 
debt of $6,208. SOR ¶ 1.c. alleges that Applicant was approximately 120 days past due 
in making a payment on his $73,661 mortgage. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied the allegation and stated that he was 15 days late on his mortgage payment. 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant in his Answer to the SOR. The record 
evidence includes Applicant’s September 2010 e-QIP; official investigation and agency 
records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 and Applicant’s credit reports 
of January 28, 2011 and September 18, 2010. (See Items 5 through 9; Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR.) 
 
 Applicant, who has a high school diploma, is 50 years old, married, and the 
father of four teenaged children. He is employed part-time by a federal contractor as a 
security officer. He has worked for his present employer since August 2010. He seeks a 
security clearance for the first time. (Item 5.) 
 
 From September 1989 until April 2010, Applicant was self-employed and 
operated a courier company. The business earned $90,000 a month before deducting 
for expenses. To manage his cash flow, Applicant opened two accounts in his name 
only with a credit card company. He used the credit cards to acquire cash advances of 
between $15,000 and $21,000 to pay the courier business employees. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
                                            
1
On March 28, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed a notarized statement 
affirming that he had read the summary of his interview with the OPM investigator. He made two factual 
corrections to the investigator’s summary. He provided the correct name for his business, and he stated 
that he was last in contact with his former business partner in April 2010. Subject to the changes he 
made, he then adopted the investigator’s summary as accurately reflecting his interview. (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2006, when some of Applicant’s former employees started a competing courier 
business, he and his business partner lost about 50 percent of their clients. In 2007, 
Applicant helped his business partner by agreeing to continue to take out the cash 
advances, and the partner agreed to reimburse Applicant. The business continued to 
decline, however, and the courier service closed in April 2010. (Item 6.) 
 
 After the business closed in April 2010, Applicant was unemployed for four 
months until he found his current employment. His business partner did not reimburse 
him for the cash advances he took from his personal credit card accounts. Applicant 
lacked sufficient funds to make the required monthly payments to the credit card 
company. He contacted the credit card company to request an alternative method of 
payment, but the credit card company refused his request. (Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that both debts were unresolved. When he learned 
from the investigator in October 2010 that the debts had been reduced to judgments 
against him, he stated that he would attempt to arrange an alternative payment plan 
with the creditor within 30 days. (Item 6.) 
 
 In March 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that the 
two judgment debts remained unresolved. He further reported that his last payments on 
the debts were made in June 2007. He said that because he is employed part-time, he 
lacks the money to pay the debts. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant also stated in his March 2011 response to DOHA interrogatories that 
his current balance on his mortgage was $15,000. He further stated that his last 
payment on his mortgage debt was made in December 2010. He provided no 
information on the current status of his mortgage debt. (Item 7.)  
 
  The record does not contain a personal financial statement from Applicant. 
Therefore, there is no information on his monthly income, living expenses, and 
commitment to debt payment. The record is also silent regarding Applicant’s wife’s 
sources of income, Applicant’s savings, and his other sources of income or 
employment. Nothing in the record indicates that Applicant has had financial credit 
counseling. 
Burden of Proof 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
Applicant obtained two credit cards, and he used them to obtain cash advances 
to pay his employees. In 2006, Applicant’s business began to decline when former 
employees opened a competing business. The business closed in 2010, and Applicant 
was unemployed for four months. His credit card debts became delinquent, and, 
eventually, the creditor sought judgments against Applicant for payment. Since August 
2010, he has been employed part-time by his current employer. He stated in response 
to DOHA interrogatories that he lacked sufficient funds to pay the judgments resulting 
from his credit card debts. The judgment debts total approximately $27,691. 
Additionally, Applicant is delinquent on his home mortgage payments. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
 
6 
 
 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20(e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency. He has not resolved two 
judgment debts that arose from credit card delinquencies in 2007, although he told an 
authorized investigator in 2010 that he would attempt to arrange a payment plan with 
the judgment creditor within 30 days of his interview. Because he has been employed 
part-time since August 2010, he lacks sufficient funds to pay his judgment creditor. 
While he denied he was delinquent on his home mortgage payments, he indicated he 
last made a payment on his mortgage in December 2010. He failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate that he was current on his mortgage payments.  
 
The record in this case is sparse. Absent from the record is information about 
Applicant’s family income, living expenses, and resources available for debt payment. 
From the information in the record, it appears that Applicant’s financial situation is 
precarious, and it is likely that that his financial delinquencies will recur, thereby casting 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
While the failure of Applicant’s business was in part a condition beyond his 
control, he failed to take action to resolve the two judgment debts resulting from the 
business failure as he said he would. He failed to act responsibly to resolve financial 
delinquencies that arose as a result of his unpaid business debts. I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant failed to provide documentation to show he was not delinquent on his 
home mortgage. Nothing in the record suggests that Applicant has pursued financial 
credit counseling, and he has not initiated good-faith efforts to resolve his delinquent 
debts. He provided no documentation to show that he had disputed his delinquent 
debts. I conclude, therefore, that AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) also do not apply to the 
facts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is experienced in business 
and a mature adult. He has not sought financial credit counseling to help him through a 
difficult financial situation. He has been underemployed and working part-time since 
August 2010. Even though his business partner failed to reimburse Applicant for using 
his personal credit cards to obtain cash advances to support the business, Applicant 
remains responsible for the debts that arose when the accounts became delinquent. 
Additionally, he failed to meet his burden of persuasion to demonstrate that he was not 
also delinquent on his home mortgage payments. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:                   Against Applicant  
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                                         
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
