1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-09025
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to disclose his citation for marijuana possession until over two
years after it occurred and his probation had expired. Under these circumstances, I
conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns. Clearance is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September
1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR on January 10, 2012, admitting the allegation and
requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2012. On February
22, 2012, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for March 13, 2012. The
hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received six Government exhibits (GE 1-6), and
the testimony of Applicant, and a character witness. The transcript was received on
March 20, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old married man with one child, age two. Applicant finished
high school in 1994, and has earned a few years of college credit. (Tr. 24) Currently, he
works in the field of information technology sales and consulting. Among other things,
he sells information support services to corporate clients including defense contractors
and subcontractors. (Tr. 25) Applicant has worked for his current employer since 2003.
(Tr. 33) Applicant also assists his wife, part-time, with her consulting business. He has
held a clearance since 2008.  
In August 2008, Applicant while at an outdoor concert with his future wife, was
issued a citation for possession of marijuana. He contends that he left the seating area 
to see if he could “‘bum’ a cigarette from someone.” (GE 2 at 3) He then ran into a
group of friends.  Applicant then asked  for a cigarette, and one of the people handed
him a pack of cigarettes. When Applicant opened the pack, he noticed that, in addition
to cigarettes, it contained “a couple of marijuana cigarettes.” Applicant further contends
that at that exact moment, a police officer observed the marijuana cigarettes nestled in
the pack with the nicotine cigarettes, and issued him a citation for possession of
marijuana.
Applicant appeared in court ten days later. He pleaded no contest to the charge.
(Tr. 39) The court placed him on probation for one year, ordered him to complete 15
hours of drug counseling, and undergo random drug screenings. Applicant successfully
completed the drug counseling program and was released early from probation in June
2009. (Tr. 41; GE 2 at 5)
Applicant has neither been cited nor arrested since the 2008 episode. He
smoked marijuana casually for approximately nine years between 1996 and 2005.
Applicant did not report the marijuana possession citation to his employer until
two years after he received it. He did not report it because he was “scared and
embarrassed.” (Tr. 27) Also, he was worried about his reputation at work. (Tr. 29) He
ultimately reported two years later after a “light went off,” and he decided to come to
terms with his “mistake.” (Tr. 30)
Applicant is highly respected at work. His employer has “always and continue[s]
to consider him reliable and trustworthy. His employer’s decision was not altered by the
revelation that he was late in reporting the 2008 citation. (GE 6)  
3
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Although Applicant did not report his marijuana citation to his
employer, his omission did not occur as part of the investigatory process. Moreover, he
ultimately reported it, albeit two years late, without being confronted about it. Neither
AG ¶16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” nor AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative,” apply. 
Applicant’s testimony was contrite, and his employer continues to think highly of
him, despite his delayed reporting of the marijuana citation. Moreover, nearly four years
have passed since the police issued the citation, and two years have passed since
Applicant reported the incident.
 Personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to1
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the
person’s personal professional, or community standing . . .
4
However, I continue to have reservations about Applicant’s security clearance-
worthiness. His testimony that he coincidentally ran into some friends at a concert, and
one friend gave him a pack of cigarettes that coincidentally contained a marijuana
cigarette that a police officer observed at the exact moment Applicant took the pack is
simply not credible, particularly in light of his history of marijuana use.
An applicant’s candor and honesty are the preeminent factors to be considered in
a security clearance evaluation. (see DoD Directive 5220.6, Enc. 1, § 6.2)
Consequently, the negative security inference generated by Applicant’s lack of honesty
in describing the circumstances surrounding his citation for marijuana possession
outweighs any mitigation generated by his voluntary decision to report the possession of
marijuana citation before being confronted about it. AG 16(e)  applies without mitigation.1
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I conducted an evaluation of the whole-person factors in my analysis of the personal
conduct guideline, and it does not warrant a favorable conclusion.      
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
