 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06380 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or the personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2011 (the SOR was undated, but an accompanying transmittal 
document reflected this date), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 30, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 9, 2012, and the hearing was convened 
 
2 
 
as scheduled on March 8, 2012. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted exhibits 
(AE) A and B at the hearing, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was held open until March 23, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
He did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on March 16, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted some of the SOR factual allegations and denied others. 
These admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and admitted exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works as a 
security officer. He has worked for his employer for about 13 months. He is married, and 
he and his wife are expecting their first child from this marriage. He has a stepchild from 
this marriage. He has three children from a previous marriage. He pays about $400 per 
month in child support for these children. He has a high school diploma and two years 
of college. He received a non-characterized medical discharge from the Army in 1992.1  
 
 The SOR alleged a previous Chapter 7 bankruptcy, a home foreclosure, a 
vehicle repossession, and 25 delinquent debts totaling approximately $35,837. The 
debts were listed on credit reports obtained on March 17, 2011, and July 6, 2011.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted, in part, from extensive medical problems 
his children had. His oldest daughter who is 11 years old now, was born with a heart 
condition that requires open heart surgery every five years. His son contracted spinal 
meningitis and was hospitalized for one month after his birth. Applicant estimates that 
the total medical expenses are over $1 million. His delinquent debts from these medical 
bills are for various copays that are his responsibility. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection in 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a), shortly after his daughter was born. He missed work 
frequently to be with his daughter during her surgeries and hospitalizations, and this 
caused a loss of income. Consequently, he was unable to keep up with his bills, 
including his mortgage and car payments. His home was foreclosed in 2005 (SOR ¶ 
1.x) and he voluntarily returned his vehicle back to the dealer (SOR ¶ 1.w) when he 
could not make his monthly payments in 2006. In 2010, he moved out of the state 
where his children were located to his present location seeking better employment 
opportunities.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 22; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 GE 4-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 21, 23; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a delinquent tuition account for his daughter’s 
school. This is also the same debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.v. Although Applicant claims 
some amount has been paid, an unpaid balance still remains.4  
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent second mortgage on the home that 
was foreclosed in the amount of $23,824. No payments have been made on this debt.5 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.p, 1.y, and 1.aa are delinquent 
medical debts. All are unresolved. The debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.y are duplicate 
debts.6   
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q is a collection for a consumer account in the 
amount of $452. He claims this is his ex-wife’s debt, but provided no documentation 
supporting this assertion. This debt remains unresolved.7 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r is a collection for a consumer account in the 
amount of $78. He claims this is his ex-wife’s debt, but provided no documentation 
supporting this assertion. This debt remains unresolved.8 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s is a charged-off utility account related to his 
foreclosed home in the amount of $369. This account is unpaid and unresolved.9   
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.u are delinquent telephone service debts 
in the amounts of $666 and $216. He disputed these amounts because of early 
termination of his contract, but provided no documentation to support his dispute.10 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.bb is a collection for a book club account in the 
amount of $37. He disputed this account claiming that it belongs to his ex-wife, but he 
did not provided documentation to support his dispute.11 
 Applicant claimed that when he filled out his security clearance questionnaire, he 
was unsure of what his actual finances were like at the time. Additionally, he was not 
quite sure how to answer the questions related to his past debts. He admitted that his 
foreclosure occurred in 2005, and that he was aware of both the foreclosure and the 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 38-39, 46, 58. 
 
5 Tr. at 39. 
 
6 Tr. at 40-42, 48. 
 
7 Tr. at 42. 
 
8 Id. 
 
9 Tr. at 43. 
 
10 Tr. at 44-45. 
 
11 Tr. at 50. 
 
 
4 
 
judgment against him at the time he completed the questionnaire. He stated that he did 
not intend to deceive the government with his answers.12 
 Applicant’s documentary evidence did not relate to any of the SOR-related debts, 
but indicated he paid his 2009 federal tax obligation with his 2011 tax refund. He also 
used his refund to pay back child support debts that he owed. He stated that he is now 
caught up on his back child support and that his current monthly child support payments 
come directly out of his pay. He did not seek any credit counseling services other than 
from his father-in-law. The record was held open for Applicant to provide additional 
information on the status of his debts, but he did not provide any additional 
information.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 52-55. 
 
13 Tr. at 26, 51; AE A-B. 
 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant made little to no effort to pay any of his obligations. They are not 
infrequent and there is no evidence to support the assertion that they will not recur. AG 
¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced large medical bills related to his children’s health. These 
are conditions beyond his control. However, in order for this mitigating condition to fully 
apply, Applicant must also act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s actions 
do not show responsible behavior. He has done little to resolve the majority of his debts, 
despite having the resources to do so since obtaining his current job 13 months ago. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not seek financial counseling to assist with his delinquent debts. He 
failed to document payments to his creditors. His debts remain unsettled and 
unresolved. Therefore, his finances are not being resolved and are not under control. 
The evidence is insufficient to support a finding that he has made a good-faith effort to 
pay or otherwise resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable. 
He offered no documentary evidence of his disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
The duplicate debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.v and 1.y will be found in favor of Applicant. 
However, at this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire…. 
Applicant’s acknowledged that he was aware of the prior judgment against him, 
which he failed to report on the questionnaire. However, it was reasonable for him to be 
unaware of what his current financial conditions were concerning his other debts at the 
time he completed the questionnaire. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.a, but 
not to SOR ¶ 2.b.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following as potentially applicable: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Falsification of material information on a security clearance application is a 
serious offense and calls into question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered medical bills related to his children’s conditions. I considered 
Applicant’s service to his employer. Applicant has not shown a track record of financial 
stability. Additionally, he deliberately falsified his security clearance questionnaire. 
Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.v:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.w – 1.x:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.y:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.z – 1.bb:  Against Applicant   
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
