 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-05843 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant abused marijuana with varying frequency from 1991 until March 2010. He 
also used Ecstasy between 1995 and 1997. Applicant intends no future involvement with 
any illegal drugs, but it is too soon to conclude with confidence that his marijuana use is not 
likely to recur. Clearance denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On October 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, why it was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his security clearance. DOHA took action under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
 2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on November 4, 2011, and he requested a 
decision without a hearing. On January 3, 2012, the Government submitted a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) consisting of seven exhibits (Items 1-7). DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM to Applicant and instructed him to respond within 30 days of receipt. 
Applicant received the FORM on January 13, 2012. He submitted a response dated 
February 12, 2012, which was received by DOHA on February 15, 2012. Applicant’s 
rebuttal to the FORM was admitted into the record as Applicant exhibit (AE A) without 
objection. On March 23, 2012, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency from about 1991 to March 2010 (SOR 1.a), including after he was granted a 
Secret security clearance around May 2008 (SOR 1.c). Applicant also allegedly used 
Ecstacy with varying frequency from about 1995 to 1997 (SOR 1.b). Applicant admitted the 
allegations, and his admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After considering the 
Government’s FORM, which includes Applicant’s Answer to the SOR allegations (Item 3), I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old contracts manager with a master’s degree. He has been 
married since November 2004, and he has two children, who are both under age ten. 
Applicant had five years of experience managing procurement contracts when he went to 
work for his present employer, a defense contractor, in January 2002. Applicant was 
granted a DOD Secret security clearance around May 2008. (Item 4.) He applied for an 
upgrade of his security clearance to Top Secret for duties involving another federal 
department around May 2010. He was denied eligibility for a Top Secret clearance in 
January 2011 because of his involvement with illegal drugs. As a result of that denial, his 
DOD Secret security clearance was apparently suspended. (Items 6, 7.) 
  
 Applicant began using marijuana in approximately 1991. He smoked the drug about 
five to ten times through 1992. While in college in 1993 and 1994, he used the drug one to 
three times per week. From 1995 through 2000, Applicant abused marijuana once or twice 
a month. Between January 2001 and March 2010, he abused marijuana about once a year 
while socializing with others at concerts or parties. Applicant was given the marijuana on 
those occasions, at times from persons he did not know. Applicant also ingested Ecstasy 
about five times around 1995 to 1997. (Items 5-7.) Applicant decided to stop using 
marijuana because “even infrequent use was not worth the complications and potential 
consequences related to [his] job and obtaining a clearance.” Family obligations and a lack 
of desire to use marijuana also led him to cease his involvement. (Item 5.) 
 
 After Applicant was denied eligibility for a Top Secret security clearance for his 
duties with another government agency, he completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for the DOD on January 31, 2011, to “satisfy [an] official 
 
 3 
requirement.” In response to question 23 concerning any illegal drug activity, Applicant 
responded affirmatively to whether he had illegally used any controlled substance in the 
last seven years, and also to whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance 
while possessing a security clearance. Applicant disclosed recreational use of marijuana 
approximately once a year, about seven to eight times total, from January 2001 through 
March 2010. Applicant admitted that he had a security clearance or access authorization 
denied, suspended, or revoked in January 2011, although he had not yet received formal 
notice of the circumstances that led to the denial. (Item 4.) 
 
 On March 7, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
DOD, in part about his illegal drug use. As reflected in the investigator’s report (Item 6) and 
in an affidavit executed by Applicant (Item 7), he used marijuana between January 2001 
and March 2010 at parties or concerts. He was unable to provide specific dates, but named 
four cities wherein he used marijuana after January 2001. Applicant indicated that on each 
of the occasions, he obtained the marijuana from persons he did not know who were at the 
same parties or concerts. He maintained that he does not associate with anyone who uses 
drugs illegally. Applicant denied any intent to use any illegal drug in the future and any 
involvement ever in selling, distributing, manufacturing, or purchasing any illegal drug. 
Applicant further averred that his spouse was aware of his past use of marijuana. He 
explained that his application for a Top Secret security clearance with another federal 
executive department was denied in January 2011 due to his previous marijuana use. He 
received formal notification of the denial in February 2011, and his DOD Secret clearance 
was suspended automatically as a result of the denial of his Top Secret eligibility. Applicant 
added that the clearance denial and suspension did not change his employment status. He 
had committed no security violations, nor had he had any problems at work. (Items 6, 7.) 
 
 In June 2011, Applicant had an opportunity to review the investigator’s report. 
Applicant clarified that there were some occasions where he knew the person who had 
given him marijuana at parties or concerts. (Item 6.) In a separate response to 
interrogatories from DOHA asking whether he had ever used any non-prescribed narcotic, 
depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen, or cannabis, Applicant reported that he had used 
marijuana from about 1991 to March 2010 at specified frequencies, including one to three 
times weekly from 1993 to 1994. He also disclosed that he used Ecstasy five times from 
1995 to 1997. Applicant indicated that he decided to cease “even infrequent use” of 
marijuana in March 2010. He denied that he presently possessed any illegal drug; that he 
currently associated with persons who use illegal drugs; or that he frequented places where 
he had reason to believe illegal drugs were being used. Applicant indicated that he had not 
sought out or received any counseling or treatment related to illegal drugs, including any 
treatment indicative of positive efforts on his part to refrain from illicit substance 
involvement.  Concerning any changes in his personal or professional situation indicative of 
a change in his lifestyle away from illegal drugs, Applicant responded: 
 
There have been no significant changes to my personal or professional 
situations that have caused me to change my lifestyle. My use over the past 
10 years or so was rare, so I simply have made a conscious decision to 
discontinue all use. I now recognize the serious effect my past use has had 
 
 4 
on my ability to obtain a clearance, and have decided it is no longer 
something that I should do, even infrequently. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant recognizes that even rare use of marijuana is not acceptable. Applicant 
attributes his “infrequent incidents” of marijuana use over the past ten years to poor 
decisions that were not symptomatic of a problem or drug habit that would adversely affect 
his ability to safeguard classified information. As of February 15, 2012, Applicant intends to 
refrain from any illicit substance abuse in the future and does not currently associate with 
known illegal drug users. (AE A.) 
 
 In rebuttal to the FORM, Applicant cited his honesty about the details of his illegal 
drug use “going all the way back to [his] teen years and early 20’s.” He asserted that “there 
has never been any doubt on the part of [his] family, friends, or colleagues about [his] 
dedication to [his] job or [his] loyalty to the U.S. Government.” He expressed confidence 
that his associates, who may have been interviewed during his background investigation, 
would attest to his dedication and loyalty. (AE A.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
 
 5 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
1
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant abused marijuana from 
1991 to March 2010. He also ingested the synthetic illicit drug Ecstasy on five occasions 
sometime between 1995 and 1997, when he was in his early to middle 20s. AG ¶ 25(c), 
“illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” is established only in that Applicant 
would have had physical possession (control) over marijuana on the occasions that he 
smoked it. Applicant has admitted using marijuana as frequently as one to three times a 
week between 1993 and 1995. His use may not have been limited solely to concerts or 
                                                 
1
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). 
 
 6 
parties at that time, although there is no evidence to the contrary. Similarly, the frequency 
of his abuse in the 1990s would suggest that he contributed funds for marijuana if not 
purchased it, but he volunteered no details about the circumstances of his illegal drug 
involvement before 2001. AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance,” applies because he abused marijuana after he was granted a Secret security 
clearance in 2008. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot 
reasonably apply to a 19-year history of marijuana abuse, even though his involvement 
with Ecstasy would fall within AG ¶ 26(a). Concerning AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future,” can be shown by “(1) disassociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” Applicant informed an authorized investigator for 
the DOD in March 2011, and DOHA in June 2011, that he last used marijuana in March 
2010; did not intend to use any illegal drug in the future; and was not associating with 
anyone who uses drugs illegally. Applicant satisfies AG ¶ 26(b)(1) and ¶ 26(b)(2), although 
his avoidance of known drug users and places conducive to drug use does not necessarily 
guarantee against recurrence of future abuse. In recent years, his use of marijuana was 
not dependent on a certain social circle or circumstance. From 2001 until 2010, Applicant 
smoked marijuana at parties or concerts in several locales, apparently to be social with 
persons he did not always know. 
 
As to whether AG ¶ 26(b)(4) applies, Applicant indicated in his rebuttal to the FORM 
that he has “absolutely no intention of using any illegal drug in the future,” and that he is 
committed to the ethical behavior required of a person with a security clearance. Yet, by 
using marijuana while he held a Secret clearance, Applicant raised considerable doubts 
about whether he can be counted on to comply with his fiduciary obligations. Applicant 
submits that he now recognizes the risk presented by illegal drug use for his security 
clearance.
2
 Whether or not Applicant was aware of the DOD prohibition against illegal drug 
use, he knew or should have realized around 2008 that using marijuana was incompatible 
with his security responsibilities. His uncorroborated claims of abstention since March 2010 
are accepted, but they are not enough to overcome a lengthy history of marijuana use, 
which continued after his marriage, the birth of his two children, and while he held a Secret 
clearance. A demonstrated track record of sustained abstinence is required before I can 
apply AG ¶ 26(b)(3) or fully mitigate the drug involvement concerns. 
                                                 
2
In response to any changes in his personal or professional situation indicative of a lifestyle no longer 
conducive to illegal drug use, Applicant stated in June 2011, “I now recognize the serious effect my past use 
has had on my ability to obtain a clearance, and have decided it is no longer something that I should do, even 
infrequently.” (Item 5.)   
 
 7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
3
 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
to consider Applicant’s poor judgment in abusing marijuana from 1991 to March 2010. 
Although his use of marijuana decreased to about once a year after he started working for 
his present employer, he was at an age where his use of the drug can no longer be 
attributed to youth or immaturity. 
 
Applicant submits that he has been fully forthright about his marijuana use, and that 
the Government should therefore be able to trust his promise to abstain completely from 
any future illegal drug activity. Applicant was granted his DOD Secret clearance around 
March 2008. It is unclear what the Government knew about his past drug use at that time. 
The e-QIP of record was submitted to “satisfy [an] official requirement” after he had been 
denied eligibility for a Top Secret clearance by another federal department in 2011. 
Presumably, his DOD Secret clearance would not have been granted in 2008 if he had 
failed to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. Yet, Applicant smoked 
marijuana on at least one occasion, if not more, thereafter. Applicant is credited for 
disclosing his involvement with illicit substances, but there is a strong presumption against 
the grant of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). Based on the facts before me and the 
adjudicative guidelines that I am bound to consider, for the aforesaid reasons, I am unable 
to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or restore to 
Applicant the security clearance that has apparently been suspended because of his illegal 
drug abuse. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
                                                 
3
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 8 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
