 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-00032 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He 
accumulated over $125,000 in bad debts and failed to establish that his financial 
situation is under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations).1 On August 31, 2011, Applicant submitted his Answer to 
the SOR and requested a decision on the administrative record. 
 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On October 27, 2011, Department Counsel submitted its File of Relevant 
Material (FORM). The FORM contains Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, which 
are admitted without objection. Applicant responded to the FORM (Response) by 
undated memorandum. He submitted ten documents, which are marked and admitted 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 10. I was assigned the case on January 3, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old systems engineer, who has been working for his 
current employer since July 2000. He attained his undergraduate degree in 2000 and 
master’s degree in 2005.2 His recent performance reports indicate that he is an 
excellent employee, who is “[v]ery dedicated and flexible, frequently working weekends . 
. . and double shifts to meet short notice (assignments) . . . (he) takes on challenging 
tasks and works them to completion.”3 
 
 Applicant divorced in 2007 and has two teenage children, ages 14 and 15. He 
attributes his financial trouble to his divorce, which left him responsible for the marital 
debts. He has less money to pay the substantial debts from the marriage due to child 
support obligation and inability to claim his children as dependents on his taxes.4 
 
Applicant was able to meet his expenses and the monthly payments due on the 
marital debts until about mid-2008. He sought the advice of a credit counseling agency 
(CCA) in approximately May 2008. Applicant’s budget at the time reflected that he had 
over $89,000 in bad debts and was running a deficit of over $1,800 a month. He was 
unable to afford the payment plan proposed by the CCA to resolve his debts. The CCA 
recommended that he file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and he completed a pre-
bankruptcy counseling session. Applicant did not follow the CCA’s advice.5 
 
Applicant disclosed his financial situation to his facility security officer in 
September 2010. He then discussed his finances with a government investigator in 
October 2010. Applicant’s finances had stabilized by October 2010 to where he had 
over $300 a month in disposable income. In June 2011, Applicant answered a DOHA 
interrogatory that requested information about his financial situation. Applicant 
submitted a personal financial statement showing that he had over $700 a month in 
discretionary income. He also provided settlement letters that he had received from his 
overdue creditors. He had not paid any of the debts, but was hoping to do so in the near 
future. Applicant also anticipated being granted full custody of his children in April 2012, 
which would free up money to pay his debts.6 
                                                          
2
 GE 5. 
 
3
 AE 3 at 1. 
 
4
 GE 5; GE 6; Answer; Response. 
 
5
 GE 6; GE 12; Response; AE 5. 
 
6
 GE 5; GE 6. See also Response. 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleges nearly $160,000 in bad debt. Applicant paid two of the smaller 
SOR debts totaling over $2,500 (SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.j),7 and established that one of the 
alleged debts is listed twice on the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g).8 Applicant is currently 
indebted to seven creditors for over $127,000.9 He has been offered settlements that 
would bring the total amount past due down to around $65,000, but is unable to afford 
the lesser amounts offered by his overdue creditors.10 His savings account has a 
balance of over $6,000, and his goal is to mitigate at least ninety percent of his 
outstanding debt by the end of 2012.11 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.12 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
                                                          
7
 Applicant paid the $2,366 debt alleged in ¶1.h and the $225 debt alleged in ¶1.j. Answer; FORM 
at 4. He claims that the debt for $2,812 in ¶1.k is the same as the debt in ¶1.h that is now satisfied. In 
light of Applicant’s honesty throughout the security clearance process, I find that ¶1.k is a duplicate of the 
paid debt alleged in ¶1.h. 
 
8
 Answer; FORM at 4. 
 
9
 Answer; Response. 
 
10
 AE 4. 
 
11
 Response; AE 9. 
 
12
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
 
4 
 
 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”13 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $127,000 in bad 
debt, which he has been unable to pay since 2008, directly implicates this concern. It 
also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                                          
13
 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”14 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began five years ago when he divorced and 
continues to the present day. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s divorce is a matter outside of his control, but he failed to establish 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.15 He has been gainfully employed 
for the entire period and, since at least October 2010, had some disposable income 
available to address his debts. As of the close of the record, he had not addressed the 
majority of the debts that he defaulted on in 2008. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling in 2008, but was unable to afford the 
payment plan proposed by the CCA to resolve his debt. He did not follow the CCA’s 
advice to file for bankruptcy and has allowed his debt to increase by about $40,000. He 
receives some credit for satisfying a few of his relatively minor debts. However, with 
over $127,000 in bad debts, Applicant’s financial situation is far from under control. 
Applicant’s promise to resolve his substantial debt by the end of 2012 is not an 
adequate substitute for a consistent track record of responsible conduct in relation to his 
                                                          
14
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
15
 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) (“the second prong of MC 
20(b) requires that an applicant act responsibly under the circumstances”). 
 
 
6 
 
 
finances.16 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) partially apply, but are insufficient to mitigate the 
Guideline F concern. Applicant’s financial situation remains a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).17 I considered the favorable and extenuating factors in 
this case, including Applicant’s honesty and work history. However, he has a substantial 
amount of unresolved debt and failed to dispel the significant security concern raised by 
his financial situation.18 The favorable whole-person factors present in this case do not 
outweigh the security concern at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:          Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:        For Applicant 
 
                                                          
16
 ISCR Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999) (“Promises to take actions in the future, 
however sincere, are not a substitute for a documented track record of remedial actions.”) 
 
17
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
18
 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (an applicant’s honesty 
and “[e]ven years of safeguarding national security information may not be sufficient to mitigate a history 
of ongoing, significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
