 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03366 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally purchased, possessed, and used marijuana between January 
2009 and August 2009, while working for a government contractor and holding a 
security clearance. As of his hearing day, he was living with his drug provider and 
marijuana-user friend. His behavior casts doubt on his reliability, judgment, and ability to 
comply with the law. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 5, 2010. 
On September 29, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline H 
(Drug Involvement).1
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 12, 2011, and requested 
 
 
2 
 
 
a decision on the record. On December 8, 2011, Applicant requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 3, 2012, convening a hearing for 
January 23, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented one witness, and 
submitted exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 27, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
to the findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, and having observed 
Applicant’s demeanor and considered his testimony, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old analyst working for a government contractor. He 
received his high school diploma in May 2002. He is currently pursuing his bachelor’s 
degree and has completed some college courses. He has never been married and he 
has no children. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant initially testified that he first illegally used marijuana in 
January 2009. Under cross-examination, he admitted that he illegally used marijuana 
once while in high school. He explained that in high school he was young and 
impressionable. He succumbed to the peer pressure and experimented with marijuana. 
He used marijuana only once because he knew better than to use an illegal drug. (Tr. 
26)  
 
After high school, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve, where he 
served from February 2002 until his discharge in 2009. He served two eight-month 
combat tours in Iraq as a light vehicle mechanic. His first combat tour was during the 
2003 Iraq invasion, and in 2008 he served his second tour in Iraq. He received a 
Combat Action Award for his 2003 tour, and two Navy Achievement Medals, one for 
each deployment. He achieved the rank of sergeant (E-5), and his service was 
characterized as honorable. Because of his military duties, he received access to 
classified information at the secret level in 2004. From late 2007 until his discharge, he 
was assigned to the Inactive Reserve, and he had no drilling responsibilities. He 
testified that he did not illegally use marijuana while serving in the Marine Corps. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in 
December 2008. When Applicant started working for his employer, he was informed that 
the company has a zero tolerance policy regarding the illegal use of drugs. Because of 
his job, he continuously held a secret security clearance from December 2008 until his 
hearing day. There is no evidence to show that Applicant has ever compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
 
3 
 
 
From January 2009 until August 2009, while holding a security clearance, 
Applicant illegally used marijuana. He testified that he had difficulty adapting to being a 
civilian after serving in the Marine Corps and being deployed to Iraq. He claimed that he 
used marijuana because he felt that he did not fit, and that something was not right. He 
was looking for an escape, and trying to adapt and fit into his civilian lifestyle. (Tr. 36-
37) Applicant obtained the marijuana from a high school friend. He testified: “[I] was with 
some friends who I knew were using, and I wanted to try it out and it felt pretty good.” 
(Tr. 38) On average, he used marijuana between one and three times a week.  
 
Applicant was introduced to a marijuana dealer by his high school friend. He and 
his high school friend travelled to another state to purchase marijuana. Additionally, 
Applicant purchased marijuana three times directly from his high school friend. 
Applicant’s high school friend has been living with Applicant (renting his basement) 
since May 2009, until at least the day of the hearing. Applicant smoked marijuana with 
his high school friend on a frequent basis until he stopped smoking marijuana in August 
2009. His fiancé was aware that Applicant and his high school friend smoked marijuana. 
Applicant claimed that the last time he observed his high school friend smoke marijuana 
was shortly after Applicant stopped using marijuana. 
 
In August 2009, Applicant decided to stop using marijuana because he knew it 
was not a good idea. He testified that enough people (his girlfriend and family members) 
knew that he was illegally using marijuana and they advised him to stop. Because of his 
military service and his company’s policy against the illegal use of drugs, Applicant was 
aware of the possible adverse consequences that would result from the use of illegal 
drugs while holding a security clearance. 
 
In his August 2010 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he illegally purchased, 
possessed, and used marijuana between January 2009 and August 2009. At his 
hearing, he expressed regret for his lapse of judgment. He promised to never use illegal 
drugs again. He believes his misconduct is mitigated by the passage of time, his change 
of circumstances, and his job performance. He averred that he changed his lifestyle and 
no longer socializes with illegal drug users. (Although, he was living with his high school 
friend.) He is now engaged to be married, purchased a home, has a good job that he 
likes and would like to keep. Applicant is considered to be dependable, credible, and 
trustworthy by his friends. He has not participated in substance abuse counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana between January 2009 and August 2009. He 
used marijuana at age 25, after serving in the Marine Corps, and while possessing a 
security clearance and working for a government contractor with a zero tolerance policy 
against the use of illegal drugs. He was made aware of his employer’s policy against the 
use of illegal drugs. Applicant knew that his possession and use of marijuana was 
illegal, and that his drug-related behavior would adversely affect his ability to retain his 
job and to possess a security clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise security concerns in this particular case: AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse”;2
 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase”; and AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.”  
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s illegal 
marijuana use is recent and frequent. Because of his age, military training and service, 
and his years possessing a secret security clearance, he was aware of the illegality of 
his actions and the adverse consequences he would face because of his misconduct. 
                                            
2  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s behavior not only was illegal, but it also violated the trust bestowed on him 
by the Government. 
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since August 2009. He claimed he has 
implemented some lifestyle changes to help him remain abstinent. He also claimed that 
the stress and anxiety that caused his drug use are no longer present in his life. He 
promised never to use illegal drugs again. Applicant’s claims of lifestyle changes are 
belied by his own testimony. As of the hearing day, he was living with his marijuana 
dealer and high school friend, with whom Applicant frequently used marijuana in 2009.  
 
Applicant’s actions demonstrate that he does not understand what is required of 
him to establish eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant’s questionable behavior 
casts doubt on his reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to comply with the 
law. His favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security 
concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant illegally used marijuana while working for a defense 
contractor and possessing a secret security clearance.  
 
In light of Applicant’s age, his military training, years holding a security clearance, 
and his continued association with a known drug dealer and user, his promise to not 
use illegal drugs in the future is not sufficient to establish his questionable behavior is 
unlikely to recur. The record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
