 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 04-11768 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
On September 11, 2003, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On July 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 18, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 27, 2009, DOHA assigned the 
case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing on March 10, 2009. The case was heard on 
 
 
 
 
2
March 24, 2009, as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 20 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) 1 through 
38 into evidence without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record 
open until April 10, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted two exhibits that I marked AE 39 and 40 and 
admitted into the record over the objection of the Government. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 2, 2009. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 26 U.S.C. § 
6011. (GE 21) Said statute sets forth the general requirements for individuals to file 
income tax returns. The exhibit was not admitted into evidence, but is included in the 
record as an Administrative Notice Exhibit. Hence, the facts administratively noticed are 
limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. Applicant 
did not object to the Department’s request, and said document was admitted for that 
purpose. (Tr. 36) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.h.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old married man with two young children. He has two 
associate degrees, one which he completed in 1996 in electrical engineering. He started 
working for his current employer in 1987. He is an associate engineer, earning 
approximately $80,000 annually.  
 
 In September 2004, a Government investigator interviewed Applicant about 
statements he made on his SF 86, pertaining to a lawsuit he filed in Federal District 
Court, in which he asserted his right not to file income tax returns. Essentially, he 
believes that the salary he earns through his employment with a federal contractor does 
not constitute taxable income, as defined by the U.S. Constitution. (Tr. 77, 131) Hence, 
he is not required to file returns because he does not earn taxable income. (Tr. 77-78) 
He began researching this issue in 1999 and arrived at his present position by 2003. 
Prior to that year, he filed state and Federal returns for 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002. 
However, once he completed his analysis on the matter, he filed amended returns and 
requested refunds for the years. He has challenged the IRS and brought suit on this 
issue in Federal court. He has lost both challenges. (GE 2) 
 
In April 2003, a Federal District Court entered a Memorandum Order dismissing 
Applicant’s case against the Federal and state governments, based on jurisdictional 
grounds. Applicant filed an application for habeas relief, in which he sought state and 
Federal income tax refunds for the calendar year 2000, arguing that he had a civil right 
 
 
 
 
3
to deduct his earned wages from his gross income as compensation for personal 
services actually rendered. (GE 13) 
 
 On June 6, 2003, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) responded to Applicant 
regarding documents he filed setting forth his argument that he is not required to file 
Federal income tax returns because he does not earn taxable income. In separate 
letters, referencing his previous correspondence for tax years 1999, 2000 and 2001, the 
IRS stated: 
  
We have determined that the document(s) referred to above is a frivolous 
document. The position you have taken has no basis in law and 
represents a frivolous position. The tax laws are very clear and have been 
tested in the courts – including the Supreme Court of the United States. 
Claims, such as yours, have been considered and rejected repeatedly as 
frivolous and without merit by the federal courts. Therefore, we will not 
respond to future correspondence from you concerning these same 
issues. (GE 15) 
 
Despite the dismissal of his law suit and notification of the IRS’s position in 2003, 
Applicant has continued to pursue his position. The July 2008 SOR alleged that 
Applicant failed to file eight income tax returns, as required by law. The status of those 
returns is as follows: 
 
1. Applicant filed his 2004 Federal Income Tax Return in December 2008, in 
order to obtain a refund. (Tr. 71) There is no evidence that he received an 
extension to file three years late. 
 
2. Applicant filed his 2004 state tax return in July 2008, after learning a 
refund was owed to him. (Tr. 72) There is no evidence that he received an 
extension to file three years late. 
 
3. Applicant has not filed his 2005 Federal Income Tax Return, nor obtained 
an extension of time in which to do so.  (Tr. 72; 76) 
 
4. Applicant filed his 2005 state income tax return in July 2008, in order to 
avoid an additional penalty and obtain a refund. (Tr. 104-105 ) There is no 
evidence that he received an extension to file this return late. 
 
5. Applicant has not filed his 2006 Federal Income Tax Return, nor obtained 
an extension of time in which to do so. (Tr. 72) 
 
6. Applicant has not filed his 2006 state income tax return, nor obtained an 
extension of time in which to do so. (Tr. 73)  
 
7. Applicant has not filed his 2007 Federal Income Tax Return, nor obtained 
an extension of time in which to do so. (Tr. 73) 
 
 
 
 
4
 
8.  Applicant has not filed his 2007 state income tax return, nor obtained an 
extension of time in which to do so. (Tr. 73 )  
 
In a second interview in February 2008, Applicant admitted that he had not filed 
Federal or state income tax returns from 2004 to 2007. He continued to assert that he 
was not required to file them because he was not a “tax payer.” (GE 3 at 184) He has 
persistently requested the IRS to document and trace the history of its interpretation and 
definition of income. (Id.) He will file the outstanding returns in the future in order to 
obtain refunds, but is “waiting for the right time to file a refund, and . . . waiting also for 
anybody yet to show [him] [he has] a requirement to file.” (Tr. 103, 128) He does not 
intend to timely file his 2008 returns nor obtain an extension for filing. (Tr. 74) 
 
Applicant submitted a copy of a 2002 state court opinion (filed by another 
individual) that specifically rejected Applicant’s arguments pertaining to his interpretation 
of the definition of “income.” (AE 33) When questioned about the court’s interpretation of 
the word, Applicant said, “The State is off base.” (Tr. 136)  
  
 Applicant provided a copy of his 2008 Performance and Development Summary 
that noted an acceptable rating in most categories and exceptional in a few areas. His 
supervisor wrote that Applicant’s “contributions continue to span a wide range of 
activities within the department.  .  .  He is willing to accept a variety of assignments and 
always digs-in quickly to contribute.” (AE 33) Applicant’s employer and colleagues are 
aware of his position regarding the requirement to file income tax returns.  
 
 During his testimony, Applicant vigorously asserted his position that he has no 
obligation to file his returns because he does not earn income within the meaning of the 
constitution. He presented extensive research and detailed summaries of his analysis to 
support his argument. He will continue to challenge the issue. In his closing argument, 
he added: 
 
No one has showed that my income is taxable and meets the definition 
pursuant to Section 61. I’ve provided the congressional records, the 
Supreme Court cases, the definitions as evidence and records that are out 
there that define it, and nobody’s been able to prove it otherwise. (Tr. 153) 
 
* * *  
The Department of Defense has made a claim that I earn Section 61 
income, which they haven’t proven otherwise that I actually have made 
Section 61 income. It’s a presumption that I have, but I have seen no 
evidence showing proof that I have. . . .  And, the Department of Defense 
claims that I’m an employee that’s taxable and that would be pursuant to 
the W4 withholding definition of “income,” and I haven’t seen any evidence 
showing that I’m that type of employee. And that definition is very clear to 
read. So pursuant to the requirements of a W4 withholding form, my 
 
 
 
 
5
income doesn’t meet it and my “employee” by definition doesn’t meet that 
requirement. I cannot fill out a W4. [Sic] (Tr. 154-155)   
 
  In his preface to AE 39, which Applicant submitted post-hearing, he states 
as follows: 
 
NOTE: What I am presenting is not some NEW discovery that I need 
to go in front of Congress with and I am NOT arguing the law. The 
laws are written correctly and I have no problem with any of them 
The problem is the DOD is misunderstanding WHO I am and not 
paying attention to statutory “terms”, congressional “definitions”, 
and my “unalienable rights” when attempting to apply the “failure to 
file” statutes to me.  [Sic] 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
 
 
 
6
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations are 
articulated in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 sets out nine conditions that could raise security concerns, two of which 
may potentially be applicable in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Based on the evidence, including Applicant’s admissions and testimony, he 
deliberately failed to timely file Federal and state tax returns for the years 2004, 2005, 
2006, and 2007, as legally required. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above two 
disqualifications. In addition to these disqualifications, the evidence raised an overall 
concern pertaining to Applicant’s lack of judgment and willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, which in turn question his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information under this guideline.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifications, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. AG ¶ 
20 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial 
difficulties: 
 
 
 
 
7
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant=s refusal to timely file his income tax returns has been ongoing since 
2004 and continues into the present. His actions are recent, not isolated, and cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment; hence, AG ¶ 20(a) cannot apply. 
His income tax issues are clearly within his control, such that AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable. Although Applicant filed his 2004 Federal and state income tax returns in 
2008, as well as his 2005 state return, he did not do so timely and has not filed any 
other return to date, as required by law. Hence, there is no evidence that the problems 
are being resolved, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(c). 
Applicant disputed, in court and directly to the IRS, the legitimacy of the income tax 
statutes that require him to file tax returns. He lost both challenges; thus, AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(d) or AG ¶ 
20(f).   
 
The Appeal Board articulated its general security concern in ISCR No. 94-0954 
(October 16, 1995) at 3, in a similar case in which an applicant argued that he was not 
obligated to file income tax returns. The Board stated:  
 
There is a nexus between Applicant’s conduct and his eligibility for a 
security clearance. Beyond the fact that Applicant shows poor judgment 
by willfully engaging in criminal conduct, he believes he has the right and 
ability to determine on his own what laws will apply to him. Accordingly, 
 
 
 
 
8
the Government cannot be sure he will always follow security rules if he 
ever begins to believe that they should not apply to him.1 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 44-year-old married 
man with two children. He has successfully worked for his present employer since 1986.  
 
In 2003, Applicant challenged the Federal and state governments’ rights to 
require him to file income tax returns. His case was subsequently dismissed and 
referred to as “frivolous” in the state court. In September 2004, the Government 
interviewed him about the lawsuit he filed in Federal court and challenges he filed with 
the IRS about his 1999, 2000, 2001 and 2002 returns. In February 2008, the 
Government again interviewed him and learned that he had not filed income tax returns 
from 2004 to 2007. According to his testimony, he does not intend to timely file 2008 
returns. Despite his lack of success with legal challenges and notification by the 
Government, twice, of its security concerns, Applicant has obstinately persisted in 
adhering to his position and jeopardizing his employment. His behavior and actions in 
this situation demonstrate serious underlying issues regarding his reliability, good 
judgment and willingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which are 
characteristics necessary and pertinent to handling classified information.   
  
In another more recent case, involving similar facts, the Appeal Board succinctly 
stated, “DOHA proceedings are not a proper forum for challenging the validity of federal 
                                            
1The SOR did not raise concerns under the guideline for Criminal Conduct in this case, but has 
raised general concerns under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
 
 
 
9
tax matters.” The Board further stated, “Failure to file tax returns suggest that an 
applicant has a problem with complying with well-established governmental rules and 
systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting 
classified information”. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 (December 20, 2002) at 2; See ISCR 
Case No. 97-0744 (November 6, 1998) at p. 3. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance based on issues involving his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and willingness to abide by rules and regulations. For 
all of the above reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns 
arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:      Against Applicant    
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                             
         
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
