                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXX )  ISCR Case No. 06-09643 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct), M (Use of Information Technology Systems), and E (Personal Conduct). 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2003, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application, 
Standard Form (SF) 86.1 On November 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1 The August 2003 security clearance application is the most recent one in Applicant’s file. He 
filled it out in connection with a previous employer and was terminated from that employer in July 2005. 
Applicant is sponsored for a security clearance by his current employer. 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct), M (Use of Information Technology Systems), and E 
(Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On November 26, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated January 7, 2009, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.3 Applicant did not submit any information within 
the 30-day time period after receiving a copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to 
me on April 16, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old defense contractor employee. The FORM did not 
contain any information regarding his education background. Applicant did serve in the 
U.S. Navy from August 1993 to September 2002, and was discharged as an E-4. He 
held a secret security clearance while in the Navy. Applicant has been married since 
April 2004. Although the FORM makes references to children and stepchildren, it does 
not contain specific information about them.4  
 
Applicant’s background investigation included a review of his SF-86,5 and 
various documents pertaining to his past arrests, and the underlying basis surrounding 
his discharge from his previous employer.6 The Government established by Applicant’s 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
3 DOHA transmittal letter is dated January 9, 2009; and Applicant received the FORM on January 
30, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to 
submit information.  
4 Item 4. 
5 Item 3. 
6 Items 4 – 11.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
admissions and evidence presented that Applicant committed four criminal offenses, all 
of which he admits. Applicant has two arrests and convictions for Driving under the 
Influence (DUI) of Alcohol in April 1996 and May 1998. In February 2003, he was 
convicted of providing alcohol to a minor after two of his teenage stepchildren and their 
friends consumed beer at his house. In September 2004, he was convicted of 
misdemeanor assault for slapping his teenage stepdaughter in the face.  
 
Applicant was employed by a defense contractor from May 2003 to July 2005, 
and was involuntarily terminated for violating his employer’s internet and e-mail policies, 
which he admitted. His employer undertook this action after having given him two 
written warnings in February 2004 and October 2004 informing him that he risked 
termination unless he altered his course of conduct.  
 
His termination for violating his employer’s internet and e-mail policies was cross-
alleged under personal conduct. (SOR ¶ 3.a.). Also, when Applicant completed his 
August 2003 SF-86, he failed to list the full extent of his alcohol/drug offenses. In 
particular, he failed to list his February 2003 charge of contributing alcohol to minor and 
subsequent conviction of providing alcohol to a minor. He also failed to list his May 1998 
arrest and charge of driving under the influence. A closer reading of Applicant’s August 
2003 SF-86 reveals that Applicant did, in fact, disclose his 2003 offense elsewhere on 
his SF-86. Applicant does not dispute that he deliberately failed to list his 1998 DUI. 
 
Applicant offered no mitigating evidence.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”7 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).8 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
  
  Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. AG ¶ 30. 
7 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
8 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Under Guideline J, there are two Disqualifying Conditions raised by Applicant’s 
conduct: AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and AG ¶ 31(c) 
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” The Government established 
these Disqualifying Conditions through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. 
 
There are four Mitigating Conditions under Guideline J that potentially apply: AG 
¶ 32(a) “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment;” AG ¶ 32(b) 
“the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those pressures are 
no longer present in the person’s life;” AG ¶ 32(c) “evidence that the person did not 
commit the offense;” and AG ¶ 32(d) “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, 
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, of 
constructive community involvement.” 
 
Applicant admitted each offense as alleged in the SOR under this concern, but 
offered no mitigating explanations. As such, I am unable to apply any of the potential 
Mitigating Conditions under Guideline J. 
 
Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems) 
 
 Under Guideline M, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. AG ¶ 39. 
 
 Under Guideline M, there is one Disqualifying Condition raised by Applicant’s 
conduct: AG ¶ 40(e) “unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system.” The Government established this Disqualifying Condition through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented.  
 
 There are three Mitigation Conditions under Guideline M that potentially apply: 
AG ¶ 41(a) “so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment;” AG ¶ 41(b) “the misuse 
was minor and done only in the interest of organizational efficiency and effectiveness, 
such as letting another person use one’s password or computer when no other timely 
alternative was readily available;” and AG ¶ 41(c) “the conduct was unintentional or 
inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good faith effort to correct the situation and 
by notification of a supervisor.”  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 Applicant’s unauthorized internet and e-mail use was intentional, repeated, and 
came after warnings from his supervisor to cease and desist, under threat of 
termination. Applicant’s employer considered his actions serious enough to warrant his 
termination, so that his actions cannot be considered “minor.” Applicant has not shown 
that the security concerns raised by his actions can be viewed as mitigated. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
Under Guideline E, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
Under Guideline E, there are several Disqualifying Conditions raised by 
Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s unauthorized internet and e-mail use at a previous 
employer (discussed under Guideline M) is cross-alleged as a separate concern under 
Personal Conduct because it constitutes questionable judgment and unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations warranting application of AG ¶ 16(d) “credible 
adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not 
be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: . . . 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.” 
 
 The remaining Guideline E allegation concerns a falsification concern that 
warrants application of AG ¶ 16(e): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced Applicant deliberately failed 
to disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in my analysis to reach that 
conclusion, including: Applicant=s age, his level of education, his employment history, 
and his admission. 
 
There are five Mitigating Conditions under Guideline E that potentially apply: AG 
¶ 17(a) “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;” AG ¶ 17(b) “the 
refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or significantly 
contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning the security 
clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide 
the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully;” AG ¶ 17(c) “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” AG ¶ 17(d) “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur;” and AG ¶ 17(e) “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  
 
Applicant admitted each offense as alleged in the SOR under this concern, but 
offered no mitigating explanations. His behavior raises questions about his ability and 
willingness to follow the law, and ultimately, to protect classified information. His 
falsification and lack of candor weigh against a finding of rehabilitation and positive 
behavioral changes. As such, I am unable to apply any of the potential Mitigating 
Conditions under Guideline E. 
 
Additionally, for the same reasons outlined under the discussions of Guidelines J, 
M and E, incorporated herein, I conclude Applicant=s behavior shows questionable 
judgment, lack of reliability, and untrustworthiness.  
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the 
whole person concept was given due consideration, and that analysis does not support 
a favorable decision. 
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”9 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a. – 3.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
