                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
 -------------------   ) ISCR Case No. 06-12309
 SSN: -----------   ) 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant left South Korea when he was nine and never returned. Applicant, his 
siblings, his spouse, his two children and his father all live in the United States. The 
security concern pertains to his relationship with his father, who frequently meets with 
high-level South Korean officials and acts as an unofficial liaison between South Korean 
officials and U.S. citizens and officials. Applicant has significantly greater contacts with 
the United States than with South Korea. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of U.S. interests. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2005, Applicant submitted a Standard Form 86, Security 
Clearance Application (EPSQ version) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On 
December 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) (GE 5). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as 
amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On January 16, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (GE 6). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on February 12, 2009. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2009. On 
February 24, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice (GE 4). The hearing was held on 
March 25, 2009. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits (GEs 1-3) 
(Transcript (Tr.) 22-23), and Applicant offered 23 exhibits (Tr. 25-35; AE A-W). There 
were no objections, and I admitted GEs 1-3 (Tr. 23), and AEs A-W (Tr. 35). Additionally, 
I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and the hearing notice (GEs 4-6). I received 
the transcript on April 2, 2009.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning a 
South Korean/North Korean Committee (AN Ex. I and II) and relating to South Korea 
(AN Ex. III) (Tr. 23-24). Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show 
detail and context for these facts. Applicant did not object, and I took administrative 
notice of all of the facts in all of the documents (Tr. 23-24; AN I-III). See the South 
Korean/North Korean Committee and South Korea sections of the Findings of Fact of 
this decision, infra (AN Ex. I to III). 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings, is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in his response to the SOR (GE 6). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names of 
committees or other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited 
sources contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Applicant is 37 years old (Tr. 6, 36). He graduated from a U.S. high school in 
1990 and received his bachelors degree in 1995 from a U.S. college (Tr. 7, 37, 38). His 
bachelors degree was in business administration with a major in accounting (Tr. 7). He 
also has a masters of science degree from a U.S. educational institution (Tr. 7). 
Applicant’s interim security clearance was revoked, and he does not currently hold a 
security clearance (Tr. 8). 
  
Applicant, his father and siblings moved to the United States in 1981, when 
Applicant was nine years old (Tr. 37). Applicant’s mother died before Applicant 
immigrated to the United States (GE 3). Since his arrival in the United States, Applicant 
has not had any contact with his mother’s family (GE 3). He has not returned to South 
Korea after leaving in 1981 (Tr. 45, 51). Two of Applicant’s South Korean family 
members (uncles) visit the United States from South Korea every two years or so, and 
Applicant might meet with them on these visits (GE 3). Applicant’s contact with these 
relatives occurs when they visit the United States (GE 3). Applicant received his green 
card in August 1998 (Tr. 40). He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2004 (Tr. 
36).  
 
From 2003 to 2007, Applicant worked for a government contractor first as a 
proposal manager and later as a business director (Tr. 42-43). From 2007 to the 
present, Applicant has been employed by another government contractor as a vice 
president of a corporate division that focuses on business development (Tr. 43-44).  
 
Applicant owns two houses in the United States (Tr. 51). He has two U.S. 401K 
accounts with a total value of about $70,000 (AE B, E) and his spouse has a U.S. 401K 
account valued at $153,000 (AE C). He has two children, who were born in the United 
States (Tr. 51). He does not have any foreign property or bank accounts (GE 2). He 
does not intend to live permanently in South Korea (Tr. 51). He has never been arrested 
for a felony, or a drug or alcohol-related offense (Tr. 52; GE 1). He has not had financial 
problems (Tr. 52). He has not served in the U.S. or South Korean military (GE 1). 
 
Applicant is not involved in any South Korea-related leagues, organizations or 
political committees (Tr. 87). Applicant offered to renounce his South Korean citizenship 
(Tr. 47, 52); however, Applicant has not taken any action to renounce his South Korean 
citizenship (Tr. 45). He was not aware of a process for ending his South Korean 
citizenship (Tr. 52). Applicant’s father informed the South Korean government that 
Applicant would not be returning to South Korea for military service for an indefinite 
period (Tr. 46). Applicant did not know about the Korean Family Relations Certificate or 
Korean Family Census Register (Tr. 54-55). Applicant renewed his South Korean 
passport in 1995; however, it is now expired (Tr. 45, 47; GE 1, 3).2 Applicant does not 
intend to renew his South Korean passport (Tr. 50). His most recent use of his South 
Korean passport was when he went to Japan in 1999 (Tr. 48).  
 
 
2Department counsel stated that it was the position of the Chief Department Counsel that turning-
in an expired passport to a security manager or taking other actions to invalidate it was unnecessary (Tr. 
50). 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant married in 2001 (GE 1). His wife was born in Japan, and her parents 
live in Japan (Tr. 48). She does not own any property in Japan (Tr. 49). She has a 
cousin and an aunt and uncle living in the United States (Tr. 49). She has a green card 
(GE 2). Applicant does not communicate with her family in Japan because he does not 
speak Japanese. 
 
Applicant obtained a U.S. passport in 2007 (Tr. 49). He has not used his U.S. 
passport to travel (Tr. 49). 
 
The gist of the security concern in this case is that until 2007 Applicant’s father 
(F) had an active role in a South Korean/North Korean Committee with the goal of 
unification of South and North Korea (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c; GE 5).  
 
Applicant’s father 
 
Applicant’s father (F) was born in South Korea 66 years ago (Tr. 58-59). F came 
to the United States in 1981 on a student visa (GE 2). F’s mother is 92 years old and 
lives in South Korea (Tr. 63). F has nine siblings (Tr. 61). Three siblings live in the 
United States and three siblings live in South Korea (Tr. 61-62). Three siblings, who 
lived in South Korea, are deceased (Tr. 63). Although F’s brothers served in the South 
Korean Army, none of F’s siblings or brothers-in-law worked for the South Korean 
government (Tr. 63-64). One of F’s brothers retired from the South Korean Army as a 
lieutenant (Tr. 65). F’s other brothers and brothers-in-law were enlisted soldiers (Tr. 65). 
F was in the South Korean Army for three years and rose to the rank of sergeant (Tr. 
64). F served with U.S. airmen in Vietnam during the Vietnam war (Tr. 64, 89, 90). F 
has three sons and all three sons live in the United States (Tr. 60). In 1981, F brought 
his family to the United States from South Korea (Tr. 60). F’s first wife, Applicant’s 
mother, passed away (Tr. 60). F remarried; however, he is now divorced (Tr. 60).  
 
In 1996, F became a U.S. citizen (Tr. 39). F has been in the residential 
construction business since 1986 (Tr. 68, 88). F has renovated houses and military 
barracks (Tr. 88). Applicant worked for his father until 1999 (Tr. 41). F owns two houses 
in the United States (Tr. 51; AE G). F has a U.S. money market account valued in 
March 2009 at about $177,000 (AE G). F uses a U.S. passport to travel, and does not 
have a currently valid South Korean passport (Tr. 53, 79).   
 
In 1975 or 1976, F tried to become elected to a special committee for peaceful 
reunification of North and South Korea (SC/NC committee); however, he lost his initial 
bid to be on the SC/NC committee (Tr. 66-69). In June 1980, a high-level official in the 
South Korean government appointed F as an advisory member to the SC/NC committee 
(Tr. 70, 72-73; GE 3). In 1981, F resigned from his SC/NC committee position because 
he was moving to the United States (GE 3). In 1996, F became an honorary member of 
the same committee; however, F ended his honorary committee membership two years 
ago (Tr. 73-74; GE 3).  
 
In 1996 and 1997 at F’s behest, Applicant attended three meetings of the SC/NC 
committee (GE 3). The SC/NC committee meetings were attended by South Korean 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
officials as well as American political officials (GE 3). Applicant has not attended any 
SC/NC committee meetings after 1997 (GE 3).  Applicant is not interested in attending 
future SC/NC committee meetings (GE 3).  
 
In 1992, F joined and has thereafter been active in a local Korean-American 
association (KAA) (Tr. 73; GE 3). In 1993, he was the vice president of KAA GE 3).  
 
F also had a leadership position in a Korean-American citizenship league (KACL) 
(Tr. 74; GE 3). The KACL’s goal is to register Korean Americans to vote and to assist 
South Korean immigrants to the United States with becoming better, more successful 
Americans (Tr. 84; AE F). The KACL has received citations and/or letters of 
appreciation/commendation from President Bush (AE K), the White House (AE J), and 
two U.S. state governors (Tr. 85; AE I, L, M, T, U). In connection with a KACL function, 
F provided photographs of himself with the U.S. Secretary of Defense (AE O, P), the 
U.S. Secretary of Labor (AE Q) and two U.S. state governors (AE R, S). The KACL 
gave F a certificate of appreciation/recognition in 2005 for his leadership (AE V). The 
KACL’s 2003 national conference program features letters from various U.S. political 
leaders, including President Bush and several other high-level U.S. political and retired 
U.S. military leaders (AE W). The KACL has held fund raisers for U.S. projects, such as 
repair to a fire station or for a 9-11 memorial at the Pentagon (Tr. 86). The KACL 
provides volunteers to help at U.S. events (Tr. 86-87).  
 
F has attended a social affair at the South Korean embassy and had dinner with 
a South Korean diplomatic official in the last year (Tr. 75-77). F travels to South Korea 
once or twice a year (Tr. 77). He usually visits his mother and siblings in South Korea; 
but also sometimes meets with South Korean government officials (Tr. 78). He also 
meets with representatives in the U.S. Congress, who are interested in South Korean 
issues (Tr. 78). F is a U.S. citizen, not a South Korean citizen (Tr. 79). F’s name has 
been removed from the South Korean register of citizens (Tr. 79). F loves the United 
States and is loyal to the United States (Tr. 88). F does not plan on serving in the South 
Korean government (Tr. 88). F often focuses on the duty of U.S. citizens to defend their 
country (Tr. 90, 91). 
 
F believed that Applicant automatically lost his South Korean citizenship, when 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen (Tr. 80-81). F does not own any property in South 
Korea (Tr. 81). F and Applicant live about 30 or 35 miles apart, and they see each other 
about once a month (Tr. 82). F and Applicant talk about twice a month (Tr. 82). 
 
South Korean/North Korean Committee (SC/NC committee)3 
 
 The goal of the SC/NC committee is peaceful unification of North and South 
Korea. The SC/NC committee monitors political developments, and encourages greater 
communication and cooperation between North and South Korea. It also offers advice 
and suggestions about unification. The SC/NC committee communicates with the 
 
3The facts in the section concerning the SC/NC committee are from documents Department 
Counsel submitted at the hearing (AN I to II). 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
highest levels of the South Korean government. High-level South Korean government 
officials are members of the SC/NC committee. 
 
South Korea4 
 
South Korea is currently a stable, democratic republic. The United States and 
South Korea have been close allies since 1950, and have fought communism on the 
Korean peninsula and in Vietnam. The United States, since 1950 and currently, has 
thousands of U.S. military personnel stationed in South Korea, and frequently conducts 
joint military operations with South Korea. About 2.3 million Koreans live in the United 
States. The United States has promised over the next four years to provide $11 billion in 
force enhancements in Korea. South Korea is the United States’ seventh largest trading 
partner. The recently signed free trade agreement between the United States and South 
Korea will generate billions of dollars in additional economic growth and job creation in 
both countries.     
 
The South Korean government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens. Criminals violate the human rights of some South Korean citizens. South Korea 
has some political prisoners, and some rules regarding arrest and detention are vague. 
 
South Korea does not recognize dual citizenship. There have been 
circumstances where U.S. citizens with connections to South Korea were drafted into 
the South Korean army (Applicant at age 37 is beyond the South Korean draft age limit 
of 35).  
 
In recent years, the United States and South Korea have differed in their 
diplomatic approaches towards North Korea. The United States’ position is more 
assertive in its attempts to curtail North Korea’s development of advanced military 
technology, such as ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons. South Korea has 
emphasized steps towards unification of North and South Korea. 
 
Industrial espionage includes seeking commercial secrets. South Korea has a 
history of collecting protected U.S. information. In 2000, South Korea was listed as one 
of the seven most active countries engaged in foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage against the United States. In 1997, Lockheed Martin was fined for unlicensed 
export to South Korea and that same year a civilian employee of the U.S. Navy passed 
classified documents to the South Korean naval attaché to the United States. On 
multiple occasions, South Korea has been the unauthorized recipient of sensitive 
technology, in violation of U.S. export control laws.          
  
 
 
 
4The facts in the section concerning South Korea are from Department Counsel’s factual 
summary (AN III), except for some comments in the first paragraph about the relationship between the 
United States and South Korea, which are from the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: South 
Korea, Oct. 2008 (AN III, enclosure I) and U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: 
Republic of Korea, January 2, 2009 (AN III, enclosure II). 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is the relevant security concerns with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
Applicant and his father were both born in South Korea. Applicant has a close 
connection to his father, F, who has contacts with high-level South Korean diplomats 
and political figures. Applicant communicates frequently with his father, and his father 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
communicates frequently with South Korean political and diplomatic leaders about 
South Korea/North Korea unification and/or other issues of Korean/U.S. interest. 
Applicant’s father frequently travels to South Korea. Applicant’s relationship with F is 
sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.” Applicant’s relationship with his father creates a potential conflict 
of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” his father assist South Korea. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person such as F, is not, as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative has a 
relationship with political or diplomatic leaders of a foreign country, and an Applicant 
has close contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential 
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of South Korea with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship 
with F, who has a relationship with his siblings living in South Korea as well as South 
Korean government and diplomatic officials do not pose a security risk. Applicant should 
not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and a desire to assist F.5 South Korea was listed as one of the seven 
most active countries engaged in foreign economic collection and industrial espionage 
against the United States. On multiple occasions, South Korea has been the 
unauthorized recipient of technology controlled under U.S. export control laws. It is 
conceivable that Applicant might be targeted through F in an attempt to gather 
information from the United States. 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from South Korea seek or 
have sought classified or economic information from or through F, nevertheless, his 
relationship with F creates a potential conflict of interest because his relationship with F 
is sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist F by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
 
5 An applicant with relatives in Iran, for example, has a much heavier burden to overcome than an 
applicant with relatives living in South Korea. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) 
(stating an applicant has “a very heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when 
parents and siblings live in Iran). See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(articulating “very heavy burden” standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran); ISCR 
Case No. 07-12471 at 9 (A.J. May 30, 2008) (listing numerous recent cases involving U.S. citizens with 
Iranian connections whose clearances were denied, and citing no recent cases where the Appeal Board 
affirmed the grant of a clearance for someone with immediate family members living in Iran). 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
of Applicant’s contacts with F and F’s relationship with South Korean officials to raise 
the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies; however, AG ¶¶ 8(c), 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply 
because the U.S. government has not encouraged Applicant’s involvement with F, or 
F’s involvement with South Korean officials. Applicant has frequent contact with his 
father, and his father has frequent contact with South Korean government officials. F 
frequently travels to South Korea. F is interested in South Korean political 
developments. F has siblings and siblings-in-law, as well as his mother, living in South 
Korea. F’s contacts in South Korea are sufficiently frequent to raise the possibility of F 
being influenced to ask Applicant for sensitive or classified information. AG ¶ 8(a) has 
some partial applicability because it is his father, and not Applicant, who has the 
extensive contacts with South Korean officials. Because of F’s connections to South 
Korea, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
that [her relationships with his relatives who are South Korean citizens] could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has established that 
“[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
Applicant was born in the United States and moved to South Korea when he was nine 
years old. He spent the next 28 years in the United States and he has never returned to 
South Korea after immigrating to the United States in 1981. Applicant graduated from a 
U.S. high school, a U.S. college, and a U.S. graduate school. Applicant and his spouse 
reside in the United States. His two children were born in the United States. Applicant’s 
siblings live in the United States. Applicant does not have frequent contacts with any 
South Korean residents and citizens. Applicant and his spouse have substantial U.S. 
property and investments and they do not have any property or investments in South 
Korea.    
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his father’s relationships with South Korean 
government officials. F frequently meets with South Korean government officials in the 
United States and South Korea. South Korea is an aggressive collector of sensitive 
economic and technological information. There is no evidence; however, that terrorists, 
criminals, the South Korean government, those conducting industrial espionage or his 
father have approached or threatened Applicant or that South Korean officials have 
asked F for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility 
that F or Applicant himself would be targets for improper South Korean coercion or 
exploitation. While the government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have a very heavy 
evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns.   
 
AG ¶ 8(f) partially applies because Applicant has no interest in property or bank 
accounts in South Korea. This mitigating condition can only fully mitigate AG ¶ 7(e), 
which provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections through F to South Korea are less significant 
than his strong connections to the United States. His connections to the United States 
taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns 
under Guideline B.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning South Korea must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in South Korea, as well as the dangers existing in South Korea.6 
South Korea is a known collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information; however, South Korea has been a close military ally of the United States 
since the Korean war began in 1950. South Korea and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade. About 2.3 million Koreans live in the United States.      
 
The only security concern here is Applicant’s relationship with F, who was active 
in the movement to reunify North and South Korea until 2007. F was a member of the 
SC/NC Committee until 2007, and is currently a member of the KACL and a local 
Korean-American Association. His father continues to have frequent meetings and 
communications with high-level South Korean political and diplomatic officials. F acts as 
an informal liaison between South Korean officials and U.S. political figures. His father 
frequently communicates with his relatives living in South Korea. Applicant’s frequent 
communications and visits with F establish his ties of affection to his father. South 
Korea has a history of targeting U.S. industries for sensitive information and firms have 
engaged in export violations, sending sensitive, technologically advanced equipment to 
South Korea and other economic espionage. There is some possibility that Applicant or 
F could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States. It 
is possible that South Korean intelligence agents could attempt to pressure Applicant or 
F to gain some kind of advantage over Applicant to obtain classified or sensitive 
information.  
 
The circumstances militating towards approval of a clearance for Applicant are 
more significant. Applicant left South Korea in 1981 at the age of nine years and has 
never returned. He has infrequent contacts with his relatives living in South Korea. He 
does not own property in South Korea, and has not manifested any direct connections 
with South Korea. His siblings and father all live in the United States. He received his 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
education and all of his employment in the United States. He is a U.S. citizen and swore 
allegiance to the United States. His father is also U.S. citizen, and professes a primary 
loyalty to the United States. His father does not own property or have bank accounts in 
South Korea. Applicant’s wife is a green card holder, and both of his children are U.S. 
born citizens. Applicant’s involvement with any South Korea-related organizations was 
limited to three meetings in the late 1990s. The South Korea league’s goal is to 
encourage Korean immigrants to the United States to become U.S. citizens and to 
participate in U.S. elections. It emphasizes U.S. civic responsibility. Until 2007, 
Applicant’s father’s communications with high-level South Korean political and 
diplomatic officials were primarily designed to facilitate peaceful reunification of North 
and South Korea. There is no evidence that Applicant’s father has participated in any 
organization that has acted or would act against U.S. interests. Recently, his father’s 
communications with South Korean officials are related to encouraging Korean-
Americans and Korean immigrants to participate in the U.S. political process and raising 
funds for charitable projects, such as a monument to the victims of the 9/11 attack at the 
Pentagon. Applicant’s father has very strong connections to the United States and it is 
unlikely he would cooperate with any attempt to compromise U.S. interests through the 
exploitation of his son. Although the possibility of attempted exploitation of Applicant is 
very low, Applicant’s strong connections to the United States and especially to his U.S. 
family, community and employment establish “such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. interest.”   
 
After weighing the evidence of her connections to South Korea and to the United 
States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of 
mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
