                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06361 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has held a security clearance since 1987.  He submitted his latest 
security clearance application on June 3, 2004, and his access to classified information 
was continued.  He was involved in a serious criminal incident in 2006.  Based on this 
incident, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for Applicant for criminal conduct under 
Guideline J on August 13, 2008.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 19, 2008. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 2, 2008.  He admitted 
three and denied two factual allegations as alleged in the SOR under Guideline J.  He 
provided a detailed explanation of his actions which led to the 2006 criminal incident.  
He requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  Department Counsel was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
prepared to proceed on February 10, 2009.  The case was assigned to me on February 
23, 2009.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 24, 2009, for a hearing on 
March 19, 2009.  I convened the hearing as scheduled.  The government offered six 
government exhibits marked (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 6 which were received without 
objection.  Applicant submitted six Applicant Exhibits marked (App. Ex.) A through F 
which were received without objection.  Applicant and one witness testified on his 
behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 26, 2009.  Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63 year old operating engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor at an Air Force base since 1987.  He is a high school graduate who also has 
a certificate as a boilermaker and welder.  He served briefly in the Army and received 
an Honorable Discharge based on hardship.  He has been married twice with both 
marriages ending in divorce.  He married his first wife in 1966.  She left him and he 
divorced her in 1973.  He has three grown children from his first marriage.  He was 
granted custody of the children and his grandmother helped him raise the children (Tr. 
11-12, 16-19; Gov. Ex. 1, Security Clearance Application, dated June 3, 2004; 
Applicant's Additional Response to SOR, dated September 2, 2008).   
 
Applicant admitted that he was arrested for having an open container of beer in 
1975.  He paid a $22 fine (SOR 1.a).  He denied that he was arrested for the same 
offense in 1976 (SOR 1.b).  Applicant noted an arrest for Open Container in 
approximately 1976 on his first security clearance application submitted on June 19, 
1987 (Gov. Ex. 4, Personnel Security Questionnaire, dated June 19, 1987).  On his 
second security clearance application submitted in 1989, Applicant listed an Open 
Container offense in 1975 (Gov. Ex. 5, Personnel Security Questionnaire, dated July 26, 
1989).  Applicant again listed an Open Container offense in 1975 on his third security 
clearance application submitted in 1994 (Gov. Ex. 6, National Agency Questionnaire, 
dated February 14, 1994).  Applicant submitted a letter from the Clerk of the county 
court which stated that court records do not list charges for Open Container in either 
1975 or 1976 (See Response to SOR, dated September 2, 2008, Circuit Court Clerk 
Letter, dated August 27, 2008).  Since Applicant admitted to an arrest for Open 
container in 1975, I find that he did commit the offense in 1975 and paid a fine.  I further 
find that he provided a different date for the Open container offense on his 1987 security 
clearance application leading to confusion as to whether there were two offenses, one 
in 1975 and the other in 1976.  I find that the Open Container offense happened in 
1975, and there is insufficient evidence to establish an Open Container offense in 1976. 
 
Applicant denied that he had been arrested for trespassing in 1979.  Applicant 
noted on two of his prior security clearance applications an arrest for trespassing in 
1980 and that the charges were either dropped or he paid a fine (Gov. Ex. 5, Personnel 
Security Questionnaire, dated July 26, 1989; Gov. Ex. 6, National Agency 
Questionnaire, dated February 14, 1994).  The police records from the jurisdiction 
 
3 
 
 
where the offense allegedly took place do not show an arrest for trespassing (See 
Response to SOR, dated September 2, 2008, Police Letter, dated August 29, 2008).  
Based on Applicant's admission in the security clearance applications, I find that the 
trespassing arrest took place.  Since the charges were probably dropped, it is not 
surprising that the police do not have a record of the arrest.  
 
Applicant admitted that he was charged with aggravated assault in 1983. He was 
living with the woman who would be his second wife when they had an argument about 
her not coming home.  They shoved each other but he did not strike her.  She filed a 
complaint with the police.  After they reconciled, his former wife told the police she did 
not want to press charges, and charges were dropped in February 1984 after costs 
were paid (See Response to SOR, dated September 2, 2008 at 1).   
 
Applicant lived with his second wife from 1982 until they married in 1999.  She 
had an affair with another man so Applicant divorced her in 2003.  His second wife 
married this other man.  Applicant was being verbally harassed, tormented, and publicly 
humiliated at work by a fellow employee about his former wife's affair and why they 
divorced.  Applicant told his tormentor to stop but the harassment and humiliation 
continued.  Applicant went to their supervisor asking for his tormentor to be moved.  
However, the supervisor refused to stop the harassment.  
 
In 2005, Applicant became very ill.  He continued to have medical problems until 
doctors discovered the cause of the medical problem and started appropriate treatment.  
However, he was still feeling ill and the harassment by his co-worker continued.  In 
February 2006, Applicant went to his human resource office and reported the 
harassment.  Human resource personnel promised to start an investigation.  However, 
Applicant and his tormentor had a verbal altercation and the tormentor filed a complaint 
against Applicant.  Applicant did not feel that the situation was being resolved so he 
asked the senior supervisor to relocate the tormentor.  The senior supervisor refused to 
reassign the tormentor and told Applicant just to stay away from the individual.  
Applicant felt that no one would take action to assist him.  He felt he was alone in 
resolving the issue.  He was still ill and was unstable because of his divorce.  He was 
also mentally distraught.   
 
On the night of March 10, 2006, Applicant went home and took an anti-anxiety 
medication prescribed by his physician.  After about an hour, he did not feel the 
medicine was working so he took another dose.  He also started drinking beer.  The 
warning label on the medicine stated that taking alcohol in conjunction with the 
medication may have an adverse effect.  Applicant is not a heavy drinker and had never 
taken alcohol in conjunction with the anti-anxiety medicine in the past.  He does not 
recall much that happened after taking the medicine and drinking beer. 
 
The local police were called by Applicant's former wife's husband about 7 am on 
the morning of March 11, 2006, about a man with a gun at their back door.  His former 
wife and her husband never left their house and did not confront the individual.  The 
police arrived to find Applicant in the back yard with a loaded pistol and more 
 
4 
 
 
ammunition in his pocket.  He was arrested and taken to jail.  Applicant only remembers 
seeing a police officer pointing a gun at him.  Applicant was charged with aggravated 
assault, criminal trespass, reckless endangerment, and public intoxication (Tr. 16-46; 
Gov. Ex. 3, Police Report and Indictment, dated March 11, 2006, and July 2006).  
 
Applicant was placed in a pre-trial diversion program in lieu of a trial on 
September 12, 2006, for two years, required to perform public service, pay a fine and 
court cost, and stay away from his former wife and her husband (Gov. Ex. 3, Agreed 
Order, dated September 12, 2006, at 19).  Applicant completed his public service by 
December 2006, paid the fine and court cost, and completed his pretrial diversion 
program in September 2008 (App. Ex. F, Order of Expungement and Dismissal, dated 
September 16, 2008). He has not seen his former wife or her husband since the 
incident.  In addition, he changed his shift at work to the day shift so he is no longer on 
the same shift as his tormentor.  
 
At the time of the incident, Applicant's employer had him evaluated by a mental 
health counselor.  He informed the counselor about his problems at work, his former 
wife leaving him for another man, his illness, and the resulting mental condition.  The 
counselor noted that Applicant's personality was more introverted than extroverted, that 
he experienced a high degree of anxiety, and has a hard time with social skills.  He lets 
his hurt turn to anger, broods over relationship failures, and has moderate to high 
depressed feelings.  His arrest and the resulting charges were uncharacteristic.  The 
counselor determined that Applicant did not pose a threat to himself or others, and was 
insecure but a decent person.  He could benefit from some support from his supervisors 
(App. Ex. A, Report, dated March 31, 2006).  A counselor who saw him for about eight 
sessions from April 17, 2006, until July 6, 2006, noted he presented with symptoms of 
depression and anxiety.  He was cooperative and willing to be responsible for his 
behavior.  He was honest and true, hardworking, and willing to make adjustments.  He 
exhibited determination to do right (App. Ex. B, Letter, dated December 12, 2008). 
 
Applicant's son testified that he works for the same company at the same 
location as his father.  His father is a good person who raised him and his sisters as a 
single parent with help from his grandmother.  His father's 2006 actions were out of 
character and caused by the stress at work combined with the medicine and alcohol.  
His father is not a drinker and only occasionally has a beer or two.   He is well liked by 
everyone.  His co-workers and supervisors think highly of him.  His father's tormentor 
has a reputation at work of being an agitator who stirs up conflicts and troubles (Tr. 46-
49).  
 
Applicant's supervisor stated that Applicant was always good to work with and 
cooperative with supervisors and fellow workers.  His only problem was the one he had 
with his tormentor.  He had a good working relationship with Applicant before and after 
Applicant's problems with the tormentor.  Applicant continues to be a good worker (App. 
Ex. C, Letter, undated).  Applicant latest evaluation report shows he is a good employee 
with a middle evaluation score (App. Ex. D, Evaluation, dated September 19, 2007). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30).  Appellant admitted that he was 
 
6 
 
 
arrested for having an open alcohol container in 1975, for trespassing in 1979, and for 
assault in 1983.  He admits he was arrested and charged with aggravated assault, 
criminal trespass, reckless endangerment, unlawful possession of a weapon, and public 
intoxication in 2006.  The government must establish by substantial evidence 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Substantial evidence is such relevant evidence 
as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all 
the contrary evidence in the record (See, directive ¶ E3.1.14, ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
(App. Bd. Aug 4, 2006)).  Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance (See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F. 3d 375, 380 (4th 
Cir. 1994)).  The government, based on Applicant's admissions and the fact that he was 
arrested and charged with criminal offenses, has established by substantial evidence 
four of the criminal offenses alleged in the SOR.  They did not establish the offense of 
possession of an open container in 1976.  The facts admitted by Applicant raise 
Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) ¶ 31(a) "a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses", and CD DC ¶ 31(c) "allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted".  The alleged offenses are serious.  Even though charges may not have been 
prosecuted, or findings of not guilty entered, or charges dismissed, they are still 
allegations of criminal conduct that raise a security concern.  
 
 The government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).  The burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the illegal drug use (Directive ¶ E3.1.15).  An 
applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government (See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)).   
 
 Appellant has raised by his testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions 
(CC MC) ¶ 32 (a) "so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; CC MC ¶ 
32(b) "the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life"; and CC MC ¶ 32(d) "there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement".  The 
1975 open container arrest, the 1979 trespassing arrest, and 1983 assault charge 
occurred 26 to 34 years ago.  The extensive passage of time since the offenses were 
committed is sufficient to show that the acts are unlikely to recur and no longer cast 
doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness.   
 
 The 2006 offenses of aggravated assault, unlawful possession of a weapon, 
criminal trespass, and public intoxication, even though they arose from one incident are 
serious.  The offenses were committed three years ago and Applicant has not been 
involved in any further criminal offenses.  Psychological evaluations of Applicant done 
contemporaneously with the 2006 offense show that his actions were not characteristic 
 
7 
 
 
for him and are not likely to recur.  There were outside pressures.  His divorce and the 
anxiety caused by continued ridicule and torment at work, led to the offenses.  There is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation.  Applicant removed himself from those pressures 
by changing his shift at work so he does not encounter his tormentor.  He has seen 
mental health professionals who have provided him with coping skills to understand his 
divorce.  He completed all of his court ordered probation and community service.  He 
continues to work hard and is productive at work.  He leads a quiet live with is family.  
Applicant established he is successfully rehabilitated by his quiet life style, the passage 
of time, and his ability to understand and manage the stresses in his life.  AG ¶¶ 32(a), 
32(b), and 32(d) all apply.  Applicant has mitigated the criminal conduct security 
concerns alleged under Guideline J. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that three of the four 
offenses happened over 26 years ago and are not likely to recur.  I considered one 
alleged offense was not established.  I considered Applicant mitigated the remaining 
offense by establishing that the offense was out of character for him, and there was 
successful rehabilitation by completion of his pre-trial diversion and community service.  
Sufficient time has passed to show the actions are not likely to recur.  Overall, on 
balance the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
