 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-02792 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 7, 2008. She did not state whether 
she wanted a hearing before an administrative judge or the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was scheduled for a hearing, during which 
Applicant specifically stated that she wanted a hearing. The case was assigned to 
 
2 
 
another administrative judge on March 4, 2009, and reassigned to me on March 11, 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 17, 2009, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on April 7, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8, which were received without objection. The Government also offered a 
demonstrative exhibit which was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted four pages of documents, which were marked AE F through H, and 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked HE II. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 15, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked in 
the defense industry for more than 22 years and has maintained a security clearance 
throughout her employment. She has a Bachelor of Science degree awarded in 1986. 
She has been married for more than 20 years. She has two children, ages 16 and 13.1  
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for a number of years, and some of her 
debts became delinquent. She owed the Internal Revenue Service for taxes due from 
about 2000. With interest and penalties, her tax debt was more $25,000. Funds were 
withheld from her paycheck for several years and the debt was paid in 2005. She is now 
current on her taxes. Her husband was unemployed from September 2003 through 
December 2003, and again from September 2008 through January 2009.2 
 
 Applicant contracted with a credit repair company in about 2006 or 2007 to 
address “discrepancies on her credit report.” Several items were deleted from her credit 
report. She was told that she did not have to pay any of the debts that were no longer 
on her credit report. She contracted with a different credit counseling company in 
November 2008. This company reinforced the position that she did not have to pay any 
debts that were not on her credit report.3  
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $18,090. Applicant admitted to 
SOR ¶ 1.b, and denied the remaining three allegations. The debts were denied because 
they no longer appeared on Applicant’s credit report. Individual debts are addressed 
below. 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, which alleged a 
delinquent debt of $9,498. Applicant denied the debt because her credit counseling 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 30-33, 48. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-23; GE 1-5, 8. The IRS debt was not alleged as a basis for the denial of Applicant’s 
security clearance in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. The debt and Applicant’s 
payment of the debt will be used in assessing Applicant’s total financial picture; in the application of 
mitigating conditions; and in evaluating the “whole person.” 
3 Tr. at 22, 24, 28, 36, 45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7; AE A, B, E, H. 
 
3 
 
company told her that she was no longer responsible for the debt because it was not 
listed on her credit report. She stated that this debt represented the deficiency owed on 
her car loan after the car was voluntarily repossessed. She did not deny that she 
incurred the debt. She was informed at the hearing that there could be security 
concerns even if the debt does not appear on her credit report. She testified that she 
would take steps to pay her debts, even if they were not listed on her credit report. She 
contacted the collection company that currently holds the debt after the hearing. She 
made arrangements to pay $77 per month on the debt.4    
 
 Applicant admitted that she owed the delinquent debt of $7,499 to a collection 
company on behalf of a credit card company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She has a 
payment plan through her credit counseling company to pay the debt. Payments are 
deposited with the credit counseling company which disburses the funds to the creditor. 
She made a deposit of $289 in December 2008, followed by monthly deposits of $192 in 
January, February, and March 2009.5    
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a debt of $606 owed to a collection company. The original 
creditor was a department store. Applicant denied the debt because it was no longer 
listed on her credit report. She did not deny that she incurred the debt. She contacted 
the creditor after the hearing and agreed to pay $50 per month, beginning on April 30, 
2009.6    
 
 Applicant denied owing the $487 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt was a car 
loan on a car that was repossessed. The monthly payment on the loan was $487. The 
debt appears on the credit reports of April 28, 2006 and March 5, 2007. Both credit 
reports reflect that the debt was transferred and had a zero balance. The debt is not 
listed on the later credit reports in evidence. This debt appears to be a duplicate of the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.7    
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is not perfect, but it is improving. She earns a good 
salary and her husband is working a temporary job. She is about two months behind on 
her mortgage, but the mortgage company is working with her to bring it current, and has 
not threatened foreclosure.8  
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from her supervisor. He has known and worked with 
her for seven years. He wrote that her character is above reproach; she is totally 
trustworthy; and never fails to complete every obligation. She has been a very active 
volunteer for the Girl Scouts for ten years. A senior member of that organization wrote a 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 24-26, 33-38, 44-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7; AE A, B, G. 
 
5 Tr. at 38-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7; AE E, H. 
 
6 Tr. at 25, 40-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7; AE A, B, G. 
 
7 Tr. at 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7; AE A, B. 
 
8 Tr. at 53-55. 
 
 
4 
 
letter on Applicant’s behalf. She praised Applicant as a leader and role model who is 
“positive, enthusiastic, and always willing to help the individuals she serves reach their 
full potential.”9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 AE C, D. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes three of the debts alleged in the SOR. She is in the process 
of addressing her financial issues, but they are not yet resolved. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable at this time. Her financial issues are at least partially related to her husband’s 
unemployment and underemployment. These qualify as conditions that were outside 
her control. To be fully applicable, there must be a causal connection between the 
unavoidable conditions and the financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had financial problems 
before her husband’s unemployment. She acted responsibly toward the IRS by paying 
that debt. She only recently began to act responsibly by setting up payment plans for 
her other debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling through the credit counseling company. 
Her largest debt of more than $25,000 to the IRS was not alleged in the SOR because it 
was paid before the SOR was issued. She credibly testified that now that she is fully 
aware of her responsibilities, she intends to pay her remaining delinquent debts. In 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal Board discussed 
an applicant’s burden of proof under these mitigating factors: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can 
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually 
 
7 
 
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the 
SOR. 
 
I find that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being 
resolved and are under control, and that she has made a good-faith effort to repay her 
creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. She does not yet 
rate full credit under mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) because of the delay in addressing 
the debts that fell off her credit report. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the SOR ¶ 1.d debt, because it is a duplicate of the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
been employed in the defense industry and maintained a security clearance for more 
than 20 years. She is very highly regarded by her employer and as a volunteer in her 
community. She has suffered financial difficulties for a number of years. She had a very 
large IRS debt. It took a number of years, but the debt was paid and she is current on 
her taxes. Her husband had periods of unemployment and underemployment. She 
entered into a payment plan to repay one of her delinquent debts. She followed the 
advice of the professionals and did not pay the debts that were no longer listed on her 
credit report. She now understands the ramifications of that advice and entered into 
payment agreements with her remaining two creditors. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s finances are not perfect. She paid a very large debt to the IRS, but 
still has debts to pay. However, she credibly testified that she intends to pay her 
delinquent debts. As noted above, the Appeal Board has held that an applicant is not 
required to establish that she has paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required 
is that an applicant must demonstrate that she has “established a plan to resolve [her] 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.”10 I find that she 
has established a plan to resolve her financial problems and has taken significant action 
to implement that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 ADP Case No. 06-18900 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). 
